--------------------------The Anusandhan National Research Foundation Act 2023.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE ANUSANDHAN NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION ATC,  2023 
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________ 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS .   
      1. Short title  and commencement . 
 2. Definitions.  
     
 CHAPTER II  
ANUSANDHAN  NATIONAL  RESEARCH  FOUNDATION  
3. Establishment of Foundation.   
     4. Objectives of Foundation.  
     5. Governing Board.  
6. Meetings of Governing Board.   
7. Executive Council.   
8. Meetings of Executive Council.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Governing Board or Executive Council.  
10. Functions of Executive Council.  
11. Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees of Foundation.  
12. Constitution of Committees.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANC E, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
13. Funds of Foundation.  
14. Budget.  
15. Annual report.  
16.  Accounts and audit.  
17.  Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER I V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
18. Certification and report to be furnished.  
19. Power of Governing Board to delegate.  2 
 SECTIONS.  
20. Power of Governing Board to issue directions.  
21. Application of other laws not barred.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to make rules.  
24. Power of Executive Council to make regulations.  
25.  Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 
26. Power to remove difficulties.  
27. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
 3 
 THE ANUSANDHAN NATIONAL RESEARCH FOUNDATION ACT, 2023  
ACT NO. 25 OF 2023 
[12th  August , 2023.]  
An Act to establish the Anusandhan National Research Foundation to provide high level strategic 
direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in the fields of natural sciences including 
mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, environmental and earth sciences, health and 
agriculture, and scientific and technological interfaces of humanities and social sciences, to promote, monitor and provide support as required for such research and for mat ters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .— (1) This Act may be called the Anusandhan National Research  
Foundation Act, 2023.  
     (2) It shall come into force on such date1
                                                           
1.  5th  day of February, 2024, vide  notification No. S.O. 474( E), dated 5th February, 2024, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii).  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a) “appointed date ” means such date as the Central Government  may, by notification, appoint 
under sub- section ( 2) of section 1;  
(b) “Chief Executive Officer ” means the Chief Executive Officer of the Foundation;  
(c) “Committees ” means the Committees of the Executive Council referred to in section 12;  
(d) “Executiv e Council ” means the Council constituted under sub- section ( 1) of section 7;  
(e) “Foundation ” means the Anusandhan National Research Foundation  established under     
section 3;  
(f) “Funds ” means the Funds referred to in sub- section ( 2) of section 13;  
(g) “Governing Board ” means the Governing Board of the Foundation constituted under section 5;  
(h) “Member ” means a Member of the Governing Board or the Executive Council and includes the 
President, Vice- President and Chairperson, as the case may be;  
(i) “notification ” means the notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified”  shall be construed accordingly;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and  
(k) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Exe cutive Council under this Act.  
 
  4 
 CHAPTER II  
ANUSANDHAN  NATIONAL  RESEARCH  FOUNDATION  
3. Establishment of Foundation .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a Foundation to be known 
as the Anusandhan National Research Foundation.  
(2) The Foundation, referred to in sub- section ( 1), shall be a body corporate, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be 
sued.  
4. Objectives of Foundation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Foundation shall serve as 
the apex body to provide high level strategic direction for research, innovation and entrepreneurship in 
the fields of natural sciences including mathematical sciences, engineering and technology, environmental 
and earth sciences, health and agriculture, and scientific and technological interfaces of humanities and 
social sciences.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub- section ( 1), the Foundation shall undertake 
suitable initiatives including the following, namely:— 
(a) preparing the roadmap for short, medium and long term research and development;  
(b) seeding, growing and facilitating research at academic and research i nstitutions, particularly at 
universities and colleges where research capacity is at a nascent stage, through programmes such as 
research and development projects, fellowships, academic chairs, and creation of centres of 
excellence;  
(c) funding competitive  peer -reviewed grant proposals to eligible persons;  
(d) assisting in setting up research infrastructure and environment that is conducive for scientific 
pursuit with specific focus on matters of national priorities, emerging frontiers and strategic research;   
(e) increasing India's role and participation in key areas of national and global importance;  
(f) supporting translation of research undertaken into capital intensive technologies;  
(g) evolving nationally coordinated programmes to identify scientific and practical solutions for 
societal, developmental, financial and techno -economic challenges;  
(h) coordinating across the Central Government, State Governments, public authorities, industries, 
and research institutions, to document and analyse the expendi ture on scientific research and their 
outcomes during each financial year, and report the same to the Central Government;   
(i) evolving participation in international collaborative projects and fostering exchange of scientific 
information;  
 (j) encouraging  collaboration with scientists from within and outside India, including scientists of 
Indian origin, with a view to enrich the Indian scientific ecosystem; and  
(k) encouraging the Public Sector Enterprises as well as the private sector entities to invest in the 
activities of the Foundation.  
 (3) In addition to the objectives referred to in sub- section ( 2), the Foundation shall also, to the extent 
practicable, either by itself, or through a suitable agency identified in this behalf, undertake an annual 
survey of outcomes of scientific research in India, with a view to create a central repository, for the 
collection, interpretation and analysis of information and data surrounding such research, and the aim of such a repository would include providing informat ion for policy formulation and advising the Central 
Government and State Governments as well as the private sector:  
Provided that the survey referred to in this sub -section shall exclude any strategic areas of research as 
determined by the Governing Board. 
 (4) The Foundation shall perform the aforesaid objectives through a Governing Board constituted 
under section 5. 5 
 5. Governing Board .—(1) There shall be constituted a Governing Board, which shall provide high 
level strategic direction, perform and monitor the implementation of the objectives of the Foundation.  
(2) The Governing Board referred to in sub- section (1 ) shall consist of the fol lowing, namely: —  
(a) the Prime Minister of India, ex officio —President;  
(b) the Union Minister of Science and Technology, ex officio —Vice -President;  
(c) the Union Minister of Education, ex officio —Vice -President;  
(d) a Member from the NITI Aayog dealing with science and technology, ex officio —Member;  
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and Technology,                 
ex officio —Member;  
(f) Secretary to the Government of India in th e Department of Scientific and Industrial Research,   
ex officio —Member;  
(g) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology, ex officio —Member;  
(h) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education, ex off icio—
Member; and  
(i) the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, ex officio —Member -Secretary  
(3) The President of the Governing Board may nominate or appoint the following Members to the 
Governing Board, namely: —  
(a) not exceeding two Members from the Prime Minister's Science, Technology and Innovation 
Council;  
(b) not exceeding five Members from business organisation or industry;  
(c) one Member from the field of humanities and social sciences;  
(d) not exceeding two Members from institutions engaged in scientific and technological research 
and development; and  
(e) not exceeding six experts who have specialised  knowledge in the areas of health, mathematical 
and physical sciences, biological sciences, engineering and t echnology, innovation and partnership, 
computer and information sciences, and engineering.  
(4) The qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Members and experts of the Governing B oard referred to in sub- section ( 3) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Meetings of Governing Board .—(1) The Governing Board shall meet at such times and places, 
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including 
quorum at such meetings, as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) If the President for any reason is unable to attend a meeting of the Governing Board, any of the 
Vice -Presidents shall preside over the meeting.    
7. Executive Council .—(1) The President of the Governing Board shall constitute an Executive 
Council to implement the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Executive Council referred to in sub- section ( 1) shall consist of the following, nominated by 
the President of the Gove rning Board, namely: —  
(a) the Principal Scientific Advisor to the Government of India, ex officio — Chairperson;  
(b) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Science and Technology,                  
ex officio —Member;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology, ex officio —
Member;  6 
 (d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of scientific and Industrial Research,    
ex officio —Member;  
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Earth Sciences, ex officio —Member;  
(f) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education, ex officio —
Member;  
 (g) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of  Health Research, ex officio —
Member;  
(h) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Defence Research and 
Development, ex officio —Member;  
(i) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Atomic Energy, ex officio —
Member;  
(j) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Space, ex officio —Member;   
(k) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education, ex officio —Member; and  
(l) the Chief Executive Officer of the Founda tion appointed under section 11 ex officio —
Member -Secretary.  
(3) The President of the Governing Board may also nominate or appoint the following Members to the 
Executive Council, namely: — 
(a) not exceeding two ex officio Members amongst Secretaries of suc h other Departments or 
Ministries of the Government of India, not referred to in sub- section ( 2), as may be notified by the 
Central Government; and  
(b) not exceeding three Members amongst distinguished experts who have specialised knowledge 
in the areas o f science and technology in academia, philanthropic sector, research laboratories and 
industries.  
(4) The qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Members of the Executive Counci l referred to in clause ( b) of                     
sub-section ( 3) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
8. Meetings of Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall meet at such times and places, 
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including 
quorum at such meetings, as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) If the Chairpers on for any reason is unable to attend a meeting of the Executive Council, the 
Member chosen by other Members shall preside over the meeting.  
(3) The Chairperson shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Executive Council, 
exercise and disch arge such powers and duties, as may be delegated by the Governing Board.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Governing Board or Executive Council .—No 
act or proceeding of the Governing Board or the Executive Council shall be invalidated me rely by reason 
of— 
 (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Governing Board or the Executive Council;  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Governing Board or the 
Executive Council; and  
(c) any irreg ularity in the procedure of the Governing Board or the Executive Council not affecting the 
merits of the case.   
10. Functions of Executive Council .—The Executive Council shall implement the objectives of the 
Foundation based on the policy direction and guidance provided by the Governing Board, including the 
following functions, namely: —  7 
 (a) to consider applications for the grant of financial assistan ce in accordance with the eligibility 
criteria as determined necessary for such grants;  
(b) to determine through regulations,—   
(i) the requirements for registration, the form and manner for making of applications for financial 
assistance;  
(ii) reports and certification to be furnished pursuant to availing the financial assistance;  
(iii) the requirements of extension of financial assistance; and  
          ( iv) the grounds for revocation of financial assistance;  
(c) to facilitate and provide a ny assistance as may be required to ensure filing of applications for 
intellectual property rights pursuant to the research undertaken through financial assistance under this 
Act; and  
(d) any other function as may be delegated to it from time to time by the Governing Board.  
11. Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees of Foundation .—(1) The President 
of the Governing Board may appoint a Chief Executive Officer, not below the rank of Additional 
Secretary to the Government of India, for efficient administration of the Foundation.  
 (2) The qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer shall be such as may be prescribed.  
 (3) The Executive Council ma y appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary 
for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(4) The qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions 
of service of the ot her officers and employees of the Foundation shall be such as may be prescribed.  
 (5) The Executive Council may engage the services of such persons, both from within and outside 
India, as consultants and visiting scientists to the Foundation.  
(6) The elig ibility criteria and honorarium payable to the consultants and visiting scientists, referred to 
in sub- section ( 5), shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.  
12. Constitution of Committees .—(1) The Executive Council may constitute such Committees as it 
may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this 
Act.  
(2) The Executive Council may also co -opt persons, other than Members of the Governi ng Board or 
the Executive Council, as members of any Committees con stituted under  sub- section ( 1). 
 (3) The co -opted members shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Committees and take part 
in the proceedings of the Committees, but shall not ha ve right to participate in decision making.  
 CHAPTER III  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT   
13. Funds of Foundation .—(1) The Foundation shall receive monies from the following sources, 
namely: —  
(a) grants and loans of such sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary, 
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf;  
(b) any sums received for research and development, including through donations from any other 
source, including from public sector enterprises, the private sector, philanthropist organisations, 
foundations or international bodies;  
(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted to the Foundation;  
(d) any income from investment of the amounts received by t he Foundation;  
(e) all amounts with the Fund for Science and Engineering Research under the Science and 
Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 (9 of 2009)  as on the appointed date; and  8 
 (f) such other sources as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Governing Board shal l constitute the following Funds, into which it shall allocate, in the 
manner as it determines fit, the amounts received from clauses ( a), (b), (c), (d) and ( f) of   sub- section ( 1), 
namely: —  
(a) the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Fund, which sha ll be used for the financing of 
activities under the Act, including expenses, salaries, allowances and other administrative exigencies 
for achieving the objectives of the Foundation;  
 (b) the Innovation Fund for supporting outstanding creativity in the are as supported by the 
Foundation;  
(c) the Science and Engineering Research Fund for continuation of the projects and programmes 
initiated under the Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008  (9 of 2009) ; and  
(d) one or more Special Purpose Funds for a ny specific project or research.  
(3) The Governing Board shall maintain the Science and Engineering Research Fund referred to in 
clause ( c) of sub- section ( 2) for such time as it may determine necessary, and allocate to such Fund, the 
following amounts, namely: —  
(a) all amounts under clause ( e) of sub- section ( 1); and  
(b) any further amounts from any of the other sources of Funds received by the Foundation, as may 
be determined to be necessary for the implementation of such projects and programmes, based on a review and assessment by the Executive Council.  
    (4) The Central Government shall frame such financial rules for the utilisation of the amounts in th e 
Funds established under this Act.  
14. Budget .—The Executive Council shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts in such form 
and manner at such time and at such intervals as may be prescribed for the next financial year, showing 
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Foundation, as approved by the Governing Board, and 
forward the same to the Central Government.  
15. Annual report .—The Executive Council shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such time 
in every financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of the Foundation's 
activities during the previous financial year and submit a copy of the same to the Central Government.  
16. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Executive Council shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroll er and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed in connection with 
the auditing of the accounts of the Foundation under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in 
connection with the auditing of the Government account and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of the office o f the Foundation under this Act.  
 (3) The accounts of the Foundation shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Foundation 
to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The Executive Council shall furnish to the Central Government, before such date as may be 
prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report.  
17. Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may be after they have received, 
before each House of Parliament.  9 
  CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Certification and report to be furnished .— (1) Any person receiving financial assistance from 
the Foundation shall furnish certification and report to the Executive Council, in such form and manner 
and at such time as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) The Executive Council may authorise an off icer to visit any academic institutions, research and 
development laboratories, industries and other organisations with which the person referred to in sub-
section ( 1) is associated, at any time to verify the accuracy of the certification or report made un der this 
section.  
19. Power of Governing Board to delegate .—The Governing Board may, by general or special order 
in writing, published in the Official Gazette, delegate to the Executive Council, the Chairperson of the 
Executive Council or the Chief Execu tive Officer, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as 
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions including, but not limited to administrative 
and financial matters, as it may deem necessary.  
20. Power of Governing Board to issue directions.— (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Executive Council shall, in discharge of its powers and performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions as the Governing Board may give in w riting to it 
from time to time.  
(2) The Executive Council shall furnish to the Governing Board such information with respect to its 
activities as the Governing Board may, from time to time, require.  
21. Application of other laws not barred .—The provision s of this Act shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or the Governing Board or Executive Council or any Member of the 
Governing Board or Executive Council, or any Committee, officer or employee of the Foundation, or any 
other person authorised by the Central Government or the Foundation, for anything which i s in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
23. Power to make rules. — (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules not incons istent with the provisions of this Act, to carry out 
the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Members and experts of the Governing Board under sub- section (4) of 
section 5;  
(b) the qualifications, experience, honorarium and allowanc es payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Members of the Executive Council under sub- section ( 4) of section 7;  
(c) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(d) the qualifications, experience, salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and 
conditions of service of the other officers and employees under sub- section (4 ) of section 11;  
(e) the other sources from where the Foundation receive monies under clause ( f) of sub- section ( 1) 
of section 13;  
(f) the financial rules for the utilisation of the amounts in the funds under sub- section ( 4) of                  
section 13;  
(g) the form, manner, time and interval for preparation of budget for the next financial year under 
section 14;  10 
 (h) the form, manner and time for preparation of annual report by the Executive Council under 
section 15;  
(i) the form and manner of preparation of annual statement of accounts by the Executive Council 
under sub- section ( 1) of section 16;   
(j) the date of submission of audited copy of accounts together with the auditor's report under              
sub-section ( 4) of section 16;  
 (k) the manner of dealing with the monies transferred by the Board to the Foundation under second 
proviso to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 27; and  
(l) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be 
made by rules.  
24. Power of Executive Council to make regulations .—(1) The Executive Council may, by 
notification and with the prior approval of the Central Government, make regulations not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the time, place and the rules of procedure in regard to transactio n of business at the meetings 
and quorum of the Governing Board under sub- section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) the time, place and the rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at the meetings 
and quorum of Executive Council under sub- section ( 1) of section 8;  
(c) the requirements for registration, form and manner for making applications for financial 
assistance, reports and certification to be furnished for the financial assistance, extension of financial 
assistance and grounds for revocation of fi nancial assistance under clause ( b) of section 10;  
 (d) the eligibility criteria and honorarium payable to the consultants and visiting scientists under 
sub-section ( 6) of section 11;  
(e) the form, manner and time for furnishing certification and report t o the Foundation under sub-
section ( 1) of section 18; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be or may be specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.  
25. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shou ld not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.   
26. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, on the recommendations of the Foundation, by an order published in 
the Official Gazet te, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing such 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this sect ion after the expiry of two years from the 
date of commencement of this Act.  
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  11 
 27. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Science and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008 (9 of 2009)  is 
hereby repealed and the Science and Engineering Research Board constituted under section 3 of the said 
Act (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved.  
     (2) The repeal of the S cience and Engineering Research Board Act, 2008  (9 of 2009)  shall, however, 
not affect: —  
(a) any action taken pursuant to sub- section ( 3) of section 13;  
(b) previous operation or anything duly done under the repealed Act;  
(c) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired or accrued or incurred under the repealed 
Act; and  
(d) any proceeding pending or ongoing under the repealed Act.  
(3) On the dissolution of the Science and Engineering Research Board—  
 (a) all assets, liabilities and other facilities forming part of or used in connection with the Science 
and Engineering Research Board, shall be deemed to be the assets of the Foundation; and  
(b) any officer or employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the Science and 
Engineering Research Board, employed on regular basis by the Science and Engineering Research 
Board, shall become, on and from such dissolution, the officer and employee, respectively, of the 
Foundation in such manner as may be notified by the Central Government, with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would have been admissible to him if the 
rights in relation to the Science and Engineering Research Board had not been transferred to, and 
vested in, the Foundation, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the 
Foundation, is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of employment are duly altered by the Foundation:  
Provided that notwithstanding anythi ng contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)  or 
in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee, 
employed in the Science and Engineering Research Board, to the Foundation shall not entitle such officer 
or other employee, any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority:  
Provided further that where the Science and Engineering Research Board has established a provident 
fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of officers and other employees employed in the Science and Engineering Research Board, the monies relatable to the officers and other employees 
whose services have been transferred by or under this Act to the Foundation shall, out of the monies 
standing, on the dissolution of the Science and Engineering Research Board, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, stand tr ansferred to, and vest in, the Foundation, 
and such monies which stand so transferred shall be dealt with by the said Foundation, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub- section ( 3) shall not be he ld to prejudice or 
affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897)  with regard to 
the effect of repeal . 
 
________
 
--------------------------The Assisted Reproductive Technology Regulation Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES TO REGULATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  
A. THE NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  
AND SURROGACY BOARD  
3. National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  
4. Application of provisions of Surrogacy Act with respect to National Board . 
5. Powers and functions of National Board.  
B. STATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND  
SURROGACY BOARD  
6. State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  
7. Application of provisions of Surrogacy Act with respect to State Board . 
8. Powers and functions of State Board . 
C. THE NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND 
SURROGACY REGISTRY AND THE APPROPRIATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE 
TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY AUTHORITY  
9.  Establishment of National Registry of clinics and banks.  
10. Composition of National Registry.  
11. Functions of National Registry.  
12. Appointment of appropriate authority.  
13. Functions of appropriate authority.  
14. Powers of appropriate authority.  
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURES FOR REGISTRATION  
15. Registration of assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reprod uctive technology 
bank.  
16. Grant of registration.  
17. Renewal of registration.  
18. Suspension or cancellation of registration.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Appeal . 
20. Power to inspect premises, etc.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES OF ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY CLINIC AND ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE 
TECHNOLOGY BANK  
21. General duties of assisted reproductive technology clinics and banks.  
22. Written informed consent.  
23. Duties of assisted reproductive technology clinics and banks to keep accurate records.  
24. Duties of assisted reproductive technology clinics using human gametes and embryos.  
25. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis.  
26. Sex selection.  
27. Sourcing of gametes by assisted reproductive technology banks.  
28. Storage and handling of human gametes and embryos.  
29. Restri ction on sale, etc., of human gametes, zygotes and embryos.  
30. Research on human gametes and embryos.  
31. Rights of child born through assisted reproductive technology.  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
32. Sex selective assisted reproductive technology.  
33. Offences and penalties.  
34. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act or rules for which no specific punishment 
is provided.  
35. Cognizance of offences.  
36. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.  
37. Offences by clinics or banks.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
38. Power of Central Government to issue directions to National Board, National Registry and 
appropriate authority.  
39. Power of State Government to issue directions to State Board, etc.  
40. Power to search and seize records, etc.  
41. Protecti on of action taken in good faith.  
42. Power to make rules.  
43. Power to make regulations.  3 
 SECTIONS  
44. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications.  
45. Application of other laws not barred.  
46. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
THE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021  
ACT NO . 42 OF 2021  
 
[18th December , 2021 .] 
 
An Act for the regulation and supervision of the assisted reproductive technology clinics and the 
assisted reproductive technology banks, prevention of misuse, safe and ethical practice of assisted 
reproductive technology services for addressing the issues of reproductive health where assisted 
reproductive t echn ology is required for becoming a parent or for freezing gametes, embryos, 
embryonic tissues for further use due to infertility, disease or social or medical concerns and for 
regulation and supervision of research and development and for matters connected therew ith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows : — 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  — (1) This Act may be called the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology (Regulation) Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions . — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “assisted reproductive technology ” with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, means all techniques that attempt to obtain a pregnancy by handling the sperm or the 
oocyte outside the human body and transferring the gamete or the embryo into the reproductive 
system o f a woman;  
(b) “assisted reproductive technology bank ” means an organisation which shall be 
responsible for collection of gametes, storage of gametes and embryos and supply of gametes to 
the assisted reproductive technology clinics or their patients;  
(c) “assisted reproductive technology clinic ” means any premises equipped with requisite 
facilities and medical practitioners registered with the National Medical Commission for carrying 
out the procedures related to the assisted reproductive technology;  
(d) “child ” means any individual born through the use of the assisted reproductive 
technology;  
(e) “commissioning couple ” means an infertile married couple who approach an assisted 
reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive technology bank for obta ining the 
services authorised of the said clinic or bank;   
                                                           
1. 25th January, 2022, vide notification No. S.O. 291(E), dated 2 0th January, 20 22, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
 5 
 (f) “embryo ” means a developing or developed organism after fertilisation till the end of 
fifty-six days from the day of fertilisation;  
(g) “gamete ” means sperm and oocyte;  
(h) “gamete donor ” means  a person who provides sperm or oocyte with the objective of 
enabling an infertile couple or woman to have a child;  
(i) “gynaecologist ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Pre -conception and 
Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994  (57 of 1994 ); 
(j) “infertility” means the inability to conceive after one year of unprotected coitus or 
other proven medical condition preventing a couple from conception;  
(k) “National Board ” means the National Assisted Reproducti ve Technology and Surrogacy 
Board to be constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 1 7 of the Surrogacy Act;  
(l) “National Registry ” means the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy 
Registry established under section 9;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(n) “patients ” means an individual or couple who comes to any registered assisted 
reproductive technology clinic for management of infertility;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under  this Act;  
(p) “appropriate authority ” means the authority appointed under section 12;  
(q) “regulations” means the regulations made by the National Board under this Act;  
 (r) “sperm ” means the mature male gamete;  
(s) “State Board ” means a State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board to 
be constituted under section 2 6 of the Surrogacy Act;  
(t) “Surrogacy Act ” means the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021; and  
(u) “woman ” means any woman above the age of twenty -one years who approaches an 
assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive technology bank for obtaining the 
authorised services of the clinic or bank.  
(2) The expressions “clinics ” and “banks ” occurring in this Act shall be construed as “assisted 
reproductive technology clinics ” and “assisted reproductive technology banks ”.  
(3) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Surrogacy 
(Regulation) Act shall have th e meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES TO REGULATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  
A. THE NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  
AND SURROGACY BOARD  
3. National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board . — The National 
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board to be constituted under                 6 
 sub-section ( 1) of section 1 7 of the Surrogacy Act shall be the National Board for the 
purposes of this Act.  
4. Application of provisions of Surrog acy Act with respect to National Board.  — Subject to 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of the Surrogacy Act relating 
to— 
(i) constitution of the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board;  
(ii) term  of office of Members of the National Board;  
(iii) meetings of the National Board;  
(iv) vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the National Board;  
(v) disqualifications for appointment as Member of the National Board;  
(vi) temporary associati on of persons with the National Board for particular purposes;  
(vii) authentication of orders and other instruments of the National Board; and  
(viii) eligibility of Members of the National Board for re -appointment,  
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply, so far as may be, in relation to assisted reproductive technology as 
they apply in relation to surrogacy, as if they are enacted under this Act.  
5. Powers and functions of National Board.  — The National Board shall exercise and discharge 
the following powers and functions, namely: —  
(a) to advise the Central Government on policy matters relating to the assisted reproductive 
technology;  
(b) to review and monitor the implementation of the Act, rules and regulations made 
thereunder and recommend to the Central Government, any suitable changes therein;  
(c) to lay down code of conduct to be observed by persons working at clinics and banks, to set 
the minimum standards of physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic equipment and expert 
manpower to be employed by clinics and banks;  
(d) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted under this Act and take 
appropriate steps to en sure their effective performance;  
(e) to supervise the functioning of the National Registry and liaison with the State Boards;  
(f) to pass orders as per the provisions made under this Act; and  
(g) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.  
B. STATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARD  
6. State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  — The State Assisted 
Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board to be constituted under section 2 6 of the Surroga cy 
Act shall be the State Board for the purposes of this Act.  
7. Application of provisions of Surrogacy Act with respect to State Board.  — Subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of the Surrogacy Act relating to — 
(i) constitution of the State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board;  
(ii) composition of the State Board;  7 
 (iii) term of office of members of the State Board;  
(iv) meetings of the State Board;  
(v) vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the State Board;  
(vi) disqualifications for appointment as member of the State Board;  
(vii) temporary association of persons with the State Board for particular purposes;  
(viii) authentication of orders and other instruments of the State Boa rd; and  
(ix) eligibility of member of the State Board for re -appointment,  
shall, mutatis mutandis , apply, so far as may be, in relation to assisted reproductive technology as they 
apply in relation to surrogacy, as if they are enacted under this Act . 
8. Powers and functions of State Board. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder, the State Board shall have the responsibility to follow the policies 
and plans laid by the National Board for clinics and banks in the State . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the State 
Board, taking into account the recommendations, policies and regulations of the National Board, 
shall —  
(a) co-ordinate the enforcement and impleme ntation of the policies and guidelines for assisted 
reproduction; and  
(b) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed.  
 (3) In the exercise of its functions under this Act, the State Board shall give such directions or 
pass such orders as directe d by the National Board.  
 
C. THE NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY 
REGISTRY AND THE APPROPRIATE ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY  
 AND SURROGACY AUTHORITY  
9. Establishment of National Registry of clinics and banks . — The Central Government may, 
within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, establish 
for the purposes of this Act and Surrogacy Act, a Registry to be called the National Assisted 
Reproductive Technology and Surr ogacy Registry.  
10. Composition of National Registry . — The National Registry referred to in section 9 shall 
consist of such scientific, technical, administrative and supportive staff and the terms and conditions of 
their service shall be such as may be pr escribed.  
11. Functions of National Registry . — The National Registry shall discharge the following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) it shall act as a central database in the country through which the details of all the clinics 
and banks of the country including na ture and types of services provided by them, outcome of the 
services and other relevant information shall be obtained on regular basis;  
(b) it shall assist the National Board in its functioning by providing the data generated from the 
central database of t he Registry ; 8 
 (c) the data generated from the National Registry shall be utilised by the National Board for 
making policies, guidelines and shall help in identifying new research areas and conducting 
research in the area of  assisted reproduction and other related fields in the country; and  
(d) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
 12. Appointment of appropriate authority.  — (1) The Central Government shall, within a 
period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more 
appropriate assisted reproductive technology and surrogacy authorities for each of the Union territories 
for the purposes of this Act and the Surrogacy Act.  
 (2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement 
of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate assisted reproductive technology and 
surrogacy authorities for the whole or any part of the State for the purposes of this Act and the 
Surrogacy Act.   
(3) The appropriate authority, under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), shall, —  
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union territory, consist of —  
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Secretary of the Health and Family Welfare 
Department —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of the Health and Family Welfare 
Department — Vice Chairperson, ex offi cio;  
(iii) an eminent woman representing women's organisation —member;  
(iv) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union territory concerned not below 
the rank of a Deputy Secretary —member, ex officio ; and  
 (v) an eminent registered medical prac titioner —member:  
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the 
occurrence of such vacancy;  
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union territory, the officers of such other 
rank as the State Government o r the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.  
(4) The members of appropriate authority, other than ex officio  members, shall receive only 
compensatory travelling expenses for attending the meetings of such Authority.  
13. Functions of appropriate authority . —The appropriate authority shall discharge the 
following functions, namely: —  
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a clinic or bank;  
(b) to enforce the standards to be fulfilled by the clinic or bank;  
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations 
made thereunder and take legal action as per provisions of this Act;  
(d) to take appropriate legal action against the misuse of assisted reproductive technology by 
any person and also to initiate independent investigations in such matter;  
(e) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder;  9 
 (f) to recommend to the National Board and State Boards about the mod ifications required in 
the rules and regulations in accordance with changes in technology or social conditions;  
(g) to take action after investigation of complaints received by it against the assisted 
reproductive technology clinics or banks; and  
(h) such  other functions as may be prescribed.  
14. Powers of appropriate authority . —(1) The appropriate authority shall exercise the powers 
in respect of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of 
the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(b) production of any document or material object relating to clause ( a); 
(c) searching of any place suspected to be violating the provisions of this Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder; and  
(d) such other powers as may be prescribed.  
 (2) The appropriate authority shall maintain the details of registration of assis ted reproductive 
technology clinics and banks, cancellation of registration, renewal of registration, grant of certificates 
to the commissioning couple and woman or any other matter pertaining to grant of licence and the like 
of the clinic or bank in such format as may be prescribed and submit the same to the National Board.  
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURES FOR REGISTRATION  
15. Registration of assisted reproductive technology clinic or assisted reproductive 
technology bank.  — (1) No person shall establish any clinic or bank for undertaking assisted 
reproductive technology or to render assisted reproductive technology procedures in any form unless 
such clinic or bank is duly registered under this Act.  
 (2) Every application for registration under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the National Registry 
through the appropriate assisted reproductive technology and surrogacy authority in such form, 
manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every clinic or bank which is conducting assisted reprod uctive technology, partly or 
exclusively shall, within a period of sixty days from the date of establishment of the National Registry, 
apply for registration:  
 Provided that such clinics and banks shall cease to conduct any such counselling or procedures o n 
the expiry of six months from the date of commencement of this Act, unless such clinics and banks 
have applied for registration and is so registered separately or till such application is disposed of, 
whichever is earlier.  
(4) No clinics or banks shall be registered under this Act, unless the appropriate authority is 
satisfied that such clinics and banks are in a position to provide such facilities and maintain such 
equipment and standards including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and diagn ostic 
facilities as may be prescribed.  
16. Grant of registration . — (1) On receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1) of section 15, 
the appropriate authority shall within a period of thirty days —  10 
 (i) grant registration subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and provide a registration number to the applicant; or  
(ii) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing, if such application does not 
conform to the provisions of this Act or the rule s or regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(2) If the appropriate authority fails to grant the registration or reject the application, as the case 
may be, as provided under sub -section ( 1), the appropriate authority shall, within a period of seven 
days from the expiry of the said period of thirty days specified under sub -section ( 1), provide a reason 
for the failure to process the applica tion. 
(3) The appropriate authority shall, within a period of one month of registration being granted 
under this section, intimate such registration to the State Board.  
(4) The State Board shall maintain a record of all registrations applied for and grante d under this 
section.  
(5) No registration shall be granted unless the State Board has inspected the premises of the 
applicant.  
(6) The registration granted under this section shall be valid for a period of five years from the 
date of registration granted by the appropriate authority.  
(7) The certificate of registration shall be displayed by the clinic or bank at a conspicuous place 
and such certificate shall contain the duration of validity of such registration.  
17. Renewal of registration.  — The registration granted under section 16, may be renewed for a 
further period of five years by the appropriate authority, on an application made by the applicant, 
under such conditions, in such form and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provid ed that no application for renewal of registration shall be rejected without giving an 
opportunity of being heard to the applicant.  
18.  Suspension or cancellation of registration.  — (1) The appropriate authority may on receipt 
of a complaint, issue a notice to the clinic or bank to show cause as to why its registration should not 
be suspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice.   
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the clinic or bank, the appropriate 
authorit y is satisfied that there has been a breach of the provision of this Act or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder or if the data obtained from them periodically do not satisfy the provisions of this 
Act, the rules and regulations made thereunder, it may , without prejudice to any criminal action, 
suspend its registration for such period as it may deem fit or cancel its registration.  
(3) On cancellation of registration, a copy of the cancellation letter shall be sent to the respective 
State Board and acco rdingly the State Board shall cancel the registration of such clinics and banks.  
19. Appeal.  — The clinic or bank or the commissioning couple or the woman may, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the communication relating to order o f rejection of 
application, suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the appropriate authority under 
section 16 or section 18, prefer an appeal against such order to —  11 
 (a) the State Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appro priate authority      
of a State;  
(b) the Central Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriated authority 
of a Union territory,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.   
20. Power to inspect premises, etc. — The National Board, the National Registry and the State 
Board shall have the power to, —  
(i) inspect, any premises relating to assisted reproductive technology; or  
(ii) call for any document or material,  
in exercise of their powers and discharge of their  functions.   
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES OF ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY CLINIC AND ASSISTED 
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY BANK  
21. General duties of assisted reproductive technology clinics and banks.  — The clinics and 
banks shall perform the following duties, namely: —  
(a) the clinics and banks shall ensure that commissioning couple, woman and donors of 
gametes are eligible to avail the assisted reproductive technology procedures subject to such 
criteria as may be prescribed;  
(b) the clinics shall obtain donor gametes from the banks and such banks shall ensure that the 
donor has been medically tested for such diseases as may be prescribed;  
(c) the clinics shall — 
 (i) provide professional counselling to commissioning couple and woman about all the 
implications and chances of success of assisted reproductive technology procedures in the 
clinic;  
(ii) inform the commissioning couple and woman of the advantages, disadvan tages and 
cost of the procedures, their medical side effects, risks including the risk of multiple 
pregnancy; and  
(iii) help the commissioning couple or woman to arrive at an informed decision on such 
matters that would most likely be the best for the com missioning couple;  
(d) the clinics shall make commissioning couple or woman, aware of the rights of a child born 
through the use of assisted reproductive technology;  
(e) the clinics and banks shall ensure that information about the commissioning couple, 
woman and donor shall be kept confidential and the information about treatment shall not be 
disclosed to anyone except to the database to be maintained by the National Registry, in a medical 
emergency at the request of the commissioning couple to whom the i nformation relates, or by an 
order of a court of competent jurisdiction;  
(f) every clinic and every bank shall maintain a grievance cell in respect of matters relating to 
such clinics and banks and the manner of making a compliant before such grievance cel l shall be 
such as may be prescribed;  12 
 (g) the clinics shall apply the assisted reproductive technology services, —  
(i) to a woman above the age of twenty -one years and below the age of fifty years;  
(ii) to a man above the age of twenty -one years and belo w the age of fifty -five years;  
(h) the clinics shall issue to the commissioning couple or woman a discharge certificate stating 
details of the assisted reproductive technology procedure performed on the commissioning couple 
or woman;  
(i) all clinics and banks shall co -operate and make available their premises for physical 
inspection by the National Board, National Registry and State Boards;  
(j) all clinics and banks shall provide all information related to —  
(i) enrolment of the commiss ioning couple, woman and gamete donors;  
 (ii) the procedure being undertaken; and  
 (iii) outcome of the procedure, complications, if any, to the National Registry 
periodically, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Written informed consent.  — (1) The clinic shall not perform any treatment or procedure 
without — 
(a) the written informed consent of all the parties seeking assisted reproductive technology;  
(b) an insurance coverage of such amount as may be prescribed for a period of twelve months 
in favou r of the oocyte donor by the commissioning couple or woman from an insurance company 
or an agent recognised by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under 
the provisions of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 19 99 (41 of 1999).  
 (2) The clinics and banks shall not cryo -preserve any human embryos or gamete, without specific 
instructions and consent in writing from all the parties seeking assisted reproductive technology, in 
case of death or incapacity of any of th e parties.  
(3) The clinic shall not use any human reproductive material, except in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act to create a human embryo or use an in-vitro  human embryo for any purpose 
without the specific consent in writing of all the conce rned persons to whom the assisted reproductive 
technology relates.  
(4) Any of the commissioning couple may withdraw his or her consent under sub -section ( 1), any 
time before the human embryos or the gametes are transferred to the concerned woman's uterus.   
Explanation . —For the purposes of this section, the expressions — 
(i) “cryo-preserve ” means the freezing and storing of gametes, zygotes, embryos, ovarian and 
testicular tissues;  
(ii) “insurance ” means an arrangement by which a company, individual or comm issioning 
couple undertake to provide a guarantee of compensation for specified loss, damage, complication 
or death of oocyte donor during the process of oocyte retrieval; and  
(iii) “parties ” includes the commissioning couple or woman and the donor.  
23. Duties of assisted reproductive technology clinics and banks to keep accurate records.  — 
The duties of clinics and banks while keeping the records relating to such clinics and banks are as 
under: — 13 
 (a) all clinics and banks shall maintain detailed records of all donor’s oocytes, sperm or 
embryos used or unused, the manner and technique of their use in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(b) all clinics and banks shall, as and when the National Registry is established, submit by 
online, —  
(i) all information available with them in regard to progress of the commissioning couple 
or woman; and  
(ii) information about number of donors (sperm and oocyte), screened, maintained and 
supplied and the like to the National Registry within a period of one month from the date of 
receipt of such information;  
(c) the records maintained under clause ( a) shall be maintained for at least a period of ten 
years, upon the expiry of which the clinic and bank shall transfer th e records to a central database 
of the National Registry:  
Provided that if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted against any clinics or banks, 
the records and all other documents of such clinics and banks shall be preserved till the final 
dispo sal of such proceedings;  
(d) in the event of the closure of any clinic or bank before the expiry of the period of ten years 
under clause ( c), such clinic or bank shall immediately transfer the records to the central database 
of the National Registry; and  
(e) all such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available for inspection to the 
National Board or the National Registry or the State Board or to any other person authorised by 
the National Board in this behalf.  
24. Duties of assisted reproduc tive technology clinics using human gametes and embryos.  — 
While using human gametes and embryos, the duties to be performed by the clinics and banks shall be 
as under: — 
(a) the clinics shall retrieve oocytes in such manner as may be specified by regulatio ns; 
(b) not more than three oocytes or embryos may be placed in the uterus of a woman during the 
treatment cycle in such manner as may be specified by regulations;  
(c) a woman shall not be treated with gametes or embryos derived from more than one man or 
woman during any one treatment cycle;  
(d) a clinic shall never mix semen from two individuals for the procedures specified under this 
Act; 
(e) the embryos shall not be split and used for twinning to increase the number of available 
embryos;  
(f) the collect ion of gametes posthumously shall be done only if prior consent of the 
commissioning couple is available in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(g) the clinic shall not use ovum that are derived from a foetus, in any process of in-vitro  
fertilisation; and  
(h) such other duties as may be prescribed.  14 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression — 
(i) “fertilisation ” means the penetration of the ovum by the spermatozoon and fusion of 
genetic materials resulting in the development of a zygote; and  
(ii) “foetus ” means a human organism during the period of its development beginning on 
the fifty -seventh day following fertilisation and ending at birth or abortion.  
25. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis.  —(1) The Pre -implantation Genetic testing shall be used 
to scree n the human embryo for known, pre -existing, heritable or genetic diseases only.  
 (2) The donation of an embryo after Pre -implantation Genetic Diagnosis to an approved research 
laboratory for research purposes shall be done only — 
 (a) with the approval of t he commissioning couple or woman; and  
 (b) when the embryo suffers from pre -existing, heritable, life -threatening or genetic diseases.  
(3) The National Board may lay down such other conditions as it deems fit in the interests of the 
Pre-implantation Genet ic testing.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression — 
(i) “Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis ” means the genetic diagnosis when one or both 
genetic parents has a known genetic abnormality and testing is performed on an embryo to 
deter mine if it also carries a genetic abnormality; and  
(ii) “Pre-implantation Genetic testing ” means a technique used to identify genetic defects in 
embryos created through in-vitro  fertilisation before pregnancy . 
26. Sex selection .— (1) Subject to the provisions of the Pre -conception and Pre -natal Diagnostic 
Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994, (57 of 1994) the clinic shall not offer to provide 
a couple or woman with a child of a pre -determined sex.  
 (2) It is prohibited for anyone to do  any act, at any stage, to determine the sex of the child to be 
born through the process of assisted reproductive technology to separate, or yield fractions enriched in 
sperm of X or Y variations.  
(3) A person shall not knowingly provide, prescribe or admi nister anything that shall ensure or 
increase the probability that an embryo shall be of a particular sex, or that shall identify the sex of an 
in-vitro embryo, except to diagnose, prevent or treat a sex -linked disorder or disease.  
27. Sourcing of gametes by assisted reproductive technology banks.  — (1) The screening of 
gamete donors, the collection, screening and storage of semen; and provision of oocyte donor, shall be 
done only by a bank registered as an independent entity under the provisions of this Ac t. 
(2) The banks shall —  
(a) obtain semen from males between twenty -one years of age and fifty -five years of age, both 
inclusive;  
(b) obtain oocytes from females between twenty -three years of age and thirty -five years of 
age; and  
(c) examine the donors for  such diseases, as may be prescribed.  
(3) A bank shall not supply the sperm or oocyte of a single donor to more than one commissioning 
couple.  15 
 (4) An oocyte donor shall donate oocytes only once in her life and not more than seven oocyte 
shall be retrieved  from the oocyte donor.  
(5) All unused oocytes shall be preserved by the banks for use on the same recipient, or given for 
research to an organisation registered under this Act after seeking written consent from the 
commissioning couple.  
(6) A bank shall  obtain all necessary information in respect of a sperm or oocyte donor, 
including the name, Aadhaar number as defined in clause ( a) of section 2 of the Aadhaar 
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, 
address and any other details of such donor, in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall 
undertake in writing from such donor about the confidentiality of such information.  
Explanation . —For the purposes of this section, the expressions — 
(i) “retrieval ” means a procedure of removing oocytes from the ovaries of a woman;  
(ii) “screening ” means the genetic test performed on embryos produced through in-vitro 
fertilisation . 
28. Storage and  handling of human gametes and embryos.  — (1) The standards for the storage 
and handling of gametes, gonadal tissues and human embryos in respect of their security, recording 
and identification shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) The gamete of a donor or embryo shall be stored for a period of not more than ten years an d at 
the end of such period such gamete or embryo shall be allowed to perish or be donated to a research 
organisation  registered under this Act for research purposes with the consent of the commissioning 
couple or individual, in such manner as may be presc ribed.  
29. Restriction on sale, etc., of human gametes, zygotes and embryos.  — The sale, transfer or 
use of gametes, zygotes and embryos, or any part thereof or information related thereto, directly or 
indirectly to any party within or outside India shall be prohibited except in the case of transfer of own 
gametes and embryos for personal use with the permission of the National Board.  
Explanation . —For the purposes of this section, the expression “zygote ” means the fertilised 
oocyte prior to the first cell  division.  
30. Research on human gametes and embryos.  — (1) The use of any human gametes and 
embryos or their transfer to any country outside India for research shall be absolutely prohibited.  
(2) The research on human gamete or embryo within India shall be performed in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
31. Rights of child born through assisted reproductive technology.  — (1) The child born 
through assisted reproductive technology shall be deemed to be a biological child of the 
commissioning couple and the said child shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges available to a 
natural child only from the commissioning couple under any law for the time being in force.  
(2) A donor shall relinquish all parental rights over the child or children which may be born from 
his or her gamete.  
 
 
 16 
 CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
32. Sex selective assisted reproductive technology . — (1) The clinic, or bank or agent 
thereof, shall not issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, 
distributed or communicated any advertisement in any manner including internet, regarding 
facilities of sex selective assisted reproductive technology.   
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a t erm which shall not be less than five years but may extend to ten years or 
with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees 
or with both.  
33. Offences and penalties.  — (1) Any medical geneticist, gynaecologis t, registered medical 
practitioner or any person shall not —  
(a) abandon, disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned, disowned or exploited in any 
form the child or children born through assisted reproductive technology;  
(b) sell human embryos or gametes, run an agency, a racket or an organisation for 
selling, purchasing or trading in human embryos or gametes;  
(c) import or help in getting imported in whatsoever manner, the human embryos or 
human gametes;  
(d) exploit the commissioning couple, woman or the gamete donor in any form;  
(e) transfer human embryo into a male person or an animal;  
(f) sell any human embryo or gamete for the purpose of research; or  
(g) use any intermediates to obtain gamete donors or purchase gamete donors.  
(2) Whoever contravene s the provisions of clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1), shall be 
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to ten lakh 
rupees for the first contravention and for subsequent contravention, shall be punishable wit h 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to eight years 
and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but may extend to twenty lakh rupees.  
34. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act or rules  for which no specific 
punishment is provided.  — Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder, for which no penalty has been provided in this Act shall be punishable 
as per sub -section ( 2) of section 33.  
35. Cognizance  of offences.  — (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act, save on a complaint made by the National Board or the State Board or by an 
officer authorised by it.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or  a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
36. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.  — Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Crimincal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all the offences under this Act shall be 
cognizable and bailable.  17 
 37. Offences by clinics or banks .— (1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any clinic or bank, the executive head of such clinic or bank shall  be deemed to 
be guilty of an offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly 
unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such of fence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act 
has been committed by any clinic or bank and it is proved that the offence has been committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neg lect on the part of any officer, 
other than the executive head of the clinic or bank, such officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
38. Power o f Central Government to issue directions to National Board, National 
Registry and appropriate authority. —(1) The Central Government may, from time to time 
issue to the National Board, the National Registry and the appropriate authority with respect to 
the Union territory, such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty 
and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly relation with foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing p rovisions of this Act, the National Board, the 
National Registry and the appropriate authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy 
as the Central Government  or the State Government, as the case may be, may give in writing to 
it from time to time:  
 Provided that the National Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to 
express its views before any direction is given under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the National Board as to 
whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central Government 
shall be final.  
39. Power of State Government to issue directions to State Boar d, etc.— (1) The State 
Government may, from time to time issue to the State Board and to the appropriate authority 
with respect to the State Government such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of 
the sovereignty and integrity of India, sec urity of the State, friendly relation with foreign States, 
public order, decency or morality.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the State Board and the 
appropriate authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under 
this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the State Government may give 
in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the State Board and the appropriate authority shall, as far as practicable, be 
given an o pportunity to express its views before any direction is given under sub -section ( 1). 18 
 (3) If any dispute arises between the State Government and the State Board as to whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the State Government  shall be final.  
40. Power to search and seize records, etc. —(1) If the National Board, the National 
Registry or the State Board has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed at any facility using assisted reproductive  technology, such Board or any 
officer authorised in this behalf may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, enter and 
search at all reasonable times with such assistance, if any, as such Board or officer considers 
necessary, such facility using assis ted reproductive technology and examine any record, 
register, document, book, pamphlet, advertisement or any other material object found therein 
and seize the same, if the said Board has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of the 
commission of a n offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches 
and seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.  
41. Protection of action taken in  good faith. — No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government or the National 
Board or the National Registry or the State Board or the appropriate authority or any other 
officer authorised by the Central  Government or the State Government or the National Board or 
the National Registry or the State Board or the appropriate authority for anything which is done 
in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder.  
42. Power to make rules . — (1) The Central Government may by notification make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and  without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for —  
(a) the other powers and functions of the National Board under clause ( g) of section 5;  
(b) the other powers and functions of the State Board under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8;  
(c) the terms of office and other conditions of service of scientific, technical and other 
employees of the National Registry under section 10;  
(d) the other functions of the National Registry under clause ( d) of section 11;  
(e) the other functions of the appropriate authority under clause ( h) of section 13;  
(f) the other powers to be exercised by the appropriate authority under clause ( d) of          
sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
(g) the format for granting of licences to th e clinic or bank by the appropriate authority 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for registration and fee 
payable thereof under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(i) the facilities and equipmen ts to be provided and maintained by the clinics and banks 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  19 
 (j) the conditions, form and fee for application of renewal of the registration of clinic or 
bank under section 17;  
(k) the manner in which  an appeal may be preferred to the State Government or the 
Central Government under section 19;  
(l) the criteria for availing the assisted reproductive technology procedures under     
clause ( a) of section 21;  
(m) the medical examination of the diseases w ith respect to which the donor shall be 
tested under clause ( b) of section 21;  
(n) the manner of making a complaint before a grievance cell and the mechanism 
adopted by the clinic under clause ( f) of section 21;  
(o) the manner of providing information by t he clinics and banks to the National 
Registry under clause ( j) of section 21;  
(p) the amount of insurance coverage for oocyte donor under clause ( b) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(q) the manner of maintaining the records by the clinic s and banks under clause ( a) of 
section 23;  
(r) the manner of collection of gametes posthumously under clause ( f) of section 24;  
(s) the other duties of clinics under clause ( h) of section 24;  
(t) the examination of the donors by the assisted reproducti ve technology banks for 
diseases under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(u) the manner of obtaining information in respect of a sperm or oocyte donor by a bank 
under sub -section (6) of section 27;  
(v) the standards for the storage and handling  of gametes, human embryos in respect of 
their security, recording and identification under sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(w) the manner of obtaining the consent of the commissioning couple or individual for 
perishing or donating the gametes of a donor or  embryo under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(x) the manner of performing research on human gametes or embryo within India under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 30;  
(y) the manner of entry and search by the National Board, the National Registry or the 
State Board or any officer authorised by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 40;  
(z) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
43.  Power to make regulations.  — (1) The National Board may, wi th the prior approval of 
the Central Government, by notification make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules 
made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act;  
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such 
regulations may provide for —  
(a) the manner of retrieving the oocytes under clause ( a) of section 24;  20 
 (b) the manner of placing the oocytes or embryos in the uterus of a woman under          
clause ( b) of section 24; and  
(c) any other matter w hich is required to be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.  
44. Laying of rules, regulations and notifications. — Every rule or regulation made and 
notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made or issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediat ely following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules or regulations or notifications, as the 
case may be or both Houses agree that the rules or regulations or notifications, as the case m ay 
be, should not be made or issued, such rules or regulations or notifications, as the case may be, 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or notification, as the case may be . 
45. Application of other laws not barred.  — The provisions of this Act shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of the Pre -conception and Pre -natal 
Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994) and the Clinical 
Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (23 of 2010) or of any other law for 
the time being in for ce. 
46. Power to remove difficulties.  — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this A ct as may appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall , as soon as may be made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.   
 
--------------------------The Bilateral Netting of Qualified Financial Contracts Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
 
1 
 THE BILATERAL NETTING OF QUALIFIED FINANCIAL  
CONTRACTS ACT, 2020  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER I I 
APPLICATION OF ACT  
 
3. Applicability of Act.  
4. Powers of authority.  
5. Enforceability of netting.  
CHAPTER III  
INVOCATION OF CLOSE -OUT NETTING  
6. Invocation of close -out netting.  
7. Net amount.  
CHAPTER IV  
LIMITATIONS ON POWERS OF ADMINISTRATION PRACTITIONER  
8. Limitations on powers of administration practitioner.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Power to amend Schedules.  
10. Provisions of this Act to override other laws.  
11. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
 THE BILATERAL NETTING OF QUALIFIED FINANCIAL  
CONTRACTS ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2020  
[28th September , 2020. ] 
An Act to ensure financial stability and promote competitiveness in Indian financial 
markets by providing enforceability of bilateral netting of qualified financial contracts and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Bilateral Netting of Qualified 
Financial Contracts Act, 2020.  
(2) It shall come  into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “administration ” means proceedings of the nature of placing under administration and 
includes imposition of moratorium, reorganisation, winding up, liquidation (including any 
compulsory winding up procedure or proceeding), insolvency, bankruptcy, compos ition with 
creditors, receivership, conservatorship or any proceedings of nature similar to or resulting in any 
of the foregoing, initiated or commenced under any law for the time being in force, against a 
qualified financial market participant;  
(b) “admin istration practitioner” means the liquidator, receiver, trustee, conservator, resolution 
professional or any other person or entity, by whatever name called, which administers the affairs 
of a party subject to administration under any law for the time bein g in force;  
(c) “authority” means the Central Government or any of the regulatory authorities as specified 
in the First Schedule;  
(d) “banking institution” means, — 
(i) scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934 (2 of 1934); and  
(ii) any other bank as the Reserve Bank of India may specify;  
(e) “close -out netting” means a process involving termination of obligations under a qualified 
financial contract with a party in default and subsequent combining of positi ve and negative 
replacement values into a single net payable or receivable as set out in section 6;  
(f) “collateral” means, — 
(i) money, in the form of cash, credited to an account in any currency, or a similar claim for 
repayment of money, such as a money market deposit;  
(ii) securities of any kind, including debt and equity securities;  
(iii) guarantees, letters of credit and obligations to reimburse; and  
(iv) any asset commonly used as collateral under any law for the time being in force;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2020, vide notification No. S.O. 3463(E), dated 1st October, 2020  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3 (ii).   
3 
 (g) “collateral arrangement” means any margin, collateral or security arrangement or other 
credit enhancement related to or forming part of a netting agreement or one or more qualified 
financial contracts to which a netting agreement applies, and includes, — 
(i) a pledge o r any other form of security interest in collateral, whether possessory or non -
possessory;  
(ii) a title transfer collateral arrangement; and  
(iii) any guarantee, letter of credit or reimbursement obligation by or to a party to one or 
more qualified financial contracts, in respect of those qualified financial contracts; or a netting 
agreement;  
(h) “insolvent party” means the party to a qualified financial contract in relation to which 
insolvency, winding up, liquidation, resolution, administration or similar proceedings have been 
instituted under any law for the time being in force in India or under the laws of any other country, 
including of its incorporation;  
(i) “margin” means the amount, form and type of collateral required as a performance bond fo r 
the purchase, sale or carrying of a qualified financial contract and includes — 
(A) initial margin which protects the transacting parties from potential future exposure 
likely to arise from future changes in the mark -to-market value of the qualified financial 
contract during the close -out and replace the position in the event of counterparty default; and  
(B) variation margin which protects the transacting parties from the current exposure that 
has already been incurred by one of the parties from chang es in the mark -to-market value of 
the qualified financial contract after the transaction has been executed;  
(j) “netting ” means determination of net claim or obligations after setting off or adjusting all the 
claims or obligations based or arising from mut ual dealings between the parties to qualified 
financial contracts and includes close -out netting;  
(k) “netting agreement ” means an agreement that provides for netting, and includes, — 
(i) an agreement that provides for the netting of amounts due under two o r more netting 
agreements; and  
(ii) a collateral arrangement relating to or forming part of a netting agreement;  
(l) “non -insolvent party” means the party to a qualified financial contract that is not the 
insolvent party;  
(m) “notification ” means a notific ation published in the Official Gazette and the term “notify ” 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(n) “qualified financial contract ” means a qualified financial contract notified by the authority 
under clause ( a) of section 4;  
(o) “qualified financial market p articipant ” includes, — 
(i) a banking institution, or a non -banking financial company, or such other financial 
institution which is subject to regulation or prudential supervision by the Reserve Bank of 
India;  
(ii) an individual, partnership firm, company, or any other person or body corporate whether 
incorporated under any law for the time being in force in India or under the laws of any other 
country and includes any international or regional development bank or other international or 
regional organisation ; 
(iii) an insurance or reinsurance company which is subject to regulation or prudential 
supervision by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India established under 
the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999);   
4 
 (iv) a pension fund regulated by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
established under the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 (23 of 
2013) ;  
(v) a financial institution regulated by the International Financial Se rvices Centres Authority 
established under the International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 (50 of 
2019); and  
(vi) any other entity notified by the relevant authority under clause ( b) of section 4;  
(p) “Schedule ” means the First Schedule or the Second Schedule to this Act;  
(q) “title transfer collateral arrangement ” means a margin, collateral or security arrangement 
related to a netting agreement based on the transfer of title to collateral, whether by outright sa le or 
by way of security, including a sale and repurchase agreement, securities lending agreement, 
securities, buy or sell -back agreement or an irregular pledge.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), the Banking Regulation 
Act,1949 (10 of 1949), the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1 970), the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act,1992  (15 of 1992) , the Foreign Exchange Management Act,1999 ( 42 
of 1992), the Insurance Regulatory and Development  Authority Act, 1999 (4 1 of 1999), the 
Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 (51 of 2007), the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) 
the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013  (23 of 2013)  and the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31  of 2016), shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those enactments.  
CHAPTER II  
APPLICATION OF ACT 
3. Applicability of Act. —The provisions of this Act shall apply to a qualified financial contract 
entered into on a bilateral basis between qualified financial market participants, either under a netting 
agreement or otherwise, where at least one of such participants shall be an entity regulated by an 
authority specified in the First Schedule.  
4. Powers of authority. — The relevant authority ma y, by notification, — 
(a) designate any bilateral agreement or contract or transaction, or type of contract regulated by 
it, as qualified financial contract:  
Provided that the contract, so designated under this clause, shall not include any contract, — 
(i) entered into between such parties and on such terms as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify; or  
(ii) entered into on multilateral basis in accordance with the provisions of the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and the  Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 
2007 (51 of 2007);  
(b) specify any entity regulated by it, as a qualified financial market participant to deal in 
qualified financial contracts.  
5. Enforceability of netting. —(1) Netting of the qualified financial contr act shall be 
enforceable — 
(a) where such contract is entered into with a netting agreement, in accordance with the terms 
of the netting agreement:  
Provided that the inclusion of any non -qualified financial contract in a netting agreement shall 
not invalida te the enforceability of netting of qualified financial contract under such agreement; or   
5 
 (b) where such contract is entered into without a netting agreement, in accordance with the 
provisions of section 6.  
(2) A qualified financial contract shall not be void and shall be deemed never to have been void or 
unenforceable by reason of any law for the time being in force.  
(3) Close -out netting of a qualified financial contract shall be enforceable against an ins olvent 
party, and, wherever applicable, against a guarantor or other person providing collateral or security for 
a party and shall not be affected or stopped or otherwise limited by: — 
(i) the appointment of, or any application for the appointment of, an ad ministration practitioner, 
or 
(ii) applicability of any provision of law relating to administration, or  
(iii) any other provision of law that may be applicable to an insolvent party  
(4) Where a qualified financial market participant is subject to administr ation, then 
notwithstanding, — 
(i) any stay, injunction, avoidance, moratorium or similar proceedings or any other order of a 
court, tribunal or authority, or  
(ii) any order of adjudication or dissolution or winding up or resolution or insolvency, or  
(iii) any rule, regulation, scheme, direction, guideline, circular or order,  
made or issued under any law for the time being in force, close -out netting shall be applicable and 
nothing contained therein shall affect the validity of close -out netting under this A ct. 
(5) The amount payable or other claims to be made in accordance with the close -out netting under 
this Act shall be final, irrevocable and binding upon the parties to a qualified financial contract and 
upon the administration practitioner, of the party in administration.  
 
CHAPTER III  
INVOCATION OF CLOSE -OUT NETTING  
6. Invocation of close -out netting. — (1) Close -out netting may be commenced by a notice given 
by one party to the other party of a qualified financial contract upon the occurrence of an event of 
default with respect to the other party or a termination event that may, in certain circumstances, occur 
automatically as specified in the netting agreement:  
Provided that where any one of the parties to a netting agreement is subject to administration,  then 
no prior notice to or consent of the party in insolvency, winding up, liquidation, administration or 
resolution proceeding, or to the administration practitioner of such proceeding, shall be required.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section ,— 
(i) “event of default ” means failure to pay or deliver or honour the obligations of a qualified 
financial contract, or bankruptcy, or any other event as may be agreed upon by the parties in the 
agreement; and  
(ii) “termination event ” means the occurrence of any event mentioned in the netting agreement 
which gives one or both parties the right to terminate relevant transactions under that agreement.  
(2) The parties to a qualified financial contract shall ensure that all obligations owe d by one party 
to another party under a qualified financial contract are reduced to or replaced with single net amount 
which has the following effect, namely: —  
6 
 (a) the termination, liquidation or acceleration of any present or future payment or delivery 
rights or obligations arising under or in connection with any one or more qualified financial 
contracts to which a netting agreement applies;  
(b) the calculation or estimation of a close -out value, market value, liquidation value or 
replacement value in resp ect of each right and obligation or group of rights and obligations 
terminated, liquidated or accelerated under clause ( a) and the conversion of each such value into a 
single currency; and  
(c) the determination of the net balance of the values calculated u nder clause ( b), whether by 
operation of set -off or otherwise, giving rise to the obligation of one party to pay an amount equal 
to the net balance to the other party.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of any law for the time being in force requiring  the 
realisation, appropriation or liquidation of collateral, and unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the 
realisation, appropriation or liquidation of collateral under a collateral arrangement shall take effect 
without any requirement of prior notice t o, or consent from, any party, person or entity.  
(4) Close -out netting shall be applicable to all qualified financial market participants who are 
parties to a qualified financial contract notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law 
specif ied in the Second Schedule or any other law pursuant to which any qualified financial market 
participant has been incorporated, constituted or is regulated.  
7. Net amount.  —(1) Where parties to the qualified financial contract enter into a netting 
agreemen t, the net amount payable under the close -out netting shall be determined in accordance with 
the terms of the netting agreement entered into by the parties.  
(2) In the absence of the netting agreement, where the parties to a qualified financial contract fa il 
to agree on the sum with regard to the net amount payable under the close -out netting, such sum shall 
be determined through arbitration.  
CHAPTER IV  
LIMITATIONS ON POWERS OF ADMINISTRATION PRACTITIONER  
8. Limitations on powers of administration practitioner.  —The administration practitioner shall 
not render or seek to render ineffective, — 
(a) any transfer, substitution or exchange of cash, collateral or any other interests under or in 
connection with a netting agreement between the insolvent part y and the non -insolvent party to a 
qualified financial contract; or  
(b) any payment or delivery obligation incurred by the insolvent party and owing to the non -
insolvent party under or in connection with a netting agreement on the grounds of it constitutin g a 
preference including a fraudulent preference or a transfer for undervalue, including during a 
suspect period by the insolvent party to the non -insolvent party.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “suspect period ” means the relevant period ref erred 
to in sub -section (4) of section 43 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016) in 
respect of “preferential transaction ” and in sub -section (1) of section 46 of the said Code in respect of 
“undervalued transaction ”.  
  
7 
 CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Power to amend Schedules.  —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, add to or otherwise amend the First Schedule or the Second 
Schedule and thereupon, the First Schedule  or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
issued, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be 
issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or an nulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that notification.  
10. Provisions of this Act to override other laws. — The provisions of this Act shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contai ned in any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.  
11. Power to remove difficulties. — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order , published in the Official Gazette, make such  
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made after the expiry of a period of th ree years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2(1) (c), (p) and 9(1)]  
Sl. No Name  of the authority  Act No . 
(1) (2) (3) 
1. The Reserve Bank of India, established under section 3 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.  2 of 1934.  
2. The Securities and Exchange Board of India, established under 
section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992.  15 of 1992.  
3. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of 
India, established under section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 1999.  41 of 1999.  
4. The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority, 
established under section 3 of the Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority Act, 2013.  23 of 2013.  
5. The International Financial Services Centres Authority 
established under section 4 of the International Financial 
Services Centres Au thority Act, 2019.  50 of 2019.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
9 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 6(4) and 9(1)]  
Sl. No  Name of the enactment  Act No  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.  2 of 1934.  
2. The Insurance Act, 1938.  4 of 1938.  
3. The Banking Regulation Act,  1949.  10 of 1949.  
4. The State Bank of India Act, 1955.  23 of 1955.  
5. The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956.  42 of 1956.  
6. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1970.  5 of 1970.  
 
7. The Regional Rural Bank Act, 1976.  21 of 1976.  
8. The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980.  40 of 1980.  
9. The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,  1992.  15 of 1992.  
10. The Foreign Exchange Management Act,  1999.  42 of 1999.  
11. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 
1999.  41 of 1999.  
12. The Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007.  51 of 2007.  
13. The Companies Act, 2013.  18 of 2013.  
14. The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 23 
of 2013 Act, 2013.  23 of 2013.  
15. The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.  31 of 2016.  
 
 
--------------------------The Central Sanskrit Universities Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
 
1 
 THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITIES ACT, 20 20 
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
SECTIONS  
1. Short  title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Establishment of  Universities . 
4. Effect  of establishment of  University . 
5. Objects of  University . 
6. Powers of  University . 
7. University to be open to all caste , creed, race or  class . 
8. Visitor of University . 
9. Officers of  University . 
10. Chancellor . 
11. Vice-Chancellor . 
12. Deans of Schools of  Studies . 
13. Registrar . 
14. Director of  Campus . 
15. Finance  Officer . 
16. Controller of Examinations . 
17. Librarian . 
18. Other  officers . 
19. Authorities of  University . 
20. The Court . 
21. Executive  Council . 
22. Academic  Council . 
23. Board of  Studies . 
24. Finance  Committee . 
25. Planning and Monitoring  Board . 
26. Other authorities of  University . 
27. Power to make  Statutes . 
28. Statutes, how to be  made . 
29. Power to make  Ordinances . 
30. Regulations . 
31. Annual  report . 
32. Annual  accounts . 
33. Returns and  information . 
34. Conditions of service of employees,  etc. 
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases  against  students . 
36. Right to  appeal . 
37. Provident and pension funds . 
38. Disputes  as to constitution  of authorities  and bodies . 
39. Filling of casual  vacancies . 
40. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by  vacancies . 
41. Protection of action taken in good  faith.  
2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Mode of proof of University  record . 
43. Power  to remove  difficulties . 
44. Statutes,  Ordinances  and Regulations  to be published  in Official  Gazette  and to 
be laid before  Parliament . 
45. Transitional  provisions . 
46. Councils,  Boards,  Standing  Committees  and Cells  of University . 
47. Constitution of    Committees . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND  SCHEDULE.  
  
   
3 
 THE CENTRAL SANSKRIT UNIVERSITIES ACT, 20 20 
ACT NO. 5 OF 2020  
[25th March , 2020.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate Universities for teaching and research in Sanskrit, to 
develop all -inclusive Sanskrit promotional activities and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the Central  Sanskrit  
Universities  Act, 2020 . 
(2) It shall  come  into force  on such date1 as the Central  Government  may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette,  appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic  Council ” means  the Academic  Council  of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by 
the Statutes and Ordinances made  thereunder;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of a Department of the University;  
(d) “Campus ” means  any unit established  or constituted  by the University  at  any place 
within or outside India for making arrangements for instruction, research, education  and training  
in Sanskrit  and includes  an existing  Campus  established  by the University prior to the 
commencement of this Act;  
(e) “Chancellor ” and “Vice -Chancellor ” mean,  respectively,  the Chancellor  and the Vice -
Chancellor  of the University;  
(f) “College ” means a College recognised or affiliated or maintained by the University;  
(g) “corresponding University ” and “deemed to be University ”, in relation to the society 
known  as— 
(i) the Rashtriya  Sanskrit  Sansthan,  New Delhi,  mean  the Rashtriya  Sanskrit  Sansthan,  New 
Delhi  established  in the year 1970  which  has been  conferred  the status of deemed to be 
University in the year  2002;  
(ii) Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, New Delhi, mean Shri Lal 
Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya  Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, New Delhi established in the year 1962 
which has been conferred the status of  deemed  to be University in the year 1987;  
(iii) the Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati, mean the Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, 
Tirupati established in  the year 1961 which has been conferred the status of deemed to be 
University in the year  1987;  
(h) “Court ” means the Court of  the University;  
(i) “Department ” means a Department of Studies and includes a Centre of Studies;  
                                                           
1. 30th April, 2020 , vide notification No. S.O. 1263(E), dated 17th April, 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3 (ii).   
4 
 (j) “Director ” means  the Head  of a Campus  or of a distance  education  system  of the  University  
or of any other  academic  branch  of studies  as approved  by the Executive  Council and prescribed by  
the Statutes;  
(k) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means 
of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, internet, correspondence course, seminar, 
contact programme, non -formal pattern or a combination  of any two or more  such means,  except  
the regul ar system  of education;  
(l) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University on regular basis  and includes 
teaching and non -teaching staff, but does not include an employee of any institution or college or 
school getting grant -in-aid to any extent w hatsoever, or affiliated or recognised, by the 
University;  
(m) “Executive  Council ” means  the Executive  Council  of the University;  
(n) “Faculty ” means a faculty of  the University;  
(o) “Hall” means  a unit of residence  or of corporate  life, being  hostel  or otherwise, for the students,  
authorities,  officers  and employees  of the University,  or of a Campus or College or Institution or 
Centre or Department, maintained or authorised by the University;  
(p) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a Campus or College  established or 
maintained or affiliated or recognised by the University;  
(q) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or School or an Institution established or 
maintained by the  University;  
(r) “Regulations ” means  the Regulations  made  by any authority  of the University under this Act 
for the time being in  force;  
(s) “Sanskrit ” means the Sanskrit language, in modern, classical or ancient form, and the 
knowledge available therein or related thereto, in addition to Sanskrit language;  
(t) “Schedule ” means a Schedule appended to this  Act; 
(u) “School ” means a School recognised  or affiliated or maintained by the University for 
secondary, primary and elementary levels or equivalent  thereto;  
(v) “School of Studies ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(w) “Society ” means  any of the following  societies  registered  under  the Societies Registration  
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) , namely: — 
(i) the Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New Delhi (Regulation No. S/4694 of 1970 -71); 
(ii) Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri  Rashtriya Sanskrit  Vidyapeeth, New Delhi (Registration No. 
S17454 of 1987);  
(iii) the Rashtriy Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati (Registraion No. 345 of 1986);  
(x) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in  force;  
(y) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant 
Professors and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting instructions  or conducting  
research  in the University  or in any College  or Institution maintained by the University and are 
designated as  teachers by the Ordinances, but  does not include the teaching staff of an institution 
or a college or school getting grant -in-aid to any extent whatsoever, or affiliated or recognised, by  
5 
 the University;  
(z) “University ” means  a University  established  and incorporated  as a University under this  Act. 
3. Establishment of Universities. —(1) The following  deemed  to be Universities  shall  be 
established  as three  separate Central Universities as  under: — 
(a) the Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New Delhi, along with its campuses as specified in the 
First Schedule, shall be established as a body corporate under this Act  by the name  of “the Central  
Sanskrit  University ”, which  shall  have  its headquarters  in New  Delhi;  
(b) Shri Lal Bahadur  Shastri  Rashtriya  Sanskrit  Vidyapeeth,  New Delhi  shall  be established as a 
body corporate under this Act by the name of “Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri  National  Sanskrit  
University ”, which  shall  have its headquarters  in New  Delhi;  
(c) the Rashtriya  Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati shall be established as a  body  corporate under 
this Act by the name of “the National Sanskrit University ”, which shall have its headquarters in  
Tirupati.  
(2) The Chancellor,  the Vice -Chancellor  and the members  of the Executiv e Council and  of the 
Academic  Council  of each University,  and all persons  who may hereafter  become such  officers  or 
members,  so long as they continue  to hold such office  or membership,  are hereby constituted a body 
corporate by the name of the University . 
(3) The University  shall  have perpetual  succession  and a common  seal, and shall sue and be sued 
by the said  name.  
4. Effect of establishment of University. —On and from  the date of commencement  of this 
Act,— 
(a) the societies,  namely,  the Rashtriya  Sanskrit  Sansthan,  New  Delhi,  Shri Lal Bahadur  Shastri  
Rashtriya  Sanskrit  Vidyapeeth,  New  Delhi  and the Rashtriya  Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati shall 
stand  dissolved;  
(b) any reference to a society or to a deemed to be University in any law (other  than this Act) 
or in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to  the corresponding 
University established and incorporated under this Act;  
(c) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to a society or to a deemed to be 
University shall  vest in the corresponding University established and incorporated under  this Act; 
(d) all rights  and liabilities  of a society  or of a deemed  to be University  shall  be transferred to, 
and be the rights and liabilities of, the corresponding University estab lished and incorporated 
under  this Act;  
(e) every person employed by a society or a deemed to be University immediately  before  such 
commencement  shall  hold his office  or service  in the corresponding  University established and 
incorporated under this Act, by the same tenure, at the same  remuneration  and upon  the same  
terms  and conditions  and with the same  rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, 
provident fund and other matters as they  would  have  held the same  if this Act had not been  enacted  
and shall  continue  to do  so  unless and  until  their  employment is  terminated or  until  such  
tenure,  remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Executive Council or the 
Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment 
may be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract  with the  
6 
 employee  or, if no provision  is made  therein  in this behalf,  on payment to him by the 
University of compensation equivalent  to three months' remuneration in case of permanent 
employees and one month's remuneration in the case of other employees:  
Provided further that every person employed before the commencement of  this Act, pending  the 
execution  of a contract  under  section  34, shall  be deemed  to have been appointed in accordance with 
the provisions of a contract consistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice -Chancellor  of a 
deemed  to be University  in any law for the time being  in force,  or in  any  contract or  other  document, 
shall  be  construed as  a  reference  to the Vice -Chancellor of the corresponding University 
established and incorporated under this Act;  
(f) the Vice -Chancellor of a deemed to be University appointed prior to the commencement of this 
Act and holding office as such, shall be deemed to have been  appointed as the Vice -Chancellor of the 
corresponding University under  this Act; 
(g) all Colleges,  Institutions,  Schools  of Studies,  and Departments  affiliated  to, or admitted to the 
privileges of, or maintained by, the deemed to be University shall stand  affiliated  to, or admitted  to the 
privilege  of, or maintained  by, the corresponding University established and incorporated under  this 
Act. 
5. Objects of University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge  by providing instructional, research and extension facilities to the promotion of Sanskrit 
Language  and such other  branches  of learning  as it may deem  fit; to make  special  provisions for 
integrated courses in humanities, social sciences and science in its educational programmes;  to take 
appropriate  measures  for promoting  innovations  in teaching -learning  process and inter-disciplinary 
studies and research; to educate and train manpower  for the overall development, promotion, 
preservation and research in the field of Sanskrit and Sanskrit traditional subjects.  
6. Powers of University. —(1) The University  shall  have the following  powers,  namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning including Sanskrit and Sanskrit 
traditional subjects, as may be specified in the Statute or as may be determined  by the University,  
from  time to time,  and to make  provisions  for research and advancement and dissemination of  
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant,  subject  to such condition  as the University  may determine,  diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on, persons on the  basis  of examination,  
evaluation  or any other  method  of testing,  and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificate s, 
degrees or other academic distinctions for good  and sufficient  cause;  
(iii) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training, extension services and such other 
measures for the promotion of Sanskrit  education;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the  Statutes;  
(v) to provide  facilities  of teaching  and learning  through  the distance  education system or 
online mode, as it may  determine;  
(vi) to provide for education not only at University or College level leading  to excellence  and 
innovations  in various  branches  of knowledge  as may be deemed  fit, but  continue  to provide  
education  to schools  already  affiliated  to the University;  
(vii) to provide facilities for imparting higher education in such branches of learning,  
including  Indian  Philosophy,  Pali-Prakrit,  Sanskrit  literature,  Yoga,  Ayurveda and Naturopathy, as 
the University may  determine;   
7 
 (viii) to institute  Principalships,  Professorships,  Associate  Professorships,  Assistant  
Professorships  and other  teaching  or academic  positions,  required  by the University  and to 
appoint  persons  for such Principalships,  Professorships,  Associate Professorships,  Assistant  
Professorships  or other  teaching  or academic  positions;  
(ix) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(x) to appoint  persons  working  in any other  University  or academic  institution  as teachers  
of the University  in accordance  with the Statutes;  
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments 
thereto, on regular basis as well as engagement on short -term basis in accordance with the  
Statutes;  
(xii) to co-operate,  collaborate  or associate  with any other  University  or authority  or institution  
of higher  learning,  including  those  located  outside  the country,  in such manner and for such 
purposes, as the University may  determine;  
(xiii) to establish,  maintain,  affiliate,  recognise  Colleges,  Institutions  and such Centres and 
specialised laboratories or other units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the 
University, necessary for the furtherance of its  objects;  
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and  prizes;  
(xv) to make provision for research and consultancy or advisory services, and for  that purpose,  
to enter  into such arrangements  with other  Universities,  Institutions or  bodies, as the University 
may deem  necessary;  
(xvi) to organise  and conduct  refresher  courses,  workshops,  seminars  and other programmes  for 
teachers,  evaluators  and other  academic  and non-academic  staff;  
(xvii) to appoint on contract or otherwise Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, 
Consultants, Professionals, Advocates, Counsels, Specialists and such other  persons  who may 
contribute  to the advancement  of the objects  of the University;  
(xviii) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the  Statutes;  
(xix) to determine standards and eligibilities for admission to the University, which may 
include examination, evaluation or any other method of  testing;  
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges in  accordance with the 
Statutes;  
(xxi) to supervise or cause to supervise the residences of the staff, faculty and students of the 
University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general  welfare;  
(xxii) to lay down  conditions  of service  of all categories  of employees,  including  their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiii) to regulate  and enforce  discipline  among  the students  and employees  of the University, 
and to take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be  
necessary;  
(xxiv) to make  special  arrangements  in respect  of women,  children  and persons, with 
disabilities as the University may consider desirable;  
(xxv) to accept  benefactions,  donations,  gifts in cash or kind for furtherance  of the  objects  of 
the University,  and to acquire,  hold and manage  and to dispose  of with the  previous  approval  of the 
Central  Government,  any property,  movable  or immovable,  including  trust and endowment  
properties  for the purposes  of the University;   
8 
 (xxvi) to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the University, money for the purpose of the  University;  
(xxvii ) to establish  new Campuses  in India  and also off-shore  campus  or Centre of  the 
University  with the prior  permission  of the Central  Government  as per the procedure  
established  thereof;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of the objects of the  University.  
(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub -section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour  of the  
University  to maintain  an all-India  character  and high standards  of teaching  and research, and the 
University  shall,  among  other  measures  which  may be necessary  for the said  purpose, take, in 
particular, the following measures, namely :-- 
(i) admission of students and recruitment of faculty shall be made on  all-India basis;  
(ii) admissions of students shall be made on merit, either through Common Entrance  
Tests  conducted  individually  by the University  or in combination  with other  Universities,  
or on the basis  of marks  obtained  in the qualifying  examination  in such courses where the 
intake of students is  small;  
(iii) inter-University  mobility  of faculty,  with portable  pensions  and protection of 
seniority, shall be  encouraged;  
(iv) semester  system,  continuous  evaluation,  choice -based  credit  system  or any other  
ancient,  traditional  or modern  appropriate  system  as may be deemed  to be fit  and proper  shall 
be introduced  and the University  shall  enter  into agreements  with other Universities and 
academic institutions for credit transfer and joint degree programmes;  
(v) ancient  traditional  teaching  system  including  Gurukulas  and Vedashalas  shall  be 
adopted  in such areas  and conditions  as may be determined  by the Executive Council.  
7. University to be open to all cast e, creed, race or class. —The University  shall  be open  to all 
persons  of either  sex and whatever  caste,  creed, race  or class,  and it shall  not be lawful  for the 
University  to adopt  or impose  on any person, any  test whatsoever  of religious  belief  or profession  in 
order  to entitle  him to be appointed as  a teacher  of the University  or to hold any other  office  therein  or 
be admitted  as a student   in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege 
thereof:  
Provided  that nothing  in this section  shall  be deemed  to prevent  the University  from making 
special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities  or of persons  
belonging  to the weaker  sections  of the society  and, in particular, of  the Scheduled  Castes,  the 
Scheduled  Tribes  and the other  socially  and educationally  backward classes of citizens, 
economically weaker section of the unreserved class and other  special  categories  as stipulated  by the 
Central  Government  from  time to time.  
8. Visitor of University. —(1) The President  of India  shall  be the Visitor  of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or  more persons to review the work and 
progress of   University, Colleges , Schools and Institutions maintained by it, and  to submit a report 
thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views  of the Executive  
Council  thereon  through  the Vice -Chancellor,  take such action  and issue  such directions,  as he 
considers  necessary,  in respect  of any of the matters  dealt  with in the report and the University shall 
abide by such action and be bound to comply with such  directions.   
9 
 (3) The Visitor  shall  have  the right  to cause  an inspection  to be made  by such person or persons as 
he may direct, of the University, its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipment, and of any 
Centre, Department, School, College or Institution maintained by  the University  and also of the 
examinations,  teaching  and other  work  conducted  or done  by the University and to cause an inquiry to 
be made in like manner in respect of any  matter  connected with the administration or finances of the 
University, Centre, Department or Institution or affiliated or recognised College or School.  
(4) The Visitor  shall,  in every  matter  referred  to in sub-section  (3), give notice  of his intention  to 
cause  an inspection  or inquiry  to be made,  to the University,  and the University shall  have  the right to 
make  such representations  to the Visitor,  as it may consider  necessary.   
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the  Visitor  may cause to 
be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section  (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University 
shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the rig ht to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor  may, if the inspection  or inquiry  is made  in respect  of the University  or any College 
or School or Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of 
such inspection or inquiry together with the such views and advice  with regard  to the action  to be 
taken  thereon,  as the Visitor  may be pleased  to offer and  on receipt  of address  made  by the Visitor,  the 
Vice -Chancellor  shall  communicate,  to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such 
advice as the Visitor may offer upon  the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or  has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where  the Executive  Council  does not, within  a reasonable  time,  take action  to the satisfaction of 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation  made  by the 
Executive  Council  issue  such directions  as he may think  fit and the Executive Council shall comply 
with such  directions.  
(10) Without  prejudice  to the foregoing  provisions  of this section,  the visitor  may,  by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes 
or the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, the Visitor shall may call upon the Registrar  to show  
cause  why such an order  should  not be made,  and, if any cause  is shown within a reasonable time, he 
shall consider the  same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the  Statutes . 
9. Officers of University. —The following  shall  be the officers  of the University,  namely: — 
(1) the Chancellor;   
(2) the Vice-Chancellor;  
(3) the Deans of School of  Studies;  
(4) the Registrar;  
(5) the Finance  Officer;   
(6) the Controller  of Examinations;   
10 
 (7) the Librarian;  and 
(8) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the  University.  
10. Chancellor .--(1) The Chancellor  shall  be appointed  by the Visitor  in such manner  as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University and shall, if 
present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for conferring degrees and meetings of the  
Court.  
(3) The Chancellor  shall  act as an appellate  authority  in the cases  where  the Executive Council is the 
disciplinary authority.  
11. Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor  shall  be appointed  by the Visitor  in such manner  
as may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University  
and shall exercise  general  supervision  and control  over the affairs  of the University  and give effect to the 
decision of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor  may,  if he is of the opinion  that immediate  action  is necessary on  any 
matter,  exercise  any power  conferred  on any authority  of the University  by or under this  Act and shall 
report  to such authority  at its next meeting  the action  taken  by him on such  matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action  
taken  by the Vice -Chancellor  under  this sub-section  shall  have  the right  to represent against such  
action to the Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is 
communicated to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor,  if he is of the opinion  that any decision  of any authority  of the  
University  is beyond  the powers  of the authority  conferred  by the provisions  of this Act, the Statutes 
or the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University,  may ask the 
authority  concerned  to review  its decision  within  sixty  days of such decision and if the authority 
refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or  no decision  is taken  by it within  the said 
period  of sixty  days,  the matter  shall  be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall  be final. 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties  as may 
be prescribed  by the Statutes  or the Ordinances.  
12. Deans of School of Studies. —Every Dean of School of Studies shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise  such powers  and perform  such duties  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
13. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and 
conditions  of service,  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar  shall  have  the power  to enter  into agreements,  sign documents  and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University, and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties, as may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
14. Director of Campus. —Every  Director  of the Campus  shall  be appointed  in such manner  and 
shall  exercise such  powers  and perform  such duties  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes.   
11 
 15. Finance Officer. —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers  and perform  such duties  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
16. Controller of Examination s.—The Controller  of Examinations  shall  be appointed  in such 
manner  and shall  exercise  such powers  and perform  such duties  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes.  
17. Librarian .—The Librarian  shall  be appointed  in such manner  and on such terms  and conditions 
of service  and shall  exercise  such powers  and perform  such duties  as may be prescribed  by the  
Statutes.  
18. Other officers .—The manner  of appointment  and powers  and duties  of other  officers  of 
the University shall be as prescribed by the  Statutes.  
19. Authorities of University. —The following  shall  be the authorities  of the University,  
namely :— 
(i) the Court;  
(ii) the Executive  Council;  
(iii) the Academic  Council;  
(iv) the Board of  Studies;  
(v) the Finance  Committee;  
(vi) the Planning and Monitoring Board;  and 
(vii) such other  authorities  as may be declared  by the Statutes  to be authorities of the  
University.  
20. The Court. —(1) The Constitution  of the Court  and the term of office  of its members  shall  be as 
prescribed by the  Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members, as may be prescribed by the Statutes, shall be elected 
from among the teachers,  employees and students of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers  and functions,  
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University, and to 
suggest me asures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider  and pass resolutions  on the annual  report  and the annual  accounts  of the 
University  and the audit  report  on such accounts;  
(c) to advise  the Visitor  in respect  of any matter  which  may be referred  to it for advice;  and 
(d) to perform  such other  functions  as may be prescribed  by the Statutes . 
21. Executive Council .—(1) The Executive  Council  shall  be the principal  executive  body  of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution  of the Executive  Council,  the term of office  of its members  and its powers  and 
functions  shall  be as prescribed  by the Statutes.  
22. Academic Council. —(1) The Academic  Council  shall  be the principal  academic  body  of the 
University  and  shall, subject to  the  provisions of  this Act,  the  Statutes and  the Ordinances,  
co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.   
12 
 (2) The constitution  of the Academic  Council,  the term of office  of its members  and its powers  and 
functions  shall  be as prescribed  by the Statutes.  
23. Board of Studies. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be  
as prescribed  by  the Statutes.  
24. Finance Committee. —The constitutions, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be as prescribed by the  Statutes.  
25. Planning and Monitoring .--The constitution, powers and functions of the Planning and 
Monitoring Board shall be as prescribed by the  Statutes.  
26. Other authorities of University. —The constitution, power s and functions of other 
authorities, as may  be  declared  by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be as 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Power to make Statutes. --Subject  to the provisions  of this Act, the Statutes  may provide  for all 
or any of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the constitution,  powers  and functions  of the authorities  and other  bodies  of the 
University,  as may be constituted  from  time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and 
bodies, the filling of vacancies of members and all other matters relating to those authorities and 
other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to  provide;  
(c) the appointment,  powers  and duties  of the officers  of the University  and their 
emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of  service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other  University or 
organisation or institution for a specific period for undertaking a joint  project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, 
provident fund, the manner of t ermination of service and disciplinary actions;  
(g) the principles  governing  seniority  of service  of the employees  of the University;   
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the  
University;  
(i) the procedure  for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student  against the 
action of any officer or authority of  the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department or a 
School or a  Centre;  
(k) the establishment  or abolition  of Campuses,  Colleges,  Institutions,  Schools, Centres or  
Halls;  
(l) the conferment of honorary  degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the management  of Colleges  and Institutions  established  by the University;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;   
13 
 (p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  and 
(q) all other  matters  which  by this Act are to be, or may be, provided  for by the Statutes.  
28. Statutes, how to be made. —(1) The First Statutes  are those  set out in the Second  Schedule.  
(2) The  Executive  Council  may,  from  time to time,  make  new or additional  Statutes  or may amend 
or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section  (1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the 
status, power or constitution of any authority of the University until such  authority  has been  given  an 
opportunity  of expressing  an opinion  in writing  on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive  Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute  shall 
require  the assent  of the Visitor who may assent  thereto  or withhold  assent  or remit  to the Executive  
Council  for reconsideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing existing Statutes shall have no validity  
unless  it has been  assented  to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new 
or additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section  (1) during  the period  
of three  years  immediately  after the commencement  of this Act: 
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make within one 
year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such 
detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parli ament.  
(6) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in this section,  the Visitor  may direct  the University to 
make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Executive Council 
is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt,  the Visitor  may, after considering  
the reasons,  if any, communicated  by the Executive Council  for its inability  to comply  with such 
direction,  make  or amend  the Statutes  suitably.  
29. Power to make Ordinance. —(1) Subject  to the provisions  of this Act and the Statutes,  the 
Ordinances  may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission  of students  to the University  and their enrolment  as such;  
(b) the  courses  of study  to be laid down  for all degrees,  diplomas  and certificates of the  
University;  
(c)  the  medium  of instruction  and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees (including Honorary degrees), diplomas, certificates and other 
academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the 
granting and obtaining of the  same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions  for the award  of fellowship s, scholarships,  studentships,  medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and 
the duties of examining bodies, examiners and  moderators;   
14 
 (h) the conditions of residence of the students, classrooms, laboratories, libraries, 
auditoriums, playgrounds and other amenities of the  University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the  residence and  teaching of 
women students and the prescribing of special courses  of  studies  for them;  
(j) the establishment  of Centres  of Studies,  Boards  of Studies,  Inter -disciplinary Studies, Special 
Centres, Specialised Laboratories and other  Committees;  
(k) the  manner  of  co -operation  and  collaboration  with  other  Universities, institutions, and 
other agencies including learned bodies or associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered 
necessary for improving the academic life of the University;  
(m) the institution  of fellowships,  scholarships,  studentships,  medals  and prizes;  
(n) the setting  up of machinery  for redressal  of grievances  of employees  and students;  
(o) all other matters which by this Act, or the Statutes, are to be, or may be, provided for by 
the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous  approval  of the 
Executive  Council  and the Ordinances  so made  may also be amended,  repealed or added to at any 
time by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Regulations. —The authorities  of the University  may make  Regulations,  consistent  with this 
Act, the  Statutes  and the Ordinances,  for the conduct  of their own business  and that of the 
Committees,  if any, appointed  by them  and not provided  for by this Act, the Statutes  or the Ordinances, 
in the manner rescribed by the Statutes.  
31. Annual report. —The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University  
towards  the fulfilment  of its objects  and shall be submitted  to the Court  on or before such date as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes and th e Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report, along with its comments, if any, to the Visitor.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be  submitted  to the 
Central  Government,  which  shall,  as soon  as may be, cause  the same  to be laid before both the Houses 
of Parliament.  
32. Annual accounts. —(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the direction of the Executive Coun cil and shall, once at least every year and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General 
of India or by such persons as he may authorise in  this behalf.   
(2) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the audit report thereon, shall be submitted  to the 
Court  and the Visitor  along  with the observations  of the Executive  Council.  
(3) Any observations  made  by the Visitor  on the annual  accounts  shall  be brought  to the  notice  of 
the Court  and the observations  of the Court,  if any, shall,  after being  considered  by the Executive  
Council,  be submitted  to the Visitor.   
(4) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor,  shall  
also be submitted  to the Central  Government,  which  shall,  as soon  as may be, cause the same to be laid 
before both the Houses of  Parliament .   
15 
 (5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of Parliament  shall  
be published  in the Gazette  of India .  
33. Returns and information. —The University shall furnish to the Central Government such 
returns or other information  with respect  to its property  or activities  as the Central  Government  may,  
from time  to time,  require,  within  such period  as may be specified  by the Central  Government.  
34. Conditions of service of employees , etc .—(1) Every  employee  of the University  shall  be 
appointed  under  a written  contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which 
shall be furnished to the employee  concerned.  
(2) Any dispute  arising  out of the contract  between  the University  and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one  member  appointed  
by the Executive  Council,  one member  nominated  by the empl oyee concerned and an umpire 
appointed by the  Visitor.  
(3) The decision  of the Tribunal  shall  be final and no suit shall  lie in any civil court  in respect of the 
matters decided by the  Tribunal:  
Provided that  nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of the judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every  request  made  by the employee  under  sub-section  (2) shall  be deemed  to be a submission 
to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration  and Conciliation  
Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students. —(1) Any 
student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from  the rolls of the University  
by the orders  or resolution  of the Vice-Chancellor,  Discipline Committee  or Examinat ion Committee,  as 
the case may be, and who has been  debarred  from appearing at the examinations of the University for 
more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such 
resolution by him, appeal to the Executive  Council  and the Executive  Council  may confirm,  modify  or 
reverse  the decision  of the  Vice -Chancellor  or the Committee,  as the case may be. 
(2) Any dispute  arising  out of any disciplinary  action  taken  by the University  against a student 
shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the  provisions  of sub-
sections  (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section  34 shall,  as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this  
sub-section.  
36. Right to appeal. —Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to 
appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council  against  the 
decision  of any officer  or authority  of the University,  or, the Principal  or the management of any 
College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive  Council  may confirm,  
modify  or reverse  the decision  appealed  against.  
37. Provident and pension funds. –(1) The University  shall  constitute  for the benefits  of its 
employees  such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes and other welfare and 
social security measures, as it may deem fit, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the  Statutes.   
16 
 (2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central  
Government  may declare  that the provision  of the Provident  Funds  Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply 
to such  fund as if it were a Government provident fund.  
38. Disputes as to constitution  of authorities and bodies. —If any question  arises  as to whether  
any person  has been  duly elected  or nominated or appointed, or is entitled to be, a member of any 
authority or other body  of the University,  the matter  shall  be referred  to the Visitor  whose  decision  
thereupon shall be  final.  
39. Filing of casual vacancies. —All casual  vacancies  among  the members  (other  than ex officio  
members)  of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who elects, nominates, appoints or co -opts the member whose place has become 
vacant and the person appointed, elected, nominated or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a 
member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose  place  he fills 
would  have  been  a member.  
40. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. —No act or proceeding 
of any authority or other body of the University s hall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies among its  members.  
41. Protection of action take in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or any other employee of the University for anythin g which is in good faith, done or 
intended to be done,  in pursuance  of any of the provisions  of this Act, the Statutes  or the Ordinances.  
42. Mode of proof of University record. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act,  1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other body of the University, or 
any other document in possession of the University or any entry in  any register duly maintained by the  
University  if certified  by the Registrar,  shall  be received  as prima  facie  evidence  of such receipt, 
application, notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the register 
and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof 
would, if produced, have been admissible in  evidence.  
43. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central  Government  may, by order  published  in the Official  Gazette,  make  such provisions, 
not inconsistent  with the provisions  of this Act, as appear  to it to be necessary  or expedient for  
removing  the difficulty:  
Provided  that no such order  shall  be made  under  this section  after the expiry  of three years from 
the commencement of this  Act. 
(2) Every  order  made  under  sub-section  (1) shall  be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made,  before  
each House  of Parliament,  while  it is in session,  for a total period  of thirty  days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry  of the session  
immediately  following  the session  or the successive  sessions aforesaid,  both Houses  agree  in making  
any modification  in the order  or both Houses  agree that the order should not be made, the order shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified  form  or be of no effect,  as the case may be; so, however,  that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously 
done under that  order.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every  Statute,  Ordinances  or Regulation  made  under  this Act shall  be published 
in the Official  Gazette.   
17 
 (2) Every Statute, Ordinances or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon  as may be 
after it is made,  before  each House  of Parliament,  while  it is in session,  for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session  or the successive  sessions  aforesaid,  both 
Houses  agree  in making  any modification in  the Statute,  Ordinances  or Regulation  or both Houses 
agree  that the Statute,  Ordinances or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinances or 
Regulation shall thereafter have  effect  only in such modified  form,  or be of no effect,  as the case may 
be; so however, that  any such modification  or annulment  shall  be without  prejudice  to the validity  of 
anything previously done under that Statute, Ordinances or  Regulation.  
(3) The power  to make  Statutes,  Ordinances  or Regulations  shall  include  the power  to give  
retrospective  effect,  from  a date not earlier  than the date of commencement  of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be  given  to any Statutes,  
Ordinances  or Regulations  so as to prejudicially  affect  the interests of any person to whom such 
Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be  applicable . 
45. Transitional provisions. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this  Act and the 
Statutes, — 
(a) the Chancellor,  Vice -Chancellor  and other  officers  of each of the deemed  to be Universities 
holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall,  on and from  such 
commencement,  continue  to hold their respective  offices  by the same  tenure  and upon  the same  terms  
and conditions  as they held it immediately  before  such commencement  for the remaining  period  of 
their term;  
(b) the members  of the Executive  Council,  the Academic  Council,  the Finance Committee,  the 
Planning  and Monitoring  Board  and Faculties  of each of the deemed to  be Universities  appointed  as 
such prior  to the commencement  of this Act shall,  on and from  such commencement,  be deemed  to have 
been  appointed  in the same  capacity  under  this Act for the remaining  period  of their term and shall  
continue  to exercise  all the powers and perform all the functions of such authority under this  Act; 
(c)  the first Court  shall  consist  of not more  than thirty -one members  who shall  be nominated  by the 
Central  Government  and shall  hold office  for a term of three  years:  
 Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the offices or authorities referred to in clauses ( a) and  
(b) the same shall be filled by appointment by the Visitor or nomination  by the Central  Government,  as 
the case may be, and the person  so appointed or nominated  shall  hold office  for so long as the officer  or 
member  in whose  place  he is  appointed  or nominated  would  have held office,  if such vacancy  had not 
occurred:  
Provided  further  that any ex officio  member  appointed  to any of the authorities  referred to in 
clauses ( a) and (b) prior to the commencement of this Act shall, if such appointment is not in 
conformity with the provisions of this Act, cease to be a member of such  authority.  
(2) All other officers and employees of the deemed to be Universities holding  office  immediately  
before  the commencement  of this Act, shall,  on and from  such commencement, continue to hold their 
respective offices by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions as they held 
immediately before such commencement of this  Act. 
(3) All students admitted in any programme or  course in a deemed to be University immediately  
before  the commencement  of this Act, shall  be deemed  to have been  migrated under same programme  
or course to corresponding University under the same terms and conditions as they held immediately 
before such commencement.   
18 
 (4) Anything done or any action taken or any degree or other academic distinction conferred by a 
deemed to be University before th e commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding  any change  
made  by this Act in the constitution  of the Court,  the Executive  Council,  the Academic  Council,  the 
Finance  Committee,  the Planning  and Monitoring  Board, Faculties and other officers be valid, as  if such 
thing was done, action taken, or degree or academic distinction conferred under this  Act. 
(5) The Regulations,  Bye-laws or Orders,  if any, made  prior  to the commencement  of this Act, 
shall, in so far as they pertain to matters mentioned in section  30, continue to  be  applicable till the 
Regulations, Bye -laws or Orders are made under this Act.  
(6) The Central  Government  may, without  prejudice  to the provisions  of this Act, and if it considers it 
necessary and expedient so to do, by notification, take such measures, as may be necessary,  for the smooth  
transfer  of the deemed  to be University  to the corresponding  University.  
46. Councils, Boards, Standing Committees and Cells of University .—The University  may 
constitute  such Councils,  Boards,  Standing  Committees  and Cells, in furtherance of its functions, as it 
may deem necessary.  
47. Constitution of Committees. —Where any authority of the University is given power by this 
Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as  otherwise provided, consist 
of the members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each 
case may think  fit. 
   
19 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1)(a)] 
 
S. No.  Name of the State  Name of the Campus  
1. Jammu and Kashmir  Shri Ranbir Campus  
2. Uttar Pradesh  (a) Lucknow Campus  
  (b) Ganganath Jha Campus  
3. Karnataka  Shri Rajiv Gandhi Campus  
4. Rajasthan  Jaipur Campus  
5. Odisha  Shri Sadashive Campus  
6. Kerala  Guruvayoor Campus  
7. Madhya Pradesh  Bhopal Campus  
8. Maharashtra  K.J. Somaiya Campus  
9. Himachal Pradesh  Veda Vyas Campus  
10. Tripura  Eklavya Campus  
11. Uttarakhand  Shri Raghunath Kirti Campus.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
20 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 28)  
The Statutes of the University  
1. Chancellor. —(1) The Minister in -Charge of the Ministry of Human Resource  Development 
shall be the ex officio Chancellor of the Central Sanskrit University, Delhi.  
(2) The Chancellors of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit University, New  Delhi and the 
National Sanskrit  University, Tirupati shall be appointed by the Visitor from a  panel of not less than 
three persons recommended by the Executive Council from amongst  persons of eminence in the 
academic or in public life of the country:  
Provided that, if the Visitor does n ot approve of any of the persons so recommended,  he may, call 
for fresh recommendations of different names, from the Executive Council.  
(3) The Chancellors of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit University, New  Delhi and of 
the National Sanskrit Uni versity, Tirupati shall hold office for a term of five  years and shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall  continue to 
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.  
(4) The age of the Chancellors of Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri National Sanskrit University,  New 
Delhi and of the National Sanskrit University, Tirupati shall not be more than seventy  years as on the 
1st day of January in the year during which the vaca ncy has arisen.  
2. Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from  out of a 
panel of three names recommended by a Committee constituted under clause ( 3): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve any of the persons inclu ded in the panel,  he may call 
for a fresh panel of new names.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be an eminent scholar in the field of Sanskrit and allied  subjects 
and his qualifications shall be as specified in the regulations made under the  University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) in this behalf.  
(3) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of five persons, out of whom  two shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and two by the Visitor, and one by the  Central Government and 
the nomine e of the Visitor shall be the convener of the Committee:  
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be an employee of the  University or a 
College or an Institution maintained by the University or a member of any  authority of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried employee of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on  which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years:  
Provided th at the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor, after his term has expired, to  continue 
in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be  specified by him, subject 
to him not exceeding seventy years of age.  
(6) Notwithstanding a nything contained in clause ( 5), the Visitor may, at any time  after the Vice -
Chancellor has entered upon his office, by order in writing, remove the  Vice -Chancellor from office 
on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of statutory  provisions:   
21 
 Provided that no such order shall be made by the Visitor unless the Vice -Chancellor  has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to  be taken against him:  
Provided further that the Visitor shall consult the Chancellor  also before making such  order:  
Provided also that the Visitor may, at any time, before making such order, place the  Vice -
Chancellor under suspension, pending enquiry.  
(7) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as  follows: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances, other  than house 
rent allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to  time and he shall be 
entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence  throughout his term of office 
and no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect  of the maintenance of such 
residence;   
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances  as may 
be fixed by the Central Government f rom time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University, or a College or an Institution  
maintained by the University, or of any other University or any college or institution  
maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, such other University , is appointed as  the 
Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident  fund of which 
he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of  such person in that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person h ad been  contributing immediately before 
his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension  scheme, 
the University shall make necessary contribution to such scheme;   
(iii) the Vice -Chancellor s hall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates  as may be 
fixed by the Central Government from time to time;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty  days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credite d to his account in advance in  two half -yearly 
instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July  every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the  office of the 
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of  a half year, the leave shall be  credited proportionately 
at the rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month  of service;  
(v) in addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor  shall also be 
entitled to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed  year of service, and 
half-pay leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full  pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice the amount of  half-pay 
leave shall be de bited against half -pay leave due.  
(8) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  otherwise, 
or if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the  senior -most 
Professor shall perform the dut ies of the Vice -Chancellor.  
3. Powers and duties of Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  
Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee and  Planning and 
Monitoring Board, and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the  Convocations held for 
conferring degrees and at meetings of the Court.   
22 
 (2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of  any 
authority or other body of the University, but shall not be en titled to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member of such authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the  Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers necessary  to ensure such 
observance.   
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance  of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or  persons as he 
deems fit.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have  all the powers to convene or cause to be convened  the 
meetings of the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee and  the Planning 
and Monitoring Board.  
4. Deans of School of Studies. — (1) Every Dean of School of Studies shall be appoin ted by the 
Vice -Chancellor from amongst the Professors in the School of Studies by rotation in  the order of 
seniority for a period of three years:  
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor in a School of  Studies, the Dean 
shall be a ppointed, for the time being, from amongst the Professors, if  any, and the Associate 
Professors in the School of Studies by rotation in the order of  seniority:  
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to  hold office  as 
such.   
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,  absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office  shall be performed by 
the senior -most Professor, as the case may be , in the School of  Studies.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School of Studies and shall be responsible for  the conduct 
and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School of  Studies and shall have 
such other functions as may be pr escribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the  Boards of 
Studies or Committees of the School of Studies, as the case may be, but shall not  have the right to 
vote thereat unless he is a member thereof.   
5. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be  whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Registrar shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for  re-
appointment after following such procedure as may be laid down for such appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall  be such as 
may be presc ribed by the Central Government from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -two years.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of  illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of  the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the  purpose.   
23 
 (5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the  employees, 
excluding teachers and other academic staff, as may be specified in the order of  the Executive Council 
and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to  them or to impose on them the 
penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has been given a  reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard  to him;  
(b) an appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar  imposing any of 
the penalties specified in sub -clause ( a); 
(c) in a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the  Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report  to the Vice -
Chancell or along with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the  Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive Council and the Academic  
Council, b ut shall not be deemed to be member of either of these authorities and he shall be  ex officio 
Member -Secretary of the Court and of the Planning and Monitoring Board.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the com mon seal and such other property  of the 
University as the Executive Council shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices, convening meeti ngs of the Court, the Executive  Council,  the 
Academic Council, the Planning and Monitoring Board, and of any Co mmittees  appointed by 
those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,  the Academic 
Council, the Planning and Monitoring Board and of any Committees  appointed by those 
authorities;  
(d) to conduct the offic ial correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council,  the Academic 
Council and the Planning and Monitoring Board;  
(e) to supply to Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities  of the 
University as soon as they are issued and of the mi nutes of such meetings;  
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the  University, sign 
powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative  for the purpose; and  
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the  Ordinances, the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive  Council or the Vice -
Chancellor.  
6. Finance Officer. —(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive  Council on the 
recommendatio ns of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and  he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible  for re -
appointment after following such proce dure as may be laid down for such appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer  shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to time:   
24 
 Provided that, the Finance Officer shall reti re on attaining the age of sixty -two years.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by  reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of the office 
shall be  performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint  for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Member —Secretary of the Finance Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall  advise it as regards 
its financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the  Executive 
Council or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including  trust and 
endowed property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and  non-recurring 
expenditure for  a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended  on the purpose for 
which they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the  University and 
for their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on  the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenues and advise on the methods  of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up -to-
date and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other  consumable materials in all 
offices, Departments, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor un -authori sed expenditure and  other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;  and  
(h) call for, from any office, Department, Centre, Laboratory, College, School of  Studies or 
Institution maintained by the University, any inf ormation or returns that  he may consider 
necessary for the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised  in this 
behalf by the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shal l be sufficient discharge 
for payment of such money.  
7. Controller of Examinations. —(1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed  by the 
Executive Council on the recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for  the purpose and 
he shall be a  whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term of five years and  shall be 
eligible for re -appointment after following such procedure as may be laid down for  such appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Controller of  Examinations 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government from time to  time:   
25 
 Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on attaining the age of  sixty -two years.  
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant or when the Controller  of 
Examinations is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the  duties of his 
office, the duties of the office shall be performed b y such person as the  Vice -Chancellor may appoint 
for the purpose.  
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and superintend the examinations  of the 
University in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances.  
8. Librarian. —(1) The Librarian shall be a ppointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a  whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be  assigned to him 
by the Executive Council.  
9. Director of the Campus. —(1) The Director of a Campus shall be the senior -most  Professor 
and appointed by the Vice -Chancellor of the University on such terms and  conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) The Director of the Campus shall exercise such powers and perform duties as may  be assigned 
to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
10. Meetings of Court. —(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to  be fixed 
by the Executive Council unless so me other date has been fixed by the Court in  respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during  the 
previous year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the  balance -sheet as aud ited, 
and financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.   
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the  financial 
estimates referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at  least seven days 
before the date of the annual meeting.  
(4) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the  Vice -
Chancellor or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, by the Registrar.   
(5) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
11. Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following  persons, 
namely: — 
(a) Vice -Chancellor shall be the Chairperson;  
(b) two Deans of the School of Studies by rotation according to the seniority;  
(c) one Pro fessor, other than a Dean by rotation according to seniority;  
(d) one Associate Professor by rotation according to seniority;  
(e) two members of the Court, none of whom shall be an employee of the  University or a 
college or an institution affiliated to or recognised by the University;  
(f) one representative from the University Grants Commission;  
(g) three eminent academics nominated by the Visitor;   
26 
 (h) two eminent academics in the field of Sanskrit and allied subjects to be  nominated by the 
Central Governme nt on the recommendations of the Vice -Chancellor;  
(i) Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Human Resources Development looking  after the 
University;  
(j) the Registrar of the University shall be the Secretary of the Executive Council.  
(2) All the members of t he Executive Council, other than ex officio members shall hold  office for 
a term of three years.  
(3) Seven members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Executive 
Council and it shall meet at least thrice in a year.  
12. Powers and functions of Executive Council. —(1) The Executive Council shall  have power 
of management and administration of the revenues and property of the University  and the conduct of 
all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive  Council 
shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers,  namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts including Chairs, to deter mine  the number and 
emoluments of such posts and to define the duties and conditions of  service of Professors, 
Associate Professors, Assistant Professors and other academic  staff:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect o f the number and 
qualifications of teachers and other academic staff otherwise than  after consideration of the 
recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors  and other academic 
staff inc luding Chairs, as may be necessary, on the  recommendation of the Selection Committee 
constituted for the purpose and to fill up  temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to promote inter -facial research by making joint appointments of teaching  staff in 
different Schools, Departments and Centres;   
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to define  their duties 
and conditions of their service and to make appointments thereto in the  manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances;  
(v) to grant lea ve of absence to any officer of the University other than the  Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the  discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employ ees in accordance with  the Statutes and 
the Ordinances;  
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property,  business and all 
other administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to  appoint such agents as it may 
think fit; 
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure  for a year on 
the recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied  income, in such 
stocks, funds,  shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think  fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying  such investment from time to time;   
27 
 (x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on  behalf of the 
University;  
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means  needed for 
carrying on the work of the University;  
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xiii) to enter tain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances  of the 
employees and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel  aggrieved;  
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them,  and to fix their 
fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting  the Academic Council;  
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the use of such  seal; 
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence  of women 
students;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,  Consultants 
and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such  appointments;  
(xix) to approve the award of degrees and diplomas based on the results of the  examinations 
and tests to confer, grant of award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and  other academic titles and 
distinctions;  
(xx) to raise and borrow money on b onds, mortgages, promissory notes or  other obligations or 
securities funded or based on any of the properties and assets of  the University or without any 
securities and upon such terms and conditions as it  may think fit and pay out of the funds of the 
Univ ersity, all expenses, incidental to the  raising of money and to repay and redeem any money 
borrowed;  
(xxi) to enter into partnership with industry and non -government agencies for  the 
advancement of knowledge and establish a corpus of funds out of the profi ts of such partnership; 
and  
(xxii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be  conferred or 
imposed on it by this Act or the Statutes.  
13. Academic Council. —(1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following  persons, 
namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor shall be the Chairperson;  
(b) Deans of School of Studies;  
(c) Head of Departments and Director of Centres;  
(d) two Professors other than Heads of Departments; according to seniority to  be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(e) two Teachers of the University, at least one of whom shall be an Associate  Professor, by 
rotation according to seniority, to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(f) one member, other than those referred to in items ( b),(c), (d) and ( e) from each  Schools of 
studies, centres;   
28 
 (g) three persons, not being employees of the University to be nominated by  the Vice -
Chancellor on the recommendations of the Academic Council for their special  knowledge;  
(h) two members of the Court, none of whom shall be an employee of the  University or a 
College or an Institution affiliated to or recognised by the University.  
(2) The Registrar of the University shall be the Secretary of the Academic Council.  
(3) All the members of the Academic Council, other than ex officio members shall  hold office for 
a term of three years and they shall be eligible for re -appointment after a  cooling off period of at least 
two years.  
(4) Half of the sanctioned strength of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for  a meeting of 
the Academi c Council.  
14. Powers and functions of Academic Council. —Subject to the provisions of this  Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all other  powers vested in it, 
have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise g eneral supervision over the academic policies of the University  and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -ordination of teaching  among the Colleges and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research and improvement of  academic standards;  
(b) to bring about and promote inter -School co -ordination and to establish or  appoint such 
Committees or Boards as may be deemed necessary for the purpose;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative,  or on a 
reference by a School or the Executive Council, and to take appropriate action  thereon;  
(d) to frame such Regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the  Ordinances 
regarding the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residence,  admissions, award of 
fellowships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life  and attendance;  
(e) to prescribe courses of study leading to degrees and diplomas of the  University; and   
(f) to make recommendations to the Executive Council on the following matters:  
(i) measures for improvement of standards of teaching, training and  research;  
(ii) institution of Fellowships, Travelling Fellowships, Scholarships,  Medals and Prizes;  
(iii) to recommend about the establishment or abolition of Centres or  Departments.  
15. Plann ing and Monitoring Board. —(1) The Planning and Monitoring Board shall  consist of 
the following persons, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be the Chairperson;  
(ii) three internal members, to be nominated by the Executive Council;  
(iii) three eminent ed ucationists having special knowledge of the University  planning, to be 
appointed by the Executive Council;  
(iv) the Finance Officer;  
(v) the Registrar who shall be Member -Secretary.  
(2) The term of the members of the Planning and Monitoring Board, excludin g ex officio 
members, shall be three years and they shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The quorum for the meeting of the Planning and Monitoring Board shall be five.   
29 
 (4) The Planning and Monitoring Board shall meet at least twice a year.  
16. Powers and functions of the Planning and Monitoring Board. —(1) The Planning  and 
Monitoring Board, subject to the supervision of the Executive Council, shall — 
(i) be responsible for overall perspective planning and development of the  University in 
consonance with its objective;  
(ii) determine the area of excellence of the University and identify the thrust  areas for 
research;  
(iii) examine, rationalise, coordinate the proposals of development received  from various 
Faculties and Departments to be submitted to the Executive Council and  the Academic Council 
for their consideration and approval;  
(iv) monitor the implementation of the approved plan of the University;  
(v) submit to the Academic Council and the Executive Council plans for  disciplines and 
courses of study ; 
(vi) propose to the Academic Council and the Faculty, measures regarding the  restructuring of 
courses and introduction of inter -disciplinary interaction amongst  the Departments of Studies;  
(vii) perform such other functions and exercise such other powers  as may be  assigned or 
delegated to it by the Executive Council.  
(2) In case of difference of opinion between the Planning and Monitoring Board and  the 
Academic Council in regard to the academic planning, the matter shall be referred to the  Executive 
Counc il whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(3) The Planning and Monitoring Board shall, under its overall supervision, establish  a planning 
cell to achieve its objectives and appoint as many Committees as it deems  necessary for such purpose:  
Provided that t wo-third members of such Committee shall be from amongst the  teachers of the 
University.  
17. Schools of Studies and Departments. —(1) The University shall have such Schools  of 
Studies as may be specified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School of studies shall ha ve a School Board and the members of the first  School Board 
shall be nominated by the Executive Council for a period of three years.  
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by  the 
Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such  meetings 
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by  the 
Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the r ecommendation of the Academic  Council, 
establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the  University as the 
Executive Council may consider necessary.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) teachers of the Department;   
30 
 (ii) persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance  with the 
provisions of the Ordinances.  
18. Board of Studies. —(1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members  shall be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and sup ervision of the Academic Council, the  functions of a 
Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various  degrees and other requirements 
of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned  School Board in the manner prescribed by the 
Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding  research 
degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the  period of three years  
immediately after the commencement of this Act, be performed  by the Department.  
19. Finance Committee. —(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following  members, 
namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) one person to be nominated by the Court;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at  least one shall 
be a member of the Executive Council;  
(iv) one representative of Ministry of Human Resource Develo pment;  
(v) Finance Officer shall be the Member —Secretary.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall  hold office 
for a term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of  dissent if he 
does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.   
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year to examine t he accounts  and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been  included in the 
budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are  considered by the Executive 
Council.  
31 
 (7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by  Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments  and thereafter submitted 
to the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure  and the 
total non -recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of  the University 
(which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loan s). 
20. Selection Committees. —(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making  
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor,  Associate 
Professor, Assistant Professor, Registrar, Finance Officer, Controller of  Examina tions, Librarian and 
Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the  University.  
(2) (a) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of  the Table 
below shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Central Government  and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:   
TABLE  
 
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School of Studies.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department, if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor, out of a panel of names 
approved by the Executive Council and recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Associate Professor/Assistant Professor  (i) The Dean of the School of Studies.  
 (ii) Head of the Department, if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) One Professor nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iv) Two persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor, out of a panel of names 
approved by the Executive Council and recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Associate Professor or Assistant 
Professor will be concerne d. 
Registrar/Finance Officer/Controller of 
Examinations  (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by 
it. 
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of t he University who 
have special knowledge of the subject of the Library Science 
or Library Administration nominated by the Executive 
Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
 
(b) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Vice -Chancellor for 
appointments of employees, consultants, retainers and other non -academic posts; and the Selection 
Committee for appointment to the post specified in column 1 of th e Table below shall consist of the 
persons mentioned in column 2, namely: —  
32 
 TABLE  
1 2 
Group A, B and C non -teaching staff  A Committee of three to five members  
comprising of one to three senior officers and  
teachers of the University to be nominated by  
the Vice -Chancellor and two external members  
with expertise in the relevant field to be 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Note 1. —Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the  head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
Note 2. —The Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor shall be a Professor  concerned 
with the speciality for which the selection is being made and the Vice -Chancellor  shall consult the 
Head of the Department and the Dean  of School of Studies before  nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, the senior -most Professor, shall convene  and preside 
at the meeting of the Selection Committee:  
Provided that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shal l not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Central Government nominee and the persons  nominated by the 
Executive Council is four in all, at least three of them attend the  meeting; and   
(b) where the number of Central Government nominee and the persons  nominated by the 
Executive Council is three in all, at least two of them attend the  meeting.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee shall be laid down in  the 
Ordinances.  
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendat ions made by the  Selection 
Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final  orders.  
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) if the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one academic session,  it shall be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the  procedure indicated in the 
foregoing clauses:   
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it  is necessary to 
fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary  basis on the advice of a 
local Selection Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a  period not exceeding six months;  
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to  such vacancy 
shall be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee  consisting of the Director of 
Campuses or Dean of School of Studies concerned, the  Head of the Department and a nominee of 
the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of  the 
Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the  Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts  caused by death 
or any oth er reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of  the Department concerned, 
make a temporary appointment for a month and report to  the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar 
about such appointment;  
(iii) no teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a  regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in  service on such temporary  
33 
 employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a  local Selection Committee or a regular 
Selection Committee, for a temporary o r permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
21. Special mode of appointment. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  Statute 20, the 
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction and  professional to accept a post 
of Professor or Ass ociate Professor or any other equivalent  academic post in the University on such 
terms and conditions as it deems fit and on the  person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post:  
Provided that the Executive Council may also create supernumerary post for a specified  period for 
appointment of such persons:  
Provided further that, the number of supernumerary posts so created, shall not  exceed five per 
cent. of the total posts in the University.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working  in any 
other University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with  the manner laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
22. Appointment for Tenure fixed. —The Executive Council may appoint a person  selected in 
accordance wi th the procedure laid down in Statute 20 for a fixed tenure on such  terms and conditions 
as it deems fit.  
23. Committees. —(1) An authority of the University may appoint as many standing  Committees, 
as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees per sons who are not  members of such 
authority.  
(2) A Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to  it subject to 
subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of t eachers, etc. —(1) All the  teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any agreement  to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as  are specified in the Statutes, 
the Ordinances an d the Regulations.  
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be such as may be  prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed  on a 
written contract, the form of which sh all be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 3) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
25. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees. —(1) All  the 
employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff shall, in  the absence of 
any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of  service and code of conduct 
as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the  Regulations.  
(2) The manner of  appointment and emoluments of employees, other than the teachers  and other 
academic staff, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
26. Seniority list. —(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to  hold an office 
or be a mem ber of an authority of the University by rotation according to  seniority, such seniority 
shall be determined according to the length of continuous service  of such person in his grade and in 
accordance with such other principles as the Executive  Council may , from time to time, prescribe.   
34 
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each  class of persons 
to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the provisions  of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular  grade or the 
relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar  may, on his own 
motion, and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to  the Executive Council whose 
decision thereon shall be final.  
27. Removal of employees of University. —(1) Where there is an allegation of  misconduct 
against a teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the  Univ ersity, the Vice -
Chancellor, in the case of teacher or a member of the academic staff and  the authority competent to 
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in  the case of other employee may, by 
order in writing, place such teacher, m ember of the  academic staff or other employee, as the case may 
be, under suspension and shall forthwith  report to the Executive Council the circumstances in which 
the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that th e circumstances  of the case 
do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff,  revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment  or of any 
other provisions in the terms and conditions of service of the employees, the  Executive Council in 
respect of teachers and other academic staff, and the appointing  authority in respect of other 
employees, shall have the power to remove a teacher or a  member of the academic staff or other 
employee, as the case may be, on grounds of  misconduct.   
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing  authority, shall 
not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other  employee except for a 
good cause and after giving three months' notice or on payment of  three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed  under clause 
(2) or clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opp ortunity of showing  cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or any other regular  appointed 
employee shall require a two -thirds majority of the members of the Executive  Counc il present and 
voting and it shall take effect from the date on which the order of  removal is made:   
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is  under 
suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take eff ect from the date on  which he was 
placed under suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute,  a teacher, 
member of the academic staff or any other employee may resign — 
(a) if he is permanent employee, only a fter giving three months' notice in writing  to the Executive 
Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying  three months' salary in lieu 
thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after given one month's notice in  writing t o the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by  paying one month's salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the  resignation is 
accepted by the Executive Council or the  appointing authority, as the  case may be.   
35 
 28. Honorary degrees. —(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of  the 
Academic Council by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the  members to 
the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion,  make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than  two-thirds of 
the members present and voting, w ithdraw, with the previous sanction of the  Visitor, any honorary 
degree conferred by the University.  
29. Withdrawal of degrees, etc. —The Executive Council may, by a special resolution  passed by 
a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw  a degree or 
academic distinction conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any  person by the 
University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been  given to that 
person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified  in the notice as to why 
such a resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if  any, and any evidence he may 
produce in support of them, have been considered  by the  Executive Council.  
30. Maintenance of discipline amongst students of University. —(1) All powers  relating to the 
maintenance of discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students  of the University shall vest 
in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) There shall be a Proctor of the University to assist the Vice -Chancellor in the  exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause ( 1), who shall be appointed by Executive Council  from amongst the 
Professors and Associate Professors in the manner prescribed by th e Ordinances.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of the powers referred to in clause ( 1), as he 
deems proper, to the Proctor and to such other officers as he may specify in this  behalf.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of  discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of  discipline, the Vice -
Chancellor may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that any  student or students be expelled 
or rusticated , for a specified period, or be not admitted to a  course or courses of study in a College, 
Institution or Department or a School of the  University for a stated period, or be punished with fine 
for an amount to be specified in the  order, or be debarred from  taking an examination or examinations 
conducted by the University,  College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or 
that the results of  the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or 
they have a ppeared be withheld or cancelled.  
(5) The Directors of Campuses, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads  of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such  disciplinary powers over 
the students in their resp ective Colleges, Campuses, Institutions,  Schools of Studies and teaching 
Departments in the University, as may be necessary, for  the proper conduct of such Colleges, 
Campuses, Institutions, Schools of Studies and  teaching Departments.  
(6) Without prejudice  to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor and the Principals and  other persons 
specified in clause ( 5), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall  be made by the University 
and the Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of  Studies an d Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University may also make such  supplementary rules as they deem necessary for 
the purposes stated therein.   
36 
 (7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to  the effect that 
he submi ts himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and  other authorities of the 
University.   
31. Convocations. —Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or  for other 
purposes shall be held in such manner as may be prescri bed by the Ordinances.  
32. Acting Chairman of meetings. —Where no provision is made for a President or  Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of  such authority or when 
the President or Chairman so provided for  is absent, the members  present shall elect one from among 
themselves to preside at such meeting.  
33. Resignation. —Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Court, the Executive 
Council, the Academic Council or any other authority of the Universit y or any Committee of such 
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon 
as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
34. Disqualification. —(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for  being, a 
member of any of the authorities, or for being appointed as, and for being, an  officer, of the 
University if — 
(i) he is of unsound mind; or  
(ii) he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an offenc e involving moral  turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six  months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of  the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shal l be referred to the Visitor  and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court  against such decision.   
35. Residence condition for membership and office. —Notwithstanding anything  contained in 
the Statutes, a perso n who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be  eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the University.  
36. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the  University or is a member of 
any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a  member of a particular authority or body 
or as the holder of a particular appointment shall  hold such office or membe rship only for so long as 
he continues to be a member of that  particular authority or body or the holder of that particular 
appointment, as the case may be.  
37. Alumni Association. —(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscr iption for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed  by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election  unless he 
has been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the  date of  election and is a degree 
holder of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year's membership shall  not apply in 
the case of the first election.   
37 
 38. Students ’ Council. —(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students ’ Council for 
every academic year, consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students ’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students ’ Council;   
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the b asis of  merit in studies, 
sports and extra -curricular activities; and   
(iii) twenty students to be elected by the students as their representatives:   
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any  matter 
concerning the Uni versity before the Students ’ Council, if so permitted by the  Chairman, and he 
shall have the right to participate in the discussions at any meeting  when the matter is taken up for 
consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students ’ Council shall be to make s uggestions to the  appropriate 
authorities of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students'  welfare and other 
matters of importance, in regard to the working of the University in  general and such suggestions shall 
be made on the basis of consensus of opinion.   
(3) The Students ’ Council shall meet at least twice in every academic year and the first  meeting of 
the Council be held in the beginning of the academic session.  
39. Ordinances how to be made. —(1) The first Ordinances made under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 29 may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by the  Executive Council in the manner 
specified in the following clauses.   
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in sub -section ( 1) of section 29  shall be 
made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed  by the Academic 
Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance  proposed by 
the Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the propo sal or return  the draft to the 
Academic Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together  with any amendment 
which the Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinances  propo sed by 
the Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question  afresh and in case the 
original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of  the members present and voting 
and more than half the total number of members of th e Academic Council, the draft may be sent back 
to the Executive Council which shall either  adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be 
final.  
(5) Every Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every O rdinances made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor  within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University to suspend the operation  of any 
Ordinances.  
(8) The Visitor shall inform  the Executive Council about his objection to the Ordinances  referred 
to in clause ( 7) and may, after receiving the comments of the University, either  withdraw the order 
suspending the Ordinances or disallow the Ordinances, and his decision  shall be final.   
38 
 40. Regulations. —(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations  consistent with 
this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number  of memb ers 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by this Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations; and  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or  committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving  of notice to 
the members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business  to be considered at 
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.   
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify  of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regula tion. 
41. Establishment of campuses in India and outside India. —(1) The establishment of  
Campuses and the abolition thereof shall be governed by the Statutes provided the same  have received 
the assent of the Visitor.  
(2) The procedures to be followed for e stablishment and abolition of Campuses shall  be as 
prescribed in the Ordinances.  
42. Distance education system. —(1) Subject to the provisions of the Act and the  Statutes, the 
University shall have a distance education system as prescribed in the  Ordinance.  
(2) The composition, powers and functions of the Distance Education System shall  be as 
prescribed in the Ordinances.  
43. Delegation of Powers. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes,  any officer or 
authority of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer  or authority or person 
under his or its respective control and subject to the condition that  overall responsibility for the 
exercise of the power so delegated shall continue to vest in the  officer or authority delegat ing such 
powers.  
44. Correspondence with the Visitor. —All the correspondences with the Visitor by  the 
University or its authorities or officers shall be routed through the Central Government.  
 
 
--------------------------The Chief Election Commissioner And Other Election Commissioners Appointment Conditions of Service And Term of Office Act 2023.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER AND OTHER ELECTION  
 COMMISSIONERS (APPOINTMENT, CONDITIONS OF  
SERVICE AND TERM OF OFFICE) ACT, 2023  
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________ 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS.  
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions.   
CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND TERM OF  CHIEF ELECTION  COMMISSIONER  AND OTHER   
ELECTION  COMMISSIONERS  
3. Election Commission.    
4. Appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
5. Qualifications of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
6. Search Committee.  
7. Selection Committee.  
8. Power of Selection Committee to regulate its own procedure.  
9. Term of office.  
CHAPTER III  
SALARY , ALLOWANCES  AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF  CHIEF ELECTION  COMMISSIONER   
AND OTHER  ELECTION COMMISSIONERS  
10. Salary, etc.  
11. Resignation and removal.  
12. Leave.  
13. Pension.  
14. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund.   
15. Other conditions of service.   
16. Protection of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. 
 2 
 CHAPTER IV  
TRANSACTION  OF BUSINESS OF  ELECTION  COMMISSION  
SECTIONS.  
17. Transaction of business.  
18. Disposal of business.  
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Power to remove difficulties.  
20.  Laying.  
21. Repeal and saving.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE CHIEF ELECTION COMMISSIONER AND OTHER ELECTION  
COMMISSIONERS (APPOINTMENT, CONDITIONS  
 OF SERVICE AND TERM OF OFFICE) ACT, 2023  
ACT NO. 49 OF 2023 
[28th December, 2023.]   
An Act to regulate the appointment, conditions of service and term of office of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners, the procedure for transaction of business by the Election 
Commission and for matters connected therewith or in cidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
1. Short title and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Chief Election Commissioner and 
other Election Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service and Term of Office) Act, 2023.  
 (2) It shall come into force on such date1
                                                           
1. 2nd day of January, 2024,  vide notification No. S.O.  35 (E),  dated 2nd day of January, 2024,  see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
  as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “Chief Election Commissioner” means the Chief Election Commissioner appointed under clause ( 2) 
of article 324 of the Constitution and in accordance with this Act;  
(b) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to  in clause ( 1) of article 324 of the 
Constitution;  
 (c) “Election Commissioner” means any other Election Commissioner appointed under clause ( 2) of 
article 324 of the Constitution and in accordance with this Act;  
 (d) “Search Committee” means the Search Co mmittee for preparation of panel of persons for 
consideration for appointment as Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners; and  
(e) “Selection Committee” means the Selection Committee that recommends appointment of Chief 
Election Commis sioner and other Election Commissioners.  
CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND TERM OF  CHIEF ELECTION  COMMISSIONER  AND OTHER   
ELECTION  COMMISSIONERS  
3. Election Commission .— The Election Commission shall consist of —  
(a) Chief Election Commissioner; and  
(b) such number of other Election Commissioners as the President may fix from time to time.     4 
 4. Appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.— The Chief 
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be appointed by the  President by warrant 
under his hand and seal.  
5. Qualifications of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners .—The Chief 
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be appointed from amongst persons who 
are holding or have held a post equivalent to the rank of Secretary to the Government of India and shall be persons of integrity, who have knowle dge of and experience in management and conduct of elections.  
6. Search Committee.— A Search Committee headed by the Minister of Law and Justice and 
comprising two other members not below the rank of Secretary to the Government of India, shall prepare a panel of five persons for consideration of the Selection Committee, for appointment as the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
7. Selection Committee .—(1) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners 
shall be ap pointed by the President on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of —  
(a) the Prime Minister —Chairperson;  
(b) the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People —Member;  
 (c) a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister —Member.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised as such, the leader of the single largest party 
in opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition.  
(2) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall not be 
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of, the Selection Committee.  
8. Power of Selection Committee to regulate its own procedure.—  (1) The Selection Committee shall 
regulate its own procedure in a transparent manner for selecting the Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioners.  
(2) The Selection Committee may also consider any other person than those included in the panel by the 
Search Committee.  
9. Term of office .—(1) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall hold 
office for a term of six years from th e date on which he assumes his office or till he attains the age of    
sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall not be eligible for          
re-appointment.  
(3) Where an Election Commissioner is appointed as Chief Election Commissioner, his term of office 
shall not be more than six years in aggregate as the Election Commissioner and the Chief Election Commissioner.      
 
 
 5 
  CHAPTER III  
SALARY , ALLOWANCES  AND OTHE R CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF  CHIEF ELECTION  COMMISSIONER  AND 
OTHER  ELECTION COMMISSIONERS  
 10. Salary, etc .—(1) The Chief  Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be paid 
a salary which is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court:  
Provided that the salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner 
and other E lection Commissioners, holding office immediately before the date of commencement of this 
Act shall not be varied to their disadvantage.  
(2) If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chief Election Commissioner 
or an Election Commissioner, was in receipt of, or being eligible so to do, had elected to draw, a pension 
(other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Central Government or a State Government, his salary in respect of service as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election 
Commissioner shall be reduced — 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and  
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in 
respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the 
pension.  
(3) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be entitled to dearness 
allowance as may be admissible to Judge of the Supreme Court.  
(4) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall be entitled to encashment 
of fifty per cent. of earned leave to his credit at the time of completion of tenure.  
(5) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner had retired from the service 
of the Central Government or a State Government prior to appointment as such, the aggregate period for 
which the encashment of unutilised earned leave he shall be entitled, shall be subject to a maximum period 
as admissible in accordance with the r ules for the time being applicable to the service to which he belonged 
before his appointment as Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner . 
11. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner 
may, at a ny time, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.  
(2) The Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on 
the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.  
(3) The other Election Commissioners shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation 
of the Chief Election Commissioner.  
12. Leave .— (1) The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner may be granted leave 
in accordance with the rules for the time b eing applicable to the service to which he belonged before the 
date of his appointment and he shall be entitled to carry forward the leave standing at his credit on such 
date, irrespective of the provisions contained in section 13. 
 (2) The power to grant or refuse leave to the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election 
Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the President.   6 
 13. Pension . —(1) Where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner was in service 
of Government, he shall be deemed to have retired from the service on the date on which he enters upon 
office as the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner, as the case may be.  
 (2) The Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissi oners who at the time of his 
appointment as such, was in service of the Central Government or a State Government, shall at his option to be exercised within a period of six months from the date of such appointment, be entitled to draw his pension and other  retirement benefits under the rules applicable to the service to which he belonged, with 
effect from the date of his appointment as the Chief Election Commissioner or other Election Commissioner.  
(3) Except where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Ele ction Commissioner demits office by 
resignation, he shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to have demitted his office only if,—  
(a) he has completed the term of office specified in section 9; or  
 (b) he has attained the age of sixty -five years; or  
 (c) his demission of office is medically certified to be necessitated by ill -health.  
14. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund .—Every person holding office as the Chief 
Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner shall be entitled to subs cribe to the General Provident 
Fund under the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960.  
15. Other conditions of service .— Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the President may by rules 
determine the conditions of service relating to trave lling allowance, medical facilities, leave travel 
concession, conveyance facilities, and such other conditions of service relating to the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
 16.Protection of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election                                          
Commissioners .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no 
Court shall entertain or continue any civil or criminal proceedings against any person who is or was a Chief 
Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner for any act, thing or word, committed, done or spoken 
by him when, or in the course of acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty or function.  
CHAPTER IV  
TRANSACTION  OF BUSINESS OF  ELECTION  COMMISSION  
 17. Transaction of business.— The business of the Election Commission shall be transacted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.   
18. Disposal of business .—(1) The Election Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the 
procedure for transaction of its business and also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
(2) All business of the Election Commission shall, as far as possible, be transacted unanimously, and if 
the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such 
matter shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.
 
 
 7 
 CHAPTER V   
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Po wer to remove difficulties .— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, within a period of five years from the date of commencement of                       
this Act, by order not inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under sub- section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.   
20. Laying.—Every rule and order made under this Act shall be laid, as so on as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or order, or both Houses agree that the rule or order should not be made, the rule or 
order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or order.  
 21. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election 
Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991 (11 of 1991)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under the Act hereby 
repealed shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done 
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 (3) The mention of particular matters in sub- section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general applicatio n of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897)  with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  
   
_______  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
--------------------------The Code on Social Security 2020.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020  
__________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title extent , commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Registration and cancellation of an establishment.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  ORGANISATIONS  
4. Constitution of Board of Trustees of Employees’ Provident Fund.  
5. Constitution of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation.  
6. National Social Security Board and State Unorganised Workers’ Board.  
7. Constitution of State Building Workers’ Welfare Boards.  
8. Disqualification and removal of a member of any Social Security Organisation.  
9. Procedure for transaction of business of Social Security Organisation , etc. 
10. Executive Heads of Central Board and Corporation.  
11. Supersession of Corporation, Central  Board, National Social Security Board or State 
Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’ Welfare Board.  
12. State Board, Regional Boards, local committees, etc.  
13. Entrustment of additional functions to Social Security Organisations.  
CHAPTER III  
EMPLOY EES’ PROVIDENT  FUND 
14. Appointment of officers of Central Board.  
15. Schemes.  
16. Funds.  
17. Contribution in respect of employees and contractors.  
18. Fund to be recogni sed under Act 43 of 1961.  
19. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts.  
20. Chapter not to apply to certain establishments.  
21. Authorising certain employers to maintain provident fund accounts.  
22. Transfer of accounts.  
23. Appeal to Tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
EMPLOYEES  STATE  INSURANCE  CORPORATION  
24. Principal Officers and other staff.  
25. Employees’ State Insurance Fund.  
26. Purposes for which Employees’ State Insurance Fund may be expended.  
27. Holding of property, etc.  
28. All employees to be insured.  
29. Contributions.  
30. Administrative expenses.  
31. Provisions as to payment of contributions by employer , etc. 
32. Benefits.  
33. Corporation’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of Insured Persons.  2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment.  
35. Accidents happening while acting in breach of law, etc.  
36. Occupational disease.  
37. References to medical board.  
38. Dependants’ benefit.  
39. Medical benefit.  
40. Provision of medical treatment by State Government or by Corporation.  
41. General provisions as to benefits.  
42. Corporation’s rights when an employer fails to register, etc.  
43. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc, for excessive sickness  benefit.  
44. Scheme for other beneficiaries.  
45. Scheme for unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform workers.  
46. Exemption of factories or other establishments belonging to Government or any local 
authority.  
47. Contributions, etc., due to corporation to have prior ity over other debts.  
48. Constitution of Employees Insurance Court.  
49. Matters to be decided by Employees Insurance court.  
50. Powers of Employees Insurance court.  
51. Proceedings of Employees Insurance courts.  
52. Appeal to High Court.  
CHAPTER V  
GRATUITY  
53. Payment of gratuity.  
54. Continuous service.  
55. Nomination.  
56. Determination of amount of gratuity.  
57. Compulsory Insurance.  
58. Competent authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
METERNITY BENEFIT  
59. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited during certain period.  
60. Right to payment of maternity benefit.  
61. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
62. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof.  
63. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of a woman.  
64. Payment of medical bonus.  
65. Leave for miscarriage, etc.  
66. Nursing breaks.  
67. Creche  facility.  
68. Dismissal for absence during pregnancy.  
69. No deduction of wages in certain cases.  
70. Forfeiture of maternity benefit.  
71. Duties of employer.  
72. Power of Inspector -cum-facilitator to direct payments to be made.  
 
  3 
 CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYEES’ COMPENSATION  
SECTIONS  
73. Reports of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries.  
74. Employer’s liability for compensation.  
75. Compensation in case of death of or injury in plantation.  
76. Amount of compensation . 
77. Compensation to be paid when due and damages for default.  
78. Method of calculating monthly wages for purposes of compensation.  
79. Review.  
80. Commutation of half -monthly payments.  
81. Distribution of compensation.  
82. Notice and claim.  
83. Special provisions relating to accidents occurring outside Indian Territory.  
84. Medical examination.  
85. Contracting.  
86. Remedies of employer against stranger.  
87. Insolvency of employer.  
88. Power to require from employers statements regarding fatal accidents.  
89. Registration of agreements.  
90. Reference to competent authority.  
91. Appointment of competent authority.  
92. Venue of pro ceedings and transfer.  
93. Form of application.  
94. Power of competent authority to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident.  
95. Powers and procedure of competent authority.  
96. Appearance of parties.  
97. Method of recording evidence.  
98. Power to submit cases.  
99. Appeal against order of competent authority.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS  
100. Levy and collection of cess.  
101. Interest payable on delay in payment of cess.  
102. Power to exempt from cess.  
103. Self-assessment of cess.  
104. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time.  
105. Appeal to appellate authority.  
106. Registration of building workers as beneficiaries.  
107. Cessation as a beneficiary.  
108. Building and other construction worker’s welfare Fund and its applications.  
CHAPTER IX  
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS, GIG WORKERS AND PLANTFORM WORKERS  
109. Framing of schemes for unorgani sed workers.  
110. Funding of state government schemes.  
111. Record keeping.  
112. Helpline, facilitation centre, etc., for unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform 
workers.  4 
 SECTIONS  
113. Registration of unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform workers.  
114. Schemes for gig workers and platform workers.  
CHAPTER X  
FINANCE AND ACCOUNTS  
115. Accounts.  
116. Audit.  
117. Budget estimates.  
118. Annual report.  
119. Valuation of assets and liabilities.  
120. Holding of property, etc., by social security organi sation.  
121. Writing off of losses.  
CHAPTER XI  
AUTHORITIES, ASSESSMENT, COMPLIANCE AND RECOVERY  
122. Appointment of Inspector -cum-Facilitators and their powers.  
123. Maintenance of records, registers, returns, etc.  
124. Employer not to reduce wages, etc.  
125. Assessment and determination of dues from employer.  
126. Appeal against order of Authori sed officer relating to chapter IV.  
127. Interest on amount due.  
128. Power to recover damages.  
129. Recovery of amount due.  
130. Validity of ce rtificate and amendment thereof.  
131. Other modes of recovery.  
132. Application of certain provisions of Income -tax act.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
133. Penalty for failure to pay contributions, etc.  
134. Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction.  
135. Offences by companies.  
136. Cognizance of offences.  
137. Prior opportunity before prosecution.  
138. Compounding of offences.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION AND MONITORING  
139. Reporting of vacancies to career centres.  
140. Exclusions from application of this chapter.  
CHAPTER  XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
141. Social Security Fund.  
142. Application of Aadhaar.  
143. Power to exempt establishment.  
144. Power to defer or reduce.  
145. Liability in case of transfer of establishm ent. 
146. Members, officers and staff to be public servants.  
147. Protection of action taken in good faith.  5 
 SECTIONS  
148. Misuse of benefits.  
149. Power of central Government to give directions to state government and social security 
organizations.  
150. Power to frame schemes.  
151. Protection against attachment, etc.  
152. Power to amend schedule.  
153. Transitional provisions.  
154. Power of  appropriate Government to make rules.  
155. Power of central Government to make rules.  
156. Power of state Government to make rules.  
157. Power of corporation to make regulations.  
158. Prior publication of rules, regulations,  etc. 
159. Rules to give effect to arrangements with oth er countries for the transfer of money paid 
as compensation.  
160. Laying of rules, regulations and schemes, etc.  
161. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this code.  
162. Delegation of powers.  
163. Power to remove difficulties.  
164. Repeal and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDUL E 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
THE FIFTH SCHEUDLE  
THE SIXTH SCHEDUEL  
THE SEVEN SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 6 
  
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020  
ACT N O. 36 OF 2020  
[28th September, 2020.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the laws relating to social security with the  goal to extend social 
security to all employees and workers either in the  organised or unorganised or any other 
sectors and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Code on 
Social Security, 2020.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Code and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code shall b e construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision.  
(4) The applicability of the Chapters specified in columns ( 1) and ( 2) of the First Schedule shall, without 
prejudice to the applicability of the other provisions of this Code, be such as is specified in corresponding 
entry in column ( 3) of that Schedule.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), where it appears to the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner, whether on an application made to him by the employer of an estab lishment or 
otherwise, that the employer and majority of employees of that establishment have agreed that the 
provisions of Chapter III should be made applicable to that establishment, the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner, may, by notification, apply th e provisions of the said Chapter to that establishment on and 
from the date of such agreement or from any subsequent date specified in the agreement:  
Provided that where the employer of an establishment to which the provisions of Chapter III applied 
under this sub -section desires to come out of such applicability, he may make an application to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner and the Central Provident Fund Commissioner shall, if satisfied that there 
is an agreement between the employer and majority o f the employees to this effect, make the provisions of 
that Chapter inapplicable to such establishment, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The Central Government may, after giving not less than  two months' notice of its intention so to do, 
by notification, apply the provisions of this Code to any establishment employing not less than such number 
of persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), where it appears to the Director General of 
the Corporation, whether on an application made to him by the employer of an establishment or otherwise, 
that the employer and majority of employees of that establishment have agreed that the pro visions of 
Chapter IV should be made applicable to that establishment, the Director General of the Corporation, may, 
by notification, apply the provisions of the said Chapter to that establishment on and from the date of such 
agreement or from any subseque nt date specified in the agreement:  
Provided that where the employer of an establishment to which the provisions of Chapter IV applied 
under this sub -section desires to come out of such applicability, he may make an application to the Director 
General of t he Corporation and Director General of the Corporation shall, if satisfied that there is an 
                                                           
1. 3rd May, 2021 - S. 142 , vide notification No. S.O. 1730(E), dated 30th April, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 7 
 agreement between the employer and majority of the employees to this effect, make the provisions of that 
Chapter inapplicable to such establishment, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), an establishment to which any Chapter 
applies at the first instance shall continue to be applied thereafter even if th e number of employees therein 
at any subsequent time falls below the threshold specified in the First Schedule in respect of that Chapter.  
2. Definitions. — In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “agent ” when used in relation to an establishment, means every person, whether appointed as such 
or not, who acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the management, control, 
supervision or direction of such establishment or part thereof;  
(2) “aggregator ” means a digital intermediary or a market place for a buyer or user of a service to 
connect with the seller or the service provider;  
(3) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(a) in relation to, an establishment carried on by or under the author ity of the Central Government 
or concerning any such controlled industry as may  be specified by notification in this behalf, by the 
Central Government or the  establishment of railways including metro railways, mines, oil field, major  
ports, air transport s ervice, telecommunication, banking and insurance company  or a corporation or 
other authority established by a Central Act or the central  public sector undertaking or subsidiary 
companies set up by the central public  sector undertakings, subsidiary companies set up by the principal 
undertakings  or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central Government,  including 
establishment of contractors for the purposes of such establishment,  corporation or other authority, 
central public sector undertak ings, subsidiary  companies or autonomous bodies or any company in 
which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid up share capital is held by the Central Government, 
as the case may be, or in relation to an establishment having departments or  branches in more than one 
State, as the case may be, the Central Government;  and 
(b) in relation to any other establishment, the State Government.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “metro railway ” means the metro 
railway as defined in s ub-clause ( i) of clause ( 1) of section 2 of the Metro  Railways (Operation and 
Maintenance ) Act, 2002  (60 of 2002) . 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause, the Central Government shall  continue to be the 
appropriate Government for the central public sector undertakings even  if the holding of the Central 
Government reduces to less than fifty per cent. equity in that  public sector undertaking after the 
commencement of this Code;  
(4) “audio -visual production ” means audio -visual produced wholly or partly in India  and includes — 
(i) animation, cartoon depiction, audio -visual advertisement;  
(ii) digital production or any of the activities in respect of making thereof; and  
(iii) features films, non -feature films, television, web -based serials, talk show s, reality shows and 
sport shows;  
(5) “Authorised Officer ” means such officer of the Central Board, or as the case may  be, of the 
Corporation notified by the Central Government;  
(6) “building or other construction work ” means the construction, alteration, repairs,  maintenance or 
demolition in relation to buildings, streets, roads, railways, tramways,  airfields, irrigation, drainage, 
embankment and navigation works, flood control works  (including storm water drainage works), 
generation, transmission and dist ribution of power,  water works (including channels for distribution of 
water), oil and gas installations, electric  lines, internet towers, wireless, radio, television, telephone, 
telegraph and overseas  communications, dams, canals, reservoirs, watercourses , tunnels, bridges, viaducts, 
aquaducts,  pipelines, towers, cooling towers, transmission towers and such other work as may  be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government, by notification, but does not include  any building or other 8 
 construction work which is related to any factory or mine or any  building or other construction work 
employing less than ten workers in the preceding  twelve months or where such work is related to own 
residential purposes of an individual or  group of individuals for their o wn residence and the total cost of 
such work does not exceed  fifty lakhs rupees or such higher amount and employing more than such number 
of workers  as may be notified by the appropriate Government;  
(7) “building worker ” means a person who is employed to do any skilled, semi -skilled  or unskilled, 
manual, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of such  employment are express or 
implied, in connection with any building or other construction  work, bu t does not include any such person 
who is employed mainly in a managerial or  supervisory or administrative capacity;  
(8) “Building Workers' Welfare Board ” means the State Building and other Construction  Workers' 
Welfare Board constituted under sub -section (1) of section 7;  
(9) “career centre ” means any office (including employment exchange, place or portal)  established and 
maintained in the manner prescribed by the Central Government for  providing such career services 
(including registration, collection and  furnishing of  information, either by the keeping of registers or 
otherwise, manually, digitally, virtually  or through any other mode) as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, which may,  inter alia , relate generally or specifically to — 
(i) persons w ho seek to employ employees;  
(ii) persons who seek employment;  
(iii) occurrence of vacancies; and  
(iv) persons who seek vocational guidance and career counselling or guidance  to start self -
employment;  
(10) “Central Board ” means the Board of Trustees of the Employees' Provident Fund  constituted under 
section 4;  
(11) “Central Provident Fund Commissioner ” means the Central Provident Fund  Commissioner of the 
Central Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(12) “child ”, for the purposes of Chapter VI, includes a stillborn child;  
(13) “Commissioning mother ” means a biological mother who uses her egg to create  an embryo 
implanted in any other woman;  
(14) “company ” means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section  2 of the  Companies Act, 2013  
(18 of 2013) ; 
(15) “compensation ” means compensation as provided under Chapter VII;  
(16) “competent authority ” means any authority appointed under section 58 for the  purposes of Chapter 
V or notified for the purposes of Chapte r VI or appointed under  section 91 for the purposes of Chapter VII, 
as the case may be, as competent authority by  the appropriate Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be;  
(17) “completed year of service ” means continuous service for twelve months;  
(18) “confinement ” means labour resulting in the issue of a living child, or labour  after twenty -six 
weeks of pregnancy resulting in the issue of a child whether alive or dead;  
(19) “contract labour ” means a wor ker who shall be deemed to be employed in or in  connection with 
the work of an establishment when he is hired in or in connection with  such work by or through a contractor, 
with or without the knowledge of the principal  employer and includes inter -State mi grant worker but does 
not include an employee (other  than part time employee) who is regularly employed by the contractor for 
any activity of  his establishment and his employment is governed by mutually accepted standards of the  
conditions of employment (i ncluding engagement on permanent basis), and gets periodical  increment in the 
pay, social security coverage and other welfare benefits in accordance  with the law for the time being in 
force in such employment;  9 
 (20) “contractor ”, in relation to an establish ment means a person, who — 
(i) undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a  mere supply of goods or 
articles of manufacture to such establishment through contract  labour; or  
(ii) supplies contract labour for any work of the estab lishment as mere human  resource,  and includes 
a sub -contractor;  
(21) “contribution ” means the sum of money payable by the employer, under this  Code, to the Central 
Board and to the Corporation, as the case may be, and includes any  amount payable by or on behalf of the 
employee in accordance with the provisions of this  Code;  
(22) “Corporation ” means the Employees' State Insurance Corporation constituted  under section 5;  
(23) “delivery ” means the birth of a child;  
(24) “dependant ” means any of the following relatives of deceased employee,  namely: — 
(a) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or  adopted daughter or a 
widowed mother:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter IV, a legitimate adopted son,  who has not attained the age of 
twenty -five years, shall be dependant of the  deceased employee;  
(b) if wholly dependant on the earnings of the employee at the time of his death,  a legitimate or adopted 
son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years  and who is infirm; exc ept for the purposes of 
Chapter IV wherein the word “eighteen ” occurring in this sub -clause shall be deemed to have been 
substituted by the word  “twenty -five”; 
(c) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of  his death, — 
(i) a widower;  
(ii) a parent other than a widowed mother;  
(iii) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a  daughter legitimate or 
illegitimate or adopted if married and a minor or if  widowed and a minor;  
(iv) a minor brother or an unma rried sister or a widowed sister if a minor;  
(v) a widowed daughter -in-law; 
(vi) a minor child of a pre -deceased son;  
(vii) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter where no parent of the  child is alive, or;  
(viii) a grandparent if no parent of the employe e is alive.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -clause ( b) and items ( vi) and ( vii) of sub-clause ( c), references 
to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son, daughter  or child, respectively;  
(25) “dock work ” means any work in or within the vicinit y of any port in connection  with, or required 
for, or incidental to, the loading, unloading, movement or storage of  cargoes into or from ship or other 
vessel, port, dock, storage place or landing place, and  includes — 
(i) work in connection with the prepara tion of ships or other vessels for receipt  or discharge of 
cargoes or leaving port;  
(ii) all repairing and maintenance processes connected with any hold, tank  structure or lifting 
machinery or any other storage area on board the ship or in the  docks; and  
(iii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, structure or lifting machinery  or any other 
storage area in board the ship or in the docks;  
(26) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice engaged under the  Apprentices Act, 1961)  
(52 of 1961 ) employed on wages by an establishment, either directly or through  a contractor, to do any 
skilled, semi -skilled or unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory,  managerial, administrative, technical, 10 
 clerical or any other work, whether the ter ms of  employment be express or implied, and also includes a 
person declared to be an employee  by the appropriate Government, but does not include any member of the 
Armed Forces of  the Union:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter III, except in case of the Employees’ Provident  Fund Scheme 
and Chapter IV, the term “employee ” shall mean such employee drawing  wages less than or equal to the 
wage ceiling notified by the Central Government and  includes such other persons or class of persons as the 
Central Gov ernment may by  notification, specify to be employee, for the purposes of those Chapters:  
Provided further that for the purposes of counting of employees for the coverage of  an establishment 
under Chapter III and Chapter IV, as the case may be, the employee s, whose wages are more than the wage 
ceiling so notified by the Central Government, shall  also be taken into account:  
Provided also that for the purposes of Chapter VII, the term “employee ” shall mean  only such persons 
as specified in the Second Schedule and such other persons or class of  persons as the Central Government, 
or as the case may be, the State Government may add  to the said Schedule, by notification, for the purposes 
of that Government;  
(27) “employer ” means a person who employs, whether directly or through any person,  or on his behalf, 
or on behalf of any person, one or more employees in his establishment  and where the establishment is 
carried on by any department of the Central Government or  the State  Government, the authority specified, 
by the head of such department, in this  behalf or where no authority is so specified, the head of the 
department and in relation to  an establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief executive of that 
authorit y, and  includes, — 
(a) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the factory;  
(b) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent or manager having  requisite qualification 
under the law for the time being in force and appointed  by the  owner or agent of the mine as such;  
(c) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority  which has ultimate 
control over the affairs of the establishment and where the said  affairs are entrusted to a manager or 
managing director, such manager or managing  director;  
(d) contractor; and  
(e) legal representative of a deceased employer;  
(28) “employment injury ” means a personal injury to an employee, caused by accident  or an 
occupational disease, as the case may be, arising ou t of and in the course of his  employment, — 
(i) for the purposes of Chapter IV, if the employee is an insured or insurable  employee under section 
28 whether such accident occurs or the occupational disease  is contracted within or outside the 
territorial lim its of India; and  
(ii) for the purposes of Chapter VII, whether such accident occurs or the  occupational disease is 
contracted within or outside the territorial limits of India;  
(29) “establishment ” means — 
(a) a place where any industry, trade, business, m anufacture or occupation is  carried on; or  
(b) a factory, motor transport undertaking, newspaper establishment, audiovisual  production, 
building and other construction work or plantation; or  
(c) a mine, port or vicinity of port where dock work is carried o ut. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of Chapter III, where an establishment consists of  different 
departments or has branches, whether situate in the same place or in different  places, all such departments 
or branches shall be treated as parts of the same est ablishment;  
(30) “executive officer ” means such officer of the appropriate Government as may be  notified by that 
Government for the purposes of Chapter XIII or an officer authorised in  writing by such executive officer 
to discharge his duties under that Chapter;  11 
 (31) “exempted employee ” for the purposes of Chapter III, means an employee to  whom any of the 
schemes referred to in section 15, but for the exemption granted under  this Code, would have applied and 
for the purposes of Chapter IV, means an employ ee, whose wage is specified in the notification by the 
Central Government and who is not  liable to pay employee's contribution;  
(32) “factory ” means any premises including the precincts thereof — 
(a) whereon ten or more employees are working, or were working on any day  of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is  being carried on with the aid of 
power, or is ordinarily so carried on, or  
(b) whereon twenty or more employees are working, or were working on any  day o f the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process  is being carried on without the aid of 
power, or is ordinarily so carried on,  but does not include a mine, or a mobile unit belonging to the 
Armed Forces of the Union,  railways  running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place.  
Explanation 1.—For computing the number of employees for the purposes of this  clause, all the 
employees in (different groups and relays) a day shall be taken into account.  
Explanation 2.—For the purpose s of this clause, the mere fact that an Electronic  Data Processing Unit 
or a Computer Unit is installed in any premises or part thereof, shall  not be construed as factory if no 
manufacturing process is being carried on in such premises  or part thereof;  
(33) “family ” means all or any of the following relatives of an employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be, namely: — 
(a) a spouse;  
(b) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be;  
(c) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be, and who is — 
(i) receiving education, till he attains the age of twenty -one years; and  
(ii) an unmarried daughter;  
(d) a child who is infirm by re ason of any physical or mental abnormality or  injury and is wholly 
dependent on the earnings of the employee or an unorganized worker, as the case may be, so long as 
the infirmity continues;  
(e) dependent parents (including father -in-law and mother -in-law of a woman  employee), whose 
income from all sources does not exceed such income as may be  prescribed by the Central Government;  
(f) in case the employee or an unorganised worker, as the case may be, is  unmarried and his parents 
are not alive, a minor broth er or sister wholly dependent  upon the earnings of the Insured Person;  
(34) “fixed term employment ” means the engagement of an employee on the basis of  a written contract 
of employment for a fixed period:  
Provided that — 
(a) his hours of work, wages, allowances and other benefits shall not be less  than that of a permanent 
employee doing the same work or work of a similar nature;  and 
(b) he shall be eligible for all benefits, under any law for the time being in  force, available to a 
permanent employee p roportionately according to the period of  service rendered by him even if his 
period of employment does not extend to the  required qualifying period of employment;  
(35) “gig worker ” means a person who performs work or participates in a work  arrangement and  earns 
from such activities outside of traditional employer -employee  relationship;  12 
 (36) “home -based worker ” means a person engaged in, the production of goods or  services for an 
employer in his home or other premises of his choice other than the workplace  of the employer, for 
remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the employer provides  the equipment, materials or other inputs;  
(37) “Inspector -cum-Facilitator ” means an Inspector -cum-Facilitator appointed under  section 122;  
(38) “Insurance Fund ” means t he Deposit -Linked Insurance Fund established under  clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(39) “Insured Person ” means the Insured Person referred to in section 28;  
(40) “Insurance Scheme ” means the Deposit -Linked Insurance Scheme framed under  clause  (c) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 15;  
(41) “inter-State migrant worker ” means a person who is employed in an establishment  and who — 
(i) has been recruited directly by the employer or indirectly through contractor  in one State for 
employment in such establ ishment situated in another State; or  
(ii) has come on his own from one State and obtained employment in an  establishment of another 
State (hereinafter called destination State) or has  subsequently changed the establishment within the 
destination State,  under an agreement or other arrangement for such employment and drawing wages 
not exceeding eighteen thousand rupees per month or such higher amount as may be notified  by the 
Central Government from time to time;  
(42) “manufacturing process ” means any proces s for —(i) making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, 
finishing, oiling, washing, cleaning,  breaking up, demolishing, refining, or otherwise treating or adapting 
any article or  substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; or  
(ii) pumping oil, water, sewage or any other substance; or  
(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting power; or  
(iv) composing, offset printing, printing by letter press, lithography,  photogravure screen printing, 
three or four dimensional printing, prototyping,  flexography or other types of printing process or book 
binding; or  
(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up  ships or vessels; or  
(vi) preserving or storing any article in cold storage; or  
(vii) such othe r activities as the Central Government may notify;  
(43) “maternity benefit ”, in respect of Chapter VI, means the payment referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 60;  
(44) “medical practitioner ” means a person registered under any law for the time  being in  force, or, any 
person declared by the State Government, by notification, to be  qualified as medical practitioner for the 
purposes of this Code:  
Provided that different class or classes of medical practitioner having specific  qualification may be 
notified by the Central Government for the purposes of Chapter IV  and by the appropriate Government for 
other Chapters of this Code;  
(45) “medical termination of pregnancy ” means the termination of pregnancy  permissible under the 
provisions of the Medical Terminati on of Pregnancy Act, 1971  (34 of 1971) ; 
(46) “mine ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952) ; 
(47) “minor ” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;  
(48) “miscarriage ” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any period  prior to or during 
the twenty -sixth week of pregnancy, but does not include any miscarriage,  the causing of which is 
punishable under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) ; 13 
 (49) “National Social Security Board ” means the National Social Security Board for  Unorganised 
Workers constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(50) “notification ” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the Official  Gazette of a 
State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify ” with its grammatical  variations and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(51) “occupational disease ” means a disease specified in the Third Schedule as a  disease peculiar to the 
employment of the employee;  
(52) “occupier ” in respect of a factory means the person who has ultimate control  over the affairs of 
the factory:  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, any one of the  individual partners or 
members the reof;  
(b) in the case of a company, any one of the directors, except any independent  director within the 
meaning of sub -section ( 6) of section 149 of the Companies  Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) ; 
(c) in the case of a factory owned or controlled by the Central Gove rnment or  any State 
Government, or any local authority, the person or persons appointed to  manage the affairs of the factory 
by the Central Government, the State Government  or the local authority or such other authority as may 
be prescribed by the Central  Government,   
shall be deemed to be the occupier:  
Provided further that in the case of a ship which is being repaired, or on which  maintenance work is 
being carried out, in a dry dock which is available for hire, the owner  of the dock shall be deemed to be the 
occupier for all purposes except the matters as may  be prescribed by the Central Government which are 
directly related to the condition of  ship for which the owner of ship shall be deemed to be the occupier;  
(53) “oilfield ” shall have the meaning assig ned to it in clause ( e) of section 3 of the  Oilfields (Regulation 
and Development) Act, 1948  (53 of 1948) ; 
(54) “organised sector ” means an enterprise which is not an unorganised sector;  
(55) “permanent partial disablement ” means, where the disablement is of a permanent  nature, such 
disablement as reduces the earning capacity of an employee in every  employment which he was capable of 
undertaking at the time of the accident resulting in  the disablement:  
Provided that every injury specified in Part II of the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed  to result in 
permanent partial disablement;  
(56) “permanent total disablement ” means such disablement of a permanent nature as  incapacitates an 
employee for all work which he was capable of performing at the time of the  accident resulting in such 
disablement:  
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury  specified in Part 
I of the Fourth Schedule or from any combination of injuries specified in  Part II thereof where the aggregate 
percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as specified  in the said Part II against those injuries, amounts to 
one hundred per cent.;  
(57) “Pension Fund ” means the Pension Fund established under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
16; 
(58) “Pension S cheme ” means the Employees' Pension Scheme framed under  clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 15;  
(59) “plantation ” means — 
(a) any land used or intended to be used for — 
(i) growing tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona or cardamom which admeasures  five hectares  or more;  14 
 (ii) growing any other plant, which admeasures five hectares or more  and in which ten or more 
persons are employed or were employed on any day  of the preceding twelve months, if, after 
obtaining the approval of the Central  Government, the State G overnment, by notification, so 
directs.  
Explanation .—Where any piece of land used for growing any plant referred to  in this sub -clause 
admeasures less than five hectares and is contiguous to any other  piece of land not being so used, but 
capable of being s o used, and both such pieces of  land are under the management of the same employer, 
then, for the purposes of this  sub-clause, the piece of land first mentioned shall be deemed to be a plantation, 
if the total area of both such pieces of land admeasures fi ve hectares or more;  
(b) any land which the State Government may, by notification, declare  and which is used or 
intended to be used for growing any plant referred to in  sub-clause ( a), notwithstanding that it 
admeasures less than five hectares:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of such land which  admeasures less than five 
hectares immediately before the commencement of this  Code; and  
(c) offices, hospitals, dispensaries, schools and any other premises used for  any purpose connecte d with 
any plantation within the meaning of sub -clause ( a) and  sub-clause ( b); but does not include factory on the 
premises;  
(60) “platform work ” means a work arrangement outside of a traditional employer employee 
relationship in which organisations or ind ividuals use an online platform to  access other organisations or 
individuals to solve specific problems or to provide specific  services or any such other activities which may 
be notified by the Central Government, in  exchange for payment;  
(61) “platform wo rker” means a person engaged in or undertaking platform work;  
(62) “port” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the  Indian Ports Act, 1908  
(15 of 1908) ; 
(63) “Provident Fund ” means the Employees' Provident Fund established under  clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(64) “Provident Fund Scheme ” means the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme framed  under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(65) “prescribed ” means p rescribed by rules made under this Code;  
(66) “railway ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 31) of section 2 of the  Railways Act, 
1989  (24 of 1989) ; 
(67) “railway company ” includes any persons whether incorporated or not, who are  owners or lessees 
of a railway or parties to an agreement for working a railway;  
(68) “Recovery Officer ” means any officer of the Central Government, the State  Government, the 
Central Board or the Corporation, who may be authorised by the Central  Government or the S tate 
Government, as the case may be, by notification, to discharge the  functions and to exercise the powers of a 
Recovery Officer under this Code;  
(69) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Corporation under this Code;  
(70) “retirement ” means termina tion of the service of an employee otherwise than on  superannuation;  
(71) “sales promotion employees ” means the sales promotion employees as defined  in clause ( d) of 
section 2 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service)  Act, 1976  (11 of 1976) ; 
(72) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to this Code;  
(73) “seamen ” means any person forming part of the crew of any ship, but does not  include the master 
of the ship;  
(74) “seasonal factory “ means a factory which is exclusively engaged in one or more  of the following 
manufacturing processes, namely, cotton ginning, cotton or jute pressing,  decortication of ground -nuts, the 15 
 manufacture of indigo, lac, sugar (including gur) or any  manufacturing process which is incidental to or 
connected with any of the aforesa id processes and includes a factory which is engaged for a period not 
exceeding seven months  in a year in a manufacturing process as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify;  
(75) “self-employed worker ” means any person who is not employed by a n employer,  but engages 
himself in any occupation in the unorganised sector subject to a monthly  earning of an amount as may be 
notified by the Central Government or the State  Government, as the case may be, from time to time or holds 
cultivable land subje ct to such  ceiling as may be notified by the State Government;  
(76) “shop ”, in respect of a State, means a shop as defined in any law for the time  being in force dealing 
with the shop in that State;  
(77) “sickness ” means a condition which requires medical treatment and attendance  and necessitates 
abstention from work on medical ground;  
(78) “social security ” means the measures of protection afforded to employees,  unorganised workers, 
gig workers and platform workers to ensure access to health care  and to pr ovide income security, 
particularly in cases of old age, unemployment, sickness,  invalidity, work injury, maternity or loss of a 
breadwinner by means of rights conferred on  them and schemes framed, under this Code;  
(79) “Social Security Organisation ” means any of the following organisations  established under this 
Code, namely: — 
(a) the Central Board of Trustees of Employees' Provident Fund constituted  under section 4;  
(b) the Employees' State Insurance Corporation constituted under section 5;  
(c) the National Social Security Board for Unorganised Workers constituted  under section 6;  
(d) the State Unorganised Workers' Social Security Board constituted under  section 6;  
(e) the State Building and other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards  constituted unde r section 
7; and  
(f) any other organisation or special purpose vehicle declared to be the social  security organisation 
by the Central Government;  
(80) “State Government ” includes — 
(a) in relation to a Union territory with legislature, the Government of the  Union  territory; and  
(b) in relation to a Union territory without legislature, the administrator appointed  under article 239 
of the Constitution as an administrator thereof;  
(81) “State Unorganised Workers' Board ” means the State Unorganised Workers'  Social Security Board 
constituted under sub -section ( 9) of section 6;  
(82) “superannuation ”, in relation to an employee, means the attainment by the  employee of such age 
as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service, as the age on the  attainment of which the employee shall 
vacate the employment:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter III, the age of superannuation shall be  fifty-eight years;  
(83) “temporary disablement ” means a condition resulting from an employment injury  which requires 
medical t reatment and renders an employee, as a result of such injury,  temporarily incapable of doing the 
work which he was doing prior to or at the time of the  injury;  
(84) “Tribunal ” means the Industrial Tribunal constituted by the appropriate  Government under se ction 
7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) ; 
(85) “unorganised sector ” means an enterprise owned by individuals or self -employed  workers and 
engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service of any kind  whatsoever, and where th e 
enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less  than ten;  16 
 (86) “unorganised worker ” means a home -based worker, self -employed worker or a  wage worker in 
the unorganised sector and includes a worker in the organised sector who  is not covered  by the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 or Chapters III to VII of this Code;  
(87) “vacancy ”, for the purposes of Chapter XIII, means an unoccupied post (including  newly created 
post, post of trainee, post to be filled through apprentice or any unoccupied  post created in an establishment 
by any other means) in a cadre or occupation for the  purpose of employing a person and carrying 
remuneration;  
(88) “wages ” means all remuneration, whether by way of salaries, allowances or  otherwise, expressed 
in terms of m oney or capable of being so expressed which would, if  the terms of employment, express or 
implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed  in respect of his employment or of work done in 
such employment, and includes, — 
(a) basic pay;  
(b) dearness a llowance; and  
(c) retaining allowance, if any,  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus payable under any law for the time being in force, which does not  form part of the 
remuneration payable under the terms of employment;  
(b) the value of any house -accommodati on, or of the supply of light, water,  medical attendance or other 
amenity or of any service excluded from the computation  of wages by a general or special order of the 
appropriate Government;  
(c) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or prov ident fund,  and the interest which may 
have accrued thereon;  
(d) any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling concession;  
(e) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed  on him by the nature of 
his employment;  
(f) house rent allowance;  
(g) remuneration payable under any award or settlement between the parties  or order of a court or 
Tribunal;  
(h) any overtime allowance;  
(i) any commission payable to the employee;  
(j) any gratuity payable on the termination of employm ent; 
(k) any retrenchment compensation or other retirement benefit payable to the  employee or any  
ex gratia payment made to him on the termination of employment,  under any law for the time being in 
force:  
Provided that for calculating the wages under this  clause, if payments made by the  employer to the 
employee under sub -clauses ( a) to ( i) exceeds one -half, or such other  per cent. as may be notified by the 
Central Government, of the all remuneration calculated  under this clause, the amount which exceeds su ch 
one-half, or the per cent. so notified,  shall be deemed as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in 
wages under this clause:  
Provided further that for the purpose of equal wages to all genders and for the purpose  of payment of 
wages, the emolument s specified in sub -clauses ( d), (f), (g) and ( h) shall be  taken for computation of wage.  
Explanation .—Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the wages  payable to him, 
any remuneration in kind by his employer, the value of such remunerat ion in kind which does not exceed 
fifteen per cent. of the total wages payable to him, shall be  deemed to form part of the wages of such 
employee;  17 
 (89) “wage ceiling ” means such amount of wages as may be notified by the Central  Government, for 
the purposes  of becoming a member under Chapter III and Chapter IV;  
(90) “wage worker ” means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganized sector, directly by 
an employer or through any contractor, irrespective of place of work,  whether exclusively for one emp loyer 
or for one or more employers, whether in cash or in  kind, whether as a home -based worker, or as a temporary 
or casual worker, or as a migrant  worker, or workers employed by households including domestic workers, 
with a monthly  wage of an amount as ma y be notified by the Central Government and the State Government,  
as the case may be;  
(91) “woman ” means a woman employed, whether directly or through any contractor,  for wages in any 
establishment:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter IV, a woman who  is or was an employee in  respect of whom 
contribution is or were payable under the said Chapter and who is by reason thereof, entitled to any of the 
benefits provided under the said Chapter shall be  called “insured woman ” and shall include — 
(i) a commissi oning mother who as biological mother wishes to have a child and  prefers to get 
embryo implanted in any other woman;  
(ii) a woman who legally adopts a child of up to three months of age.  
3. Registration and cancellation of an establishment .—(1) Every establishment to which this Code 
applies shall be electronically or  otherwise, registered within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the  Central Government:  
Provided that the establishment which is already registered under any other Centra l labour law for the 
time being in force shall not be required to obtain registration again under  this Code and such registration 
shall be deemed to be registration for the purposes of this  Code:  
(2) Any establishment to which Chapter III or Chapter IV app lies, and whose business  activities are in 
the process of closure, may make an application for cancellation of registration  granted under this section.  
(3) The manner of making application for cancellation of the registration under  sub-section ( 2), the 
conditions subject to which the registration shall be cancelled and the  procedure of cancellation and other 
matters relating thereto, shall be such as may be  prescribed by the Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL SECURITY ORGANISATIONS  
4. Constitution of Board of Trustees of Employees’ Provident Fund .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, constitute, with effect from such  date as may be specified therein, a Board of Trustees 
of the Employees' Provident Fund to  be called the Cent ral Board, for the purposes of Chapter III and the 
provisions of this Code  relating to that Chapter, for the administration of the funds vested in it in such 
manner as  may be prescribed by the Central Government, consisting of the following members, namely :— 
(a) a Chairperson and a Vice -Chairperson to be appointed by the Central  Government;  
(b) not more than five persons appointed by the Central Government from  amongst its officials;  
(c) not more than fifteen persons representing Governments of such States as the Central Government 
may specify in this behalf, to be appointed by the Central  Government;  
(d) ten persons representing employers of the establishments to which the  schemes referred to in sub 
section ( 1) of section 15 applies, to be appointed by the  Central Government after consultation with such 
organisations of employers as may  be recognised by the Central Government in this behalf;  
(e) ten persons representing employees in the establishments to which schemes  referred to in sub -
section ( 1) of sectio n 15 applies, who shall be appointed by the  Central Government after consultation 
with such organisations of employees as may  be recognised by that Government in this behalf; and  
(f) the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, ex officio.  18 
 (2) The Central Board shall be a body corporate by the name of Board of Trustees of  the Employees' 
Provident Fund, having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall  by the said name sue and be 
sued.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute, with e ffect from such  date as may be 
specified therein, an Executive Committee from amongst the members of the  Central Board to assist the 
Central Board in performance of its functions in such manner as  may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Centra l Board may, by order, constitute one or more committees of such  composition as may be 
specified in the order to assist it in the discharge of its functions.  
(5) The Central Board may, by order, delegate to its Chairperson or to its Executive  Committee or to 
any of its officers and a State Board constituted under section 12 may, by  order, delegate to its Chairperson 
or to any of its officers, subject to such conditions and  limitations, if any, as it may specify in such order, 
such of its powers and function s under  this Code as it may deem necessary for efficient administration of 
the schemes referred to  in sub -section ( 1) of section 15.  
(6) The terms and conditions, including tenure of office, subject to which a member  of the Central Board 
and Executive Comm ittee shall discharge their respective duties may  be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that a member of the Central Board shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the  tenure of his office, 
continue to hold office until his successor  is appointed.  
(7) The Central Board, apart from the functions specified in this Code, shall also  perform such other 
functions in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
5. Constitution of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation. — (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, constitute with effect from such  date as may be specified therein, the Employees' State 
Insurance Corporation to be called  the Corporation, for the purposes of Chapter IV and the provisions of 
this Code relating t o that Chapter and the administration thereof, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) not more than five persons to be appointed by the Central Government  from amongst its officials;  
(d) one person representing each of such States in such manner, as may be  prescribed by the Central 
Government;  
(e) one person to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the  Union territories;  
(f) ten persons representing employers to be appointed by the Central  Government in consultation 
with such organisations of employers as may be  recognised for the purpose by the Central Government;  
(g) ten persons representing employees to be appointed by the Central  Government in consultation 
with such organisations of employees as may be  recognised for the purpose by the Central Government;  
(h) two persons representing the medic al profession to be appointed by the  Central Government in 
consultation with such organisations of medical practitioners  as may be recognised for the purpose by 
the Central Government;  
(i) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be members of the Hou se of the People (Lok 
Sabha) and one shall be a member of the Council of States  (Rajya Sabha) elected respectively by the 
members of the House of the People and  the members of the Council of States; and  
(j) the Director General of the Corporation, ex offic io. 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name of Employees' State  Insurance Corporation, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the  said name sue and be sued.  19 
 (3) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute, with effect from such  date as may be 
specified therein, a Standing Committee from amongst the members of the  Corporation, in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Corporati on, the Standing  Committee — 
(a) shall administer the affairs of the Corporation and may exercise any of the  powers and perform 
any of the functions of the Corporation in such manner as may  be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) shall submit for the c onsideration and decision of the Corporation all such  cases and matters as 
may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf; and  
(c) may, in its discretion, submit any other case or matter for the decision of  the Corporation.  
(5) (a) The Central Gov ernment may, by notification, constitute, with effect from  such date as may be 
specified therein, a Medical Benefit Committee of such composition  as may be specified therein, to assist 
the Corporation and the Standing Committee in  performance of its functi ons relating to administration of 
medical benefits.  
(b) the Medical Benefit Committee shall perform such duties and exercise such powers  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The Corporation may, by order, constitute one or more committees of  such composition as may be 
specified in the regulations to assist it in the discharge of its functions.  
(7) The terms and conditions, including tenure of office, subject to which a member  of the Corporation 
and Standing Committee shall discharge their res pective duties may be  such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that a member of the Corporation shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the  tenure of his office, 
continue to hold office until his successor is appointed.  
6. National Social Security Board and State Unorganised Workers’ Board. —(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, constitute a National Social  Security Board for unorganised workers to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform  the functions a ssigned to, it under this Code, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(2) The National Social Security Board shall consist of the following members,  namely: — 
(a) Union Minister for Labour and Employment as Chairperson;  
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment as Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) forty members to be nominated by the Central Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven members representing unorganised sector workers;  
(ii) seven members representing employers of unorganised sector;  
(iii) seven members representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(iv) two members representing the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya  Sabha;  
(v) ten members representing Central Government Ministries and  Departments concerned;  
(vi) five members r epresenting State Governments;  
(vii) one member representing the Union territories; and  
(d) the Director General Labour Welfare, as Member -Secretary, ex officio.  
(3) All members except Chairperson of the National Social Security Board shall be  from amongst  
persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, management, finance,  law and administration.  
(4) The manner in which members shall be nominated from each of the categories  specified in clause 
(c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other condi tions of service  of members, the procedure to be 20 
 followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the  manner of filling vacancies among the members of, 
the National Social Security Board shall  be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the  Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the minorities and women.  
(5) The term of the National Social Security Board shall be three years.  
(6) The National Social Security Board shall meet at least thrice a year, at such time  and place and shall 
observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business  at its meetings, as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(7) The National Social Security Board shall perfor m the following functions,  namely: — 
(a) recommend to the Central Government for framing suitable schemes for  different sections of 
unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers;  
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the  administration of this Code as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised workers, gig workers  and platform workers 
as are administered by the Central Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the State level;  
(e) review the expenditure from the fund and account; and  
(f) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the Central  Government from time to time.  
(8) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such  date as may be 
specified therein one or more advisory committee to advise the Central  Government upon such matters 
arising out of the administration of this Code relating to  unorganised workers and such other matters as the 
Central Government may refer to it for  advice.  
(9) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a State Board to be  known as (name of the 
State) Unorganised Workers' Social Security Board to exercise the  powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to, it under  this Code, in such  manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(10) Every State Unorganised Workers' Board shall consist of the following members,  namely: — 
(a) Minister of Labour and Employment of the concerned State as Chairperson,  ex officio;  
(b) Principal Secretary or Secretary (Labour) as Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) one member representing the Central Government in the Ministry of Labour  and Employment;  
(d) thirty -one members to be nominated by the State Government, out of  whom — 
(i) seven representi ng the unorganised workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised workers;  
(iii) two members representing the Legislative Assembly of the concerned  State;  
(iv) five members representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(v) ten members representing the State Government Departments  concerned; and  
(e) Member -Secretary as notified by the State Government.  
(11) All members except Chairperson of the State Unorganised Workers' Board shall  be from amongst 
persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, management, finance,  law and administration.  
(12) The manner in which members shall be nominated from each of the categories  specified in clause 
(d) of sub -section ( 10), the term of office and other conditions of service  of members, the pro cedure to be 
followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the  manner of filling vacancies among the members of, 
the State Unorganised Workers' Board  shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:  21 
 Provided that adequate representation s hall be given to persons belonging to the  Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the minorities and women.  
(13) The term of the State Unorganised Workers' Board shall be three years.  
(14) The State Unorganised Workers' Board shall meet at least once in a quarter at  such time and place 
and shall observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of  business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(15) The State Board shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend the State Government for framing suitable schemes for different  sections of the 
unorganised sector workers;  
(b) advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration  of this Code as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised workers as are  administered by the State 
Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the district level;  
(e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganised sector  workers;  
(f) review the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  
(g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government  from time to time.  
(16) The State Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such  date as  may be 
specified therein, one or more advisory committee to advise the State  Government upon such matters arising 
out of the administration of this Code relating to  unorganised workers and such other matters as the State 
Government may refer to it for  advice. 
7. Constitution of State Building Workers’ Welfare Boards. —(1) Every State Government shall, 
with effect from such date as it may, by  notification, appoint, constitute a Board to be known as 
the................(name of the State)  Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Board to exercise the 
powers conferred  on, and perform the functions assigned to, it under this section and Chapter VIII.  
(2) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall be a body corporate by the name  aforesaid, having 
perpetua l succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue  and be sued.  
(3) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall consist of a chairperson to be  nominated by the State 
Government, one member to be nominated by the Central  Government and such number of other members, 
not exceeding fifteen, as may be appointed  to it by the State Government:  
Provided that the Building Workers' Welfare Board shall include an equal number of  members 
representing the State Government, the employers and the building workers  and that at least one member 
of the Board shall be a woman.  
(4) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other allowances  payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Building Workers' Welfare Board,  and the manner of filling of 
casual vacancies of the members of the Building Workers'  Welfare Board, shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(5) (a) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall appoint a Secretary and such  officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions  under this Code.  
(b) The Secretary of the Building Workers' Welfare Board shall be its chief executive  officer.  
(c) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salary and allowances payab le to the Secretary and 
the other officers and employees of the Building Workers' Welfare  Board shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
(6) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall perform the following functions,  namely: — 
(a) provide death and disability benefits to a beneficiary or his dependants;  22 
 (b) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age  of sixty years;  
(c) pay such amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme  of the beneficiaries 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;  
(d) frame educational schemes for the benefit of children of the beneficiaries  as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government;  
(e) meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary  or, such dependant, 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;  
(f) make payment of maternity benefit to the beneficiaries;  
(g) frame skill development and awareness schemes for the beneficiaries;  
(h) provide transit accommodation or ho stel facility to the beneficiaries;  
(i) formulation of any other welfare scheme for the building worker beneficiaries  by State 
Government in concurrence with the Central Government; and  
(j) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and  facilities as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(7) The State Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such date  as may be specified 
therein one or more advisory committee to advise the State Government  upon such matters aris ing out of 
the administration of this Code relating to building workers  and such other matters as the State Government 
may refer to it for advice.  
8. Disqualification and remov al of a member of any Social Security Organisation. —(1) No person 
shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a member of a Social Security  Organisation, or any Committee thereof 
who, — 
(a) is or at any time has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or  
(c) is or has been convicted of an y offence involving moral turpitude; or  
(d) is an employer in an establishment and has defaulted in the payment of any  dues under this Code;  
(e) is a member of a Social Security Organisation being a member of the  Parliament or a member of 
a State Legislative Assembly, when he ceases to be such  member of the Parliament or State Legislative 
Assembly, as the case may be; or  
(f) is a member of Social Security Organisation being a member of the  Parliament or a member of a 
State Legislative Assembly, and  he becomes a — 
(i) Minister of Central or State Government; or  
(ii) Speaker or Deputy Speaker of House of the People or a State  Legislative Assembly; or  
(iii) Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.  
Explanation 1.—If any question arises whether any person is disqualified under  clause ( d), it shall be 
referred to the appropriate Government and the decision of the  appropriate Government on any such 
question shall be final.  
Explanation 2.—Clause ( f) shall not apply in case of persons who are members of the Social Security 
Organisation ex officio , by virtue of being a Minister.  
(2) The Central Government, in case of the Central Board, the Corporation and the  National Social 
Security Board and the State Government in case of the State Unorganised  Workers' Board and the Building 
Workers' Welfare Board, may remove any member of  such Social Security Organisation from his office, 
who, — 
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in  sub-section ( 1); or 23 
 (b) is absent without leave of the Social Security Organisation of which he is a  member for more 
than three consecutive meetings of the Social Security Organisation  or a Committee thereof;  
(c) in the opinion of such Government, has so abused the position of his office  as to render that 
member's continuation in the office detrimental to the public interest  or is otherwise unfit or unsuitable 
to continue as such member in the opinion of such  Government:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under clauses ( b) and ( c), unless that person  has been given 
an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be removed:  
Provided further that a member of the Executive Committee of the Central Board or  the Standing 
Committee of the Corporation shall cease to hold office if he ceases to be a  memb er of the Central Board 
or the Corporation, as the case may be.  
(3) Any member of a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof may at  any time resign from 
his office in writing under his hand addressed to the Central  Government or the State Govern ment, as the 
case may be, which had made his appointment  and on acceptance of such resignation, his office shall 
become vacant.  
(4) If in a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof, the Central  Government or the State 
Government, as the case may  be, is of the opinion that — 
(a) any member thereof representing employers or the employees or the  unorganised workers, as the 
case may be, ceases to adequately represent so; or  
(b) any member thereof representing to be an expert in a specified area, is la ter on found not to 
possess sufficient expertise in that area; or  
(c) having regard to exigencies of circumstances or services in such  Government, the member thereof 
representing such Government cannot continue to  represent the Government,  then, such Gover nment 
may, by order, remove such member from his office:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under clause ( a) or clause ( b), unless that  person has been 
given an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be removed.  
(5) If any member of a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof, who is  a director of a 
company and who as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary  interest in any matter coming up 
for consideration of the Social Security Organisation or a  Committee thereof , then, he shall, as soon as may 
be possible after such fact of interest has  come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of the interest and such 
disclosure shall be  recorded in the proceedings of the Social Security Organisation or the Committee 
thereof,  as the case may be, and such member, thereafter, shall not take part in any proceeding or  decision 
of the Social Security Organisation, or a Committee thereof relating to that matter.  
9. Procedure for transaction of business of Social Security Organisation,  etc. (1) A Social Security 
Organisation or any Committee thereof shall meet at such  intervals and observe such procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings  (including the quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed 
by the Central G overnment.  
(2) All orders and decisions of the Social Security Organisation shall be authenticated  by the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner, Director General, Director General Labour  Welfare, State Principal 
Secretary or Secretary (Labour) of the respect ive Social Security  Organisations or such other officer as may 
be notified by the appropriate Government and  all other instruments issued by the Social Security 
Organisation shall be authenticated by  the signature of such officer as may be authorised by an  order by the 
respective Social  Security Organisations.  
(3) No act done or proceeding taken by a Social Security Organisation or any Committee  thereof shall 
be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any  defect in the constit ution of 
the Social Security Organisation or the Committee thereof, as  the case may be.  
(4) Such members of a Social Security Organisation or any Committee thereof shall be  entitled for such 
fee and allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government . 24 
 10. Executive Heads of Central Board and Corporation. —The Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner and the Director General shall be the  whole -time officer of the Central Board and the 
Corporation, respectively, and such officer  shall not undertake any work u nconnected with his office 
without the prior approval of the  Central Government.  
11. Supersession of Corporation, Central Board National Social Security Board or State 
Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’ Welfare Board. — (1) If the Central 
Government in case of the Central Board, the Corporation or the  National Social Security Board and the 
State Government, in case of the State Unorganised  Workers' Board or the Building Workers' Welfare 
Board, is of the opinion that the Corporation  or the C entral Board or the National Social Security Board or 
the State Unorganised Workers’  Board or the Building Workers' Welfare Board or any of the Committee 
thereof, as the case  may be, is unable to perform its functions, or, has persistently made delay in th e 
discharge  of its functions or has exceeded or abused its powers or jurisdiction, then such Government  may, 
by notification, supersede the Corporation or the Central Board or the National Social  Security Board or 
the State Unorganised Workers' Board or th e Building Workers’ Welfare  Board, or any of the Committees 
thereof, as the case may be, and reconstitute it in such  manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub -section on any of the  grounds specified 
herein, such Government shall give an opportunity to the Corporation or  the Central Board or the National 
Social Security Board or the State Unorganised Workers’  Board or the Building Workers' Welfare Board 
or any Committee thereof, as the case may  be, to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and 
shall consider the explanations  and objections raised by it and take appropriate action thereon.  
(2) After the supersession of the Corporation, or the Central Board or the National  Social  Security 
Board, the State Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’  Welfare Board, or any of the 
Committee thereof, as the case may be, and until it is  reconstituted, the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall  make  such alternate arrangements for the purpose of administration 
of the relevant  provisions of this Code, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall  cause, a full report of 
any action taken by it under this section and the circumstances  leading to such action, to be laid before each 
House of Parliament or the State Legislature,  as the case may be, at the earliest opportunity and in any case 
not later than three months  from the date of the notification of supersession issued under sub -section ( 1). 
12. State Board, Regional Boards, local committees etc. — (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, — 
(i) after consultation with the Government of any State, constitute for that  State, a Board of Trustees 
(hereinafter in this Code referred to as a State Board) which  shall exercise such powers and perform 
such functions as may be assigned by  notification, to it by the Central Government from time to time;  
(ii) specify the manner of  constitution of a State Board, the terms and conditions  of the appointment 
of its members and the procedure of its meeting and other  proceedings relating thereto.  
(2) The Corporation may, by order, appoint Regional Boards and local committees in  such area  and in 
such manner to perform such functions and to exercise such powers as  may be specified in the regulations.  
13. Entrustment of additional functions to Social Security Organisations. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Code, the Central Government may,  by notification, — 
(i) assign additional functions to a Social Security Organisation including  administration of any 
other Act or scheme relating to social security subject to such  provisions as may be specified in this 
behalf in the notific ation:  
Provided that while the additional function of administering the Act or scheme  are assigned under 
this clause to a Social Security Organisation, the officer or authority  of such organisation, to whom 
such function has been assigned, shall exercise t he powers under the enactment or scheme required for 
discharging such function in the  manner as may be specified in the notification:  25 
 Provided further that the Social Security Organisations may assign such  additional functions to 
existing officers or appoi nt or engage new officers necessary  for such purpose, if such functions may 
not be performed and completed with the  assistance of its personnel as existing immediately before the 
assignment of the  additional functions;  
(ii) specify the terms and conditions  of discharging the functions under clause ( i) by the Social 
Security Organisation;  
(iii) provide that the expenditure incurred in discharging the functions specified  in clause ( i) 
including appointment or engagement of personnel necessary for proper  disch arge of such functions 
shall be borne by the Central Government;  
(iv) specify the powers which the Social Security Organisation shall exercise  while discharging the 
functions specified in clause ( i); and  
(v) provide that any expenditure referred to in clause ( iii) shall be made by the  Social Security 
Organisation after prior approval of the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUND  
14. Appointment of officers of Central Board. —(1) The Central Government may appoint a Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner  who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Central Board and shall also 
function as  head of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Code, the expression “Employees’ Provident  Fund 
Organisation ” means the organisation consisting of officers and employees of the  Central Board.  
(2) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner shall be subject to the general control  and 
superintendence of the Central Board in the discharge of his functions u nder this Code.  
(3) The Central Government shall also appoint a Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts  Officer to assist 
the Central Provident Fund Commissioner in the discharge of his duties.  
(4) The Central Board may appoint, as many Additional Central Pro vident Fund  Commissioners, 
Deputy Provident Fund Commissioners, Regional Provident Fund  Commissioners, Assistant Provident 
Fund Commissioners and such other officers and  employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient 
administration of the Provide nt Fund Scheme, the Pension Scheme and the Insurance Scheme or other 
responsibilities  assigned to the Central Board from time to time by the Central Government.  
(5) No appointment to the post of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or an  Additional Cent ral 
Provident Fund Commissioner or a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts  Officer or any other post under 
the Central Board carrying a scale of pay equivalent to the  scale of pay of any Group 'A' or Group 'B' post 
under the Central Government shall be  made  except after consultation with the Union Public Service 
Commission:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in regard to any such  appointment — 
(a) for a period not exceeding one year; or  
(b) if the person to be appointed is, at the time of h is appointment, — 
(i) a member of the Indian Administrative Service, or  
(ii) in the service of the Central Government or the Central Board in a  Group 'A' or Group 'B' 
post.  
(6) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other condition s of service of the 
Central Provident Fund Commissioner and the Financial Adviser and  Chief Accounts Officer shall be such 
as may be specified by the Central Government and  such salary and allowances shall be paid out of the 
Provident Fund.  
(7) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other  conditions of service of 
the Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioners, Deputy  Provident Fund Commissioners, Regional 26 
 Provident Fund Commissioners, Assistant  Provident Fund Commission ers and other officers and 
employees of the Central Board  shall be such as may be specified by the Central Board in accordance with 
the rules and  orders applicable to the officers and employees of the Central Government drawing  
corresponding scales of pay:  
Provided that where the Central Board is of the opinion that it is necessary to make  a departure from 
the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall  obtain the prior approval of the 
Central Government:  
Provided further that the salary and allowances of the officers specified in this clause  shall not exceed 
the scale of pay respectively provided in the Provident Fund Scheme.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under  clause ( a), the 
Cent ral Board shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of  recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central  Government and in case of any doubt, the 
Central Board shall refer the matter to the  Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
15. Schemes. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification — 
(a) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme for  which the provident 
funds shall be established under this Chapter for employees or  for any class of employees and specify 
the establishments or class of establishments  to which the said scheme shall apply;  
(b) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Pension Scheme for the purpose  of providing for — 
(i) superannuation pensi on, retiring pension or permanent total  disablement pension to the 
employees of any establishment or class of  establishments to which this Chapter applies;  
(ii) widow or widower's pension, children pension or orphan pension  payable to the beneficiaries 
of such employees; and  
(iii) nominee pension;  
(c) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Deposit Linked Insurance  Scheme for the purpose 
of providing life insurance benefits to the employees of any  establishment or class of establishments to 
which this Ch apter applies;  
(d) frame any other scheme or schemes for the purposes of providing social  security benefits under 
this Code to self -employed workers or any other class of  persons; and  
(e) modify any scheme referred to in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) by adding  thereto, amending or 
varying therein, either prospectively or retrospectively.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the schemes referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any of the matters respectiv ely specified in  Part A, Part B and Part C 
of the Fifth Schedule.  
(3) The schemes may provide that all or any of its provisions shall take effect either  prospectively or 
retrospectively on and from such date as may be specified in that behalf  in the scheme . 
16.  Funds .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of — 
(a) the Provident Fund Scheme, establish a Provident Fund where the  contributions paid by the 
employer to the fund shall be ten per cent. of the wages for  the time being payable to each of the 
employees (whether employed by him directly  or by or through a contactor), and the employee's 
contribution shall be equal to the  contribution payable by the employer in respect of him and may, if 
any employee so  desires, be an amount exceeding ten per cent. of the wages, subject to the condition  
that the employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any contribution over and  above his 
contribution payable under this section:  
Provided that in its application to any establishment or class of establishm ents which the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, may, by  notification, specify, this section shall 
be subject to the modification that for the  words “ten per cent. ” at both the places where they occur, the 
words “twelve  per cen t.” shall be substituted:  27 
 Provided further that the Central Government, after making such inquiry as it  deems fit, may, by 
notification, specify rates of employees’ contributions and the  period for which such rates shall apply 
for any class of employee;  
(b) the Pension Scheme, establish a Pension Fund in the manner specified in  that scheme by that 
Government into which there shall be paid, from time to time, in  respect of every employee who is a 
member of the Pension Scheme, — 
(i) such sums from the employer's contribution under clause ( a) not  exceeding eight and one -
third per cent. of the wages or such per cent. of wages  as may be notified by the Central 
Government;  
(ii) such sums payable as contribution to the Pension Fund, as may be  specified in th e Pension 
Scheme, by the employers of the exempted  establishments under section 143 to which the pension 
scheme applies;  
(iii) such sums as the Central Government after due appropriation by  Parliament by law in this 
behalf, specify;  
(c) the Insurance Schem e, establish a Deposit -Linked Insurance Fund in the  manner specified in 
that scheme by that Government into which there shall be paid  by the employer from time to time in 
respect of every such employee in relation to  whom he is the employer, such amount, n ot being more 
than one per cent. of the  wages or such per cent. of wages as may be notified by the Central Government 
for the time being payable in relation to such employee:  
Provided that the employer shall pay into the Insurance Fund such further  sums of  money, not 
exceeding one -fourth of the contribution which he is required to  make under this clause, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, determine  to meet all the expenses in connection with the 
administration of the Insurance Scheme  other th an the expenses towards the cost of any benefits 
provided by or under the  Insurance Scheme.  
(2) The Provident Fund, the Pension Fund and the Insurance Fund shall vest in, and  be administered 
by, the Central Board in such manner as may be specified in the r espective  schemes.  
17. Contribution in respect of employees and contractors. —(1) The amount of contribution (that is 
to say, the employer's contribution as well  as the employee's contribution in pursuance of any scheme and 
the employer's contribution  in pursuance of the Insurance Scheme) and any charge for meeting the cost of 
administering  the fund paid or payable by an employer in respect of an employee employed by or through  
a contractor may be recovered by such employer from the contractor, either by d eduction  from any amount 
payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the  contractor.  
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) may be  recovered in respect of 
any employee employed by or through him may rec over from such  employee, the employee's contribution 
under any scheme by deduction from the wages  payable to such employee.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, no contractor shall be entitled to  deduct the employer's 
contribution or the charg es referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the  wages payable to an employee employed 
by or through him or otherwise to recover such  contribution or charges from such employee.  
18. Fund to be recognized under Act 43 of 1961. — For the purposes of the Income -tax Act, 1961, 
the Provident Fund shall be deemed  to be a recognised provident fund within the meaning of clause ( 38) of 
section 2 of that  Act: 
Provided that nothing contained in the said Act shall operate to render ineffective  any provision of the 
Provident F und Scheme (under which the Provident Fund is established)  which is repugnant to any of the 
provisions of that Act or of the rules made thereunder.  
19. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other l aw for the time being in force,  any amount due under this Chapter shall be the charge on the 
assets of the establishment to  which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance with the provisions 
of the  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 28 
 20. Chapter not to apply to certain establishments. —(1) This Chapter shall not apply — 
(a) to any establishment registered under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912)  or under 
any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co -operative  societies employing less 
than fifty persons and working without the aid of power; or  
(b) to any other establishment belonging to or under the control of the Central  Government or a State 
Government and whose employees are entitled to the benefit  of contributory provident fund or old age 
pension in accordance with any scheme or  rule framed by the Central Government or the State 
Government governing such  benefits; or  
(c) to any other establishment set up under any Central or State or any other  law for the time being in 
force and whose employees are entitled to the benefits of  contributory provident fund or old age pension 
in accordance with any scheme or  rule framed under that law governing such benefits; or  
(d) to the employees who, immediately before the commencement of this Code,  were receiving 
benefits of Provident Fund under any Central or State enactment.  
(2) If the Central Government is of the opinion that having regard to the financial  position of any class 
of establishment or other circumstances of the case, it is necessary or  expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification and subject to such conditions, as may be specified  in the notification, exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, that class of  establishments from the  operation of this Chapter for such 
period as may be specified in  the notification.  
21. Authorising certain employer to maintain provident fund accounts. — (1) The Central 
Government may, on an application made to it in this behalf by the  employer and the m ajority of employees 
in relation to an establishment employing one  hundred or more persons, authorise the employer by an order 
in writing, to maintain a  provident fund account in relation to the establishment, in such manner as may be 
prescribed  by the Cen tral Government and subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in  the 
Provident Fund Scheme:  
Provided that no authorisation shall be made under this sub -section if the employer  of such 
establishment had committed any default in the payment of  provident fund  contribution or had committed 
any other offence under this Code during the three years  immediately preceding the date of such 
authorisation.  
(2) Where an establishment is authorised to maintain a provident fund account under  sub-section ( 1), 
the employer in relation to such establishment shall maintain such account,  submit such return, deposit the 
contribution in such manner, provide for such facilities for  inspection, pay such administrative charges, and 
abide by such other terms and condi tions,  as may be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme.  
(3) Any authorisation made under this section may be cancelled by the Central  Government by order 
in writing if the employer fails to comply with any of the terms and  conditions of the authorisation or where 
he commits any offence under any provision of  this Code:  
Provided that before cancelling the authorisation, the Central Government shall give  the employer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
22. Transfer of accounts. — Where an employee, — 
(a) employed in an establishment to which this Chapter applies, relinquishes  his employment 
therefrom and obtains employment in any other establishment to  which this Chapter applies or not; or  
(b) employed in an establishment to which this Chapter does not app ly, relinquishes his 
employment therefrom and obtains employment in an establishment  to which this Chapter applies,  then, 
his accumulated amount in provident fund account or pension account, as the case  may be, shall be 
transferred or dealt with in the manner as may be specified in the Provident  Fund Scheme or the Pension 
Scheme, as the case may be.  
23. Appeal to Tribunal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by any authority in regard to 
the following matters may prefer an appeal to the Tribunal constituted by the Central  Government, 
namely: — 29 
 (a) determination and assessment of dues under section 125 relating to  Chapter III; and  
(b) levy of damages under section 128 relating to Chapter III.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner, within  such time and 
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) No appeal under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) by the employer shall be entertained  by the Tribunal 
unless he has deposited with Social S ecurity Organisation concerned  twenty -five per cent. of the amount 
due from him as determined by an officer under  section 125.  
(4) The Tribunal shall endeavour to decide the appeal within a period of one year from  the date on 
which the appeal has been preferred.  
CHAPTER IV  
EMPLOYEES STATE INSURANCE CORPORATION  
24. Principal Officers and other staff. —(1) The Central Government may appoint a Director General 
of the Corporation  and a Financial Commissioner, who shall be the Principal Officers of the Corpor ation.  
(2) The Director General and the Financial Commissioner shall hold office for such  period, not 
exceeding five years, as may be specified in the order of appointment:  
Provided that outgoing Director General or Financial Commissioner, as the case may  be, shall be 
eligible for re -appointment if he is otherwise qualified.  
(3) The Director General or the Financial Commissioner shall receive such salary and  allowances as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Director General and the Financial Commissioner shall exercise such powers  and discharge 
such duties as may be prescribed by the Central Government and shall perform  such other functions as may 
be specified in the regulations.  
(5) A person shall be disqualified from being appointe d as or for being the Director  General of the 
Corporation or the Financial Commissioner if he is subject to any of the  disqualifications specified in 
section 8.  
(6) The Central Government may at any time remove the Director General of the  Corporation or th e 
Financial Commissioner from office and shall do so if such removal is  recommended by a resolution of the 
Corporation passed at a special meeting called for the  purpose and supported by the votes of not less than 
two-third of the total strength of the  Corporation.  
(7) The Corporation may employ such other officers and employees as may be  necessary for the 
efficient transaction of its business and for discharge of any other  responsibilities assigned to the 
Corporation from time to time by the Central Govern ment:  
Provided that the sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for the creation  of any post the 
maximum monthly salary of which exceeds such salary as may be prescribed  by the Central Government.  
(8) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other  conditions of service of 
the officers and employees of the Corporation shall be such as  may be specified in the regulations in 
accordance with the rules and orders applicable to  the officers and employees of the Central Gov ernment 
drawing corresponding scales of  pay: 
Provided that the terms and conditions of service including pay and allowances of  such posts of medical 
specialists and super specialists in the Corporation possessing  comparable qualifications and expertise, as  
may be notified by the Central Government,  with the equivalent posts of the specialists and super specialists 
in the All India Institute of  Medical Sciences or in the Post Graduate Institutes of Medical Sciences and 
Research or  other similar institutions established by the Central Government, shall respectively be  similar:  
Provided further that where the Corporation is of the opinion that it is necessary to  make a departure 
from the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it  shall obtain the prior approval of 
the Central Government:  30 
 Provided also that this sub -section shall not apply to appointment of consultants and  specialists in 
various fields appointed on contract basis.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under  clause ( a), the 
Corporation shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of  recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central  Government and in case of any doubt, the 
Corpo ration shall refer the matter to the Central  Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(9) Every appointment to posts (other than medical, nursing or para -medical posts)  corresponding to 
Group 'A' and Group 'B' Gazetted posts under the Central Gove rnment  shall be made in consultation with 
the Union Public Service Commission:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply to an officiating or  temporary 
appointment for a period not exceeding one year:  
Provided further that any such o fficiating or temporary appointment shall not confer  any claim for 
regular appointment and the services rendered in that capacity shall not  count towards seniority or minimum 
qualifying service specified in the regulations for  promotion to next higher grad e. 
(10) If any question arises whether a post corresponds to a Group 'A' and Group 'B'  posts under the 
Central Government, the question shall be referred to that Government  whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
25. Employees’ State Insurance Fund. —(1) All  contributions and user charges paid under this 
Chapter and all other moneys  received on behalf of the Corporation shall be paid into a fund (hereinafter 
referred to as the  Employees' State Insurance Fund) which shall be held and administered by the 
Corpor ation  for the purposes of this Code:  
Provided that the user charges collected from the other beneficiaries referred to in  section 44 shall be 
deemed to be contribution and shall form part of Employees' State  Insurance Corporation.  
(2) The Corporation may a ccept grants, donations, Corporate Social Responsibility  Fund and gifts from 
the Central or any State Government, local authority, or any individual  or body whether incorporated or 
not, for all or any of the purposes of this Chapter.  
(3) Subject to the oth er provisions contained in this Code and to any rules or  regulations made in this 
behalf, all moneys accruing or payable to the said Fund shall be  deposited in such bank or banks as may be 
approved by the Central Government to the  credit of an account styl ed the account of the Employees' State 
Insurance Fund.  
(4) The Employees State Insurance Fund or any other money which is held by the  Corporation shall be 
deposited or invested in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government and the account referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) shall be operated by such officers  as may be authorised by the Committee constituted under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5  (hereinafter referred to as the Standing Committee) with the approval of the 
Corporation.  
26. Purposes for which Employees’ State Insurance Fund may be expended. — Subject to the 
provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations relating  thereto, made under this Code, the 
Employees' State Insurance Fund shall be expended  only for the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) payment of benefits and provision of medical treatment and attendance to  Insured Persons referred 
to in section 28 and, where the medical benefit is extended  to their families, the provision of such 
medical benefit to their families, in accordance  with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and 
regulations relating thereto and  defraying the charges and costs in connection therewith;  
(b) payment of fees and allowances to members of the Corporation, the Standing  Committee, the 
Medical Benefit Comm ittee or other Committees thereof;  
(c) payment of salaries, leave and joining time allowances, travelling and  compensatory allowances, 
gratuities and compassionate allowances, pensions,  contributions to provident or other benefit fund of 
officers and staff  of the Corporation  and meeting the expenditure in respect of offices and other services 
set up for the  purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Code relating to this Chapter;  31 
 (d) establishment and maintenance of hospitals, dispensaries and other  institutions and the provision 
of medical and other ancillary services for the benefit  of Insured Persons referred to in section 28 and, 
where the medical benefit is extended  to their families;  
(e) payment of contributions to any State Government, local a uthority or any  private body or 
individual, towards the cost of medical treatment and attendance  provided to Insured Persons referred 
to in section 28 and, where the medical benefit  is extended to their families, their families, including 
the cost of any b uilding and  equipment, in accordance with any agreement entered into by the 
Corporation;  
(f) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of auditing the accounts of the  Corporation and of the 
valuation of its assets and liabilities;  
(g) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of the Employees' Insurance  Courts set up under this 
Chapter;  
(h) payment of any sums under any contract entered into for the purposes of  this Code by Corporation 
or the Standing Committee or by any officer duly authorised  by the C orporation or the Standing 
Committee in that behalf;  
(i) payment of sums under any decree, order or award of any Court or Tribunal  against the 
Corporation or any of its officers or staff for any act done in the execution  of his duty or under a 
compromise or settlement of any suit or other legal proceeding  or claim instituted or made against the 
Corporation;  
(j) defraying the cost and other charges of instituting or defending any civil or  criminal proceedings 
arising out of any action taken under this Code relating to this  Chapter;  
(k) defraying expenditure, within the limits prescribed by the Central  Government after consultation 
with the Corporation, on measures for the improvement  of the health and welfare of Insured Persons 
and for the rehabilitation and  re-employment of Insured Persons referred to in section 28 who have 
been disabled  or injured; and  
(l) such other purposes as may be authorised by the Corporation with the  previous approval of the 
Central Government.  
27. Holding of property, etc. . — (1) The Corporation may, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the  Central Government, acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, sell or  
otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in  or have been  
acquired by it and do all things necessary for the purposes for which the  Corporation is established.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the  Corporation may 
from time to time invest any moneys which are not imme diately required  for expenses properly defrayable 
under this Code and may, subject to as aforesaid, from  time to time re -invest or realise such investments.  
(3) The Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government and  on such terms as 
may be prescribed by it, raise loans and take measures for discharging  such loans.  
(4) The Corporation may constitute for the benefit of its officers and staff or any  class of them, such 
provident or other benefit fund as it may think fit.  
28. All employee s to be insured. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, every employee in an 
establishment to  which this Chapter applies shall be insured in such manner whether electronically or  
otherwise, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) An employee whether insured or insurable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of  whom contributions 
are or were payable and who is by reason thereof, entitled to any of  the benefits provided under this Chapter, 
shall be called “Insured Person ”. 
29. Contributions. —(1) The contribution payable under this Chapter in respect of an employee shall  
comprise contribution payable by the employer (hereinafter referred to as the employer's  contribution) and 
contribution payable by the employee (hereinafter referred to as the  employee's contribution) and shall be 
paid to the Corporation.  32 
 (2) The contributions (employer's contribution and the employee’s contribution both)  shall be paid at 
such rates as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The wage period in relation  to an employee shall be the unit as specified in the  regulations 
(hereinafter referred to as the wage period) in respect of which all contributions  shall be payable under this 
Chapter.  
(4) The contributions payable in respect of each wage period shall ord inarily fall due  on the last day of 
the wage period, and where an employee is employed for part of the  wage period, or is employed under two 
or more employers during the same wage period,  the contributions shall fall due on such days as may be 
specified in  the regulations.  
30.  Administrative expenses. —The types of expenses which may be termed as administrative 
expenses and the  percentage of the income of the Corporation which may be spent for such expenses shall  
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Corporation shall keep  its administrative 
expenses within the limit so prescribed by the Central Government.  
31. Provisions as to payment of contributions by employer etc.  .— (1) The employer shall pay in 
respect of every employee, whether directly  employed by him or by or through a contractor, both the 
employer's contribution and the  employee's contribution.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  but subject to the 
provisions of this Cod e and the rules and regulations, if any, made  thereunder in this behalf, the employer 
shall, in the case of an employee directly employed  by him (not being an exempted employee), be entitled 
to recover from the employee the  employee's contribution by reduc tion from his wages and not otherwise:  
Provided that no such deduction shall be made from any wages other than such as  relates to the period 
or part of the period in respect of which the contribution is payable or  in excess of the sum representing the 
empl oyee's contribution for the period.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, neither the employer nor the  contractor shall be 
entitled to deduct the employer's contribution from any wages payable  to an employee or otherwise to 
recover it from him.  
(4) Any sum deducted by the employer from wages under this Chapter shall be deemed  to have been 
entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of paying the contribution  in respect of which it was 
deducted.  
(5) The employer shall bear the expenses of re mitting the contributions to the  Corporation.  
(6) An employer, who has paid contribution in respect of an employee employed by  or through a 
contractor, shall be entitled to recover the amount of the contribution so paid  (that is to say the employer's 
contribution as well as the employee's contribution, if any,)  from the contractor, either by deduction from 
any amount payable to him by the employer  under any contract, or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
(7) The contractor shall maintain a register o f employees employed by or through  him as provided in 
the regulations and submit the same to the employer before the settlement  of any amount payable under 
sub-section ( 6). 
(8) In the case referred to in sub -section ( 6), the contractor shall be entitled to  recover  the employee's 
contribution from the employee employed by or through him by deduction  from wages and not otherwise, 
subject to such conditions as specified in the proviso to  sub-section ( 2). 
(9) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Corporat ion may make regulations for  any matter relating 
or incidental to the payment and collection of contributions payable  under this Chapter.  
32. Benefits. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Insured Persons, their dependants  or the 
persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case may be, shall be entitled to the following  benefits, namely: — 
(a) periodical payments to any Insured Person in case of his sickness certified  by a duly appointed 
medical practitioner or by any other person possessing such  qualifications and experience as the 
Corporation may, by the regulations, specify in  this behalf (hereinafter referred to as sickness benefit);  33 
 (b) periodical payments to an Insured Person being a woman in case of  confinement or miscarriage 
or sickness ar ising out of pregnancy, confinement,  premature birth of child or miscarriage, such woman 
being certified to be eligible  for such payments by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations  
(hereinafter referred to as maternity benefit);  
(c) period ical payments to an Insured Person suffering from disablement as a  result of an employment 
injury sustained by him as an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter and certified to be eligible for 
such payments by an authority specified  in this behalf by th e regulations (hereinafter referred to as 
disablement benefit);  
(d) periodical payments to such dependants of an Insured Person who dies as a  result of an 
employment injury sustained by him as an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter, as are entitled 
under this Chapter (hereinafter referred to as dependents’ benefit);  
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on Insured Persons (hereinafter referred  to as medical 
benefit); and  
(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an Insured Person  who has died, towards 
the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased Insured Person,  or, where the Insured Person did not 
have a family or was not living with his family  at the time of his death, to the person who actually 
incurs the expenditure on the  funeral of the deceased Insured Person (to be known as funeral expenses):  
Provided that the amount of payment under this clause shall not exceed such amount  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government and the claim for such payment shall be  made within three months 
of the death of the Insured Person or within such extended  period as the Corporation or any officer or 
authority authorised by it in this behalf may  allow.  
(2) The Corporation may, subject to such conditions as may be laid down in the  regulati ons, extend the 
medical benefits to the family of an Insured Person.  
(3) The qualification of a person to claim sickness benefit, maternity benefit,  disablement benefit and 
dependants' benefit and the conditions subject to which such benefit  may be given a nd the rate and period 
thereof, shall be such as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Code and the rules made thereunder relating to  this Chapter, the 
Corporation may make regulations for any matter relating or  incidental to  the accrual and payment of 
benefits payable under this Chapter.  
33. Corporation’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of Insured Persons. —The 
Corporation may, in addition to the benefits specified in this Chapter, promote  measures fo r the 
improvement of the health and welfare of Insured Persons and for the  rehabilitation and re -employment of 
Insured Persons who have been disabled or injured  and may incur in respect of such measures, expenditure 
from the Employees' State Insurance  Fund  within such limits as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
34. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment. —(1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, an accident arising in the course of an  employee's employment shall be presumed, in th e absence 
of evidence to the contrary, to  have arisen out of that employment.  
(2) An accident happening to an employee in or about any premises at which he is for  the time being 
employed for the purpose of his employer's trade or business shall be  deemed t o arise out of and in the 
course of his employment, if it happens while he is taking  steps, on an actual or supposed emergency at 
those premises, to rescue, succour or protect  persons who are, or are thought to be or possibly to be, injured 
or imperilled, or to avert or  minimise serious damage to property.  
(3) An accident occurring to an employee while commuting from his residence to  the place of 
employment for duty or from the place of employment to his residence after  performing duty, shall be 
deemed to h ave arisen out of and in the course of employment if  nexus between the circumstances, time 
and place in which the accident occurred and the  employment is established.  
(4) An accident happening while an employee is, with the express or implied  permission of  his 
employer, travelling as a passenger by any vehicle to or from his place of  work shall, notwithstanding that 34 
 he is under no obligation to his employer to travel by that  vehicle, be deemed to arise out of and in the 
course of his employment, if — 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had he been under  such obligation; and  
(b) at the time of the accident, the vehicle — 
(i) is being operated by or on behalf of his employer or some other  person by whom it is provided 
in pursuance of arrang ements made with his  employer; and  
(ii) is not being operated in the ordinary course of public transport service.  
Explanation .—In this section, “vehicle ” includes a vessel and an aircraft.  
35. Accidents happening while acting in breach of law etc. — An accident shall be deemed to arise 
out of and in the course of an employee's  employment notwithstanding that he is at the time of the accident 
acting in contravention  of the provisions of any law applicable to him, or of any orders given by or on 
behalf of his employer or that he is acting without instructions from his employer, if — 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had the act not  been done in contravention 
as aforesaid or without instructions from his employer,  as the case may be; a nd 
(b) the act is done for the purpose of and in connection with the employer's  trade or business.  
36. Occupational disease. —(1) If an employee employed in any employment specified in Part A of 
the Third  Schedule contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to  that 
employment, or if an employee employed in the employment specified in Part B of  that Schedule for a 
continuous period of not less than six months contracts any disease  specified therein as an occupational 
disease pe culiar to that employment or if an employee  employed in any employment specified in Part C of 
that Schedule for such continuous  period as the Corporation may specify by regulations in respect of each 
such employment,  contracts any disease specified in such  Part C as an occupational disease peculiar to that  
employment, the contracting of the disease shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed  to be an 
“employment injury “, arising out of and in the course of employment.  
(2) Save as provided by sub -sectio n (1), no benefit shall be payable to an employee  in respect of any 
disease unless the disease is directly attributable to a specific injury by  accident arising out of and in the 
course of his employment.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 34  shall not apply to the cases to  which this section 
applies.  
37. References to medical board. — (1) Any question — 
(a) whether the relevant accident has resulted in permanent disablement; or  
(b) whether the extent of loss of earning capacity can be assessed provisionally  or finally; or  
(c) whether the assessment of the proportion of the loss of earning capacity is  provisional or final; or  
(d) in the case of provisional assessment, as to the period for which such  assessment shall hold good,  
shall be determined  by a medical board constituted in accordance with the provisions of  the regulations 
(hereinafter referred to as medical board) and any such question shall  hereafter be referred to as the 
“disablement question ”. 
(2) The case of any Insured Person for perma nent disablement benefit shall be referred  by the 
Corporation to a medical board for determination of the disablement in question  and if, on that or any 
subsequent reference, the extent of loss of earning capacity of the  Insured Person is provisionally assessed, 
it shall again be so referred to the medical board  not later than the end of the period taken into account by 
the provisional assessment.  
(3) Any decision under this Chapter of a medical board may be reviewed at any time  by the medical 
board if i t is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was given in  consequence of the non -disclosure 
or misrepresentation by the employee or any other  person of a material fact whether the non -disclosure or 
misrepresentation was or was not  fraudulent.  35 
 (4) Any  assessment of the extent of the disablement resulting from the relevant  employment injury may 
also be reviewed by a medical board if it is satisfied that since the  making of the assessment there has been 
a substantial and unforeseen aggravation of the  results of the relevant injury:  
Provided that an assessment shall not be reviewed under this sub -section unless the  medical board is of 
the opinion, having regard to the period taken into account by the  assessment and the probable duration of 
the aggravation aforesaid, that substantial injustice  will be done by not reviewing it.  
(5) Except with the leave of a medical appeal tribunal constituted by regulations, an  assessment shall 
not be reviewed under sub -section ( 4) on any application made less than  five year s, or in the case of a 
provisional assessment, six months, from the date thereof and  on such a review the period to be taken into 
account by any revised assessment shall not  include any period before the date of the application.  
(6) Subject to the foregoin g provisions of this section, a medical board may deal  with a case of review 
in any manner in which it could deal with it on an original reference  to it, and in particular may make a 
provisional assessment notwithstanding that the  assessment under review w as final and the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2) shall apply to an  application for review under this sub -section and to a decision of a medical 
board in  connection with such application as they apply to a case for disablement benefit under that  sub-
section a nd to a decision of the medical board in connection with such case.  
(7) (a) If the Insured Person or the Corporation is aggrieved by any decision of the  medical board, the 
Insured Person or the Corporation, as the case may be, may appeal in  such manner and  within such time as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government to — 
(i) the medical appeal tribunal constituted in accordance with the provisions of  the regulations; or  
(ii) the Employees' Insurance Court directly:  
Provided that no appeal by an Insured Person shall lie under this sub -section if such  person has applied 
for commutation of disablement benefit on the basis of the decision of  the medical board and received the 
commuted value of such benefits:  
Provided further that no appeal by the Corporation  shall lie under this sub -section if  the Corporation 
paid the commuted value of the disablement benefit on the basis of the  decision of the medical board.  
(b) Where the Insured Person or the Corporation preferred appeal to the medical  appeal tribunal under  
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) instead of to the Employees' Insurance  Court under sub -clause ( ii) of that clause, 
then, he or it, as the case may be, shall have the  further right to file second appeal to the Employees' 
Insurance Court in such manner and  within such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
38. Dependants’ benefit. —(1) If an Insured Person dies as a result of an employment injury sustained 
as an  employee under this Chapter (whether or not he was in receipt of any periodical pay ment  for 
temporary disablement in respect of the injury), dependants' benefit shall be payable to  his dependants 
specified in sub -clause ( a) and sub -clause ( b) of clause ( 24) of section 2 at  such rates and for such periods 
and subject to such conditions as  may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(2) In case the Insured Person dies without leaving behind him the dependants as  aforesaid, the 
dependants' benefit shall be paid to the other dependants of the deceased at  such rates and for such periods 
and s ubject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(3) Any decision awarding dependants' benefit under this Chapter may be reviewed  at any time by the 
Corporation if it is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was  given in co nsequence of non -disclosure 
or misrepresentation by the claimant or any other  person of a material fact (whether the non -disclosure or 
misrepresentation was or was not  fraudulent) or that the decision is no longer in accordance with this 
Chapter due to any  birth or death or due to the marriage, re -marriage, or ceasing of infirmity, or attainment 
of the  age of twenty -five years by, a claimant.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Corporation may, on such review  under sub -section 
(3), direct tha t the dependants' benefit be continued, increased, reduced  or discontinued.  36 
 39. Medical benefit. —(1) An Insured Person or (where such medical benefit is extended to his family)  
a member of his family whose condition requires medical treatment and attendanc e shall  be entitled to 
receive medical benefit.  
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of out -patient treatment  and attendance in a 
hospital or dispensary, clinic or other institution or by visits to the  home of the Insured Person or treatment 
as in-patient in a hospital or other institution.  
(3) The qualification of an Insured Person and (where such medical benefit is extended  to his family) 
his family, to claim medical benefit and the conditions subject to which such  benefit may be g iven, the scale 
and period thereof shall be such as may be prescribed by  the Central Government:  
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be payable under  this Chapter may be 
allowed medical benefit for such period and of such natur e as may be  provided by the regulations:  
Provided further that an Insured Person who has attained the age of superannuation,  a person who retires 
under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or takes premature retirement,  and his spouse shall be eligible to 
receive  medical benefits subject to payment of contribution  and such other conditions as may be specified 
in the regulations:  
Provided also that an Insured Person who ceases to be in insurable employment on  account of 
permanent disablement caused due to employmen t injury shall continue to  receive medical benefits, subject 
to payment of contribution and other conditions as may  be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided also that the conditions for grant of medical benefits to the Insured Person  during employ ment 
injury shall be as specified in the regulations.  
(4) (a) The Corporation may establish medical education institutions, including  colleges, dental 
colleges, nursing colleges and the training institutes for its officers and  staff with a view to improve the 
quality of their services.  
(b) The medical education institutions referred to in clause ( a) shall require its students  to furnish a 
bond for serving the Corporation for such time and in such manner, as may be  specified in the regulations.  
(5) The medic al education institutions and training institutes referred to in  sub-section ( 4) may be run 
by the Corporation itself or on the request of the Corporation,  by the Central Government, any State 
Government, Public Sector Undertaking of the Central  Government  or the State Government or any other 
body notified by the Central Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “other body ” means any such 
organisation of persons which the Central Government considers capable  to run colle ges and training 
institutions referred to in sub -section ( 4). 
(6) The Corporation may, in order to take preventive and curative measures for welfare  of the Insured 
Persons, carry out such occupational and epidemiological surveys and studies  for assessment of health and 
working conditions of Insured Persons in such manner as  may be specified in the regulations.  
40. Provision of medical treatment by State Government or by Corporation. — (1) The State 
Government shall provide for Insured Persons and (where such  benefit is extended to their families) their 
families in the State, reasonable medical, surgical  and obstetric treatment:  
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Corporation, arrange  for medical 
treatment at clinics of medical pra ctitioners on such scale and subject to such  terms and conditions as may 
be agreed upon.  
(2) Where the incidence of sickness benefit payment to Insured Persons in any State  is found to exceed 
the all -India average, the amount of such excess shall be shared  between  the Corporation and the State 
Government in such proportion as may be fixed by agreement  between them:  
Provided that the Corporation may in any case waive the recovery of the whole or  any part of the share 
which is to be borne by the State Governm ent. 37 
 (3) The Corporation may enter into an agreement with a State Government in regard  to the nature and 
scale of the medical treatment that should be provided to Insured Persons  and (where such medical benefit 
is extended to the families) their families (including  provision of buildings, equipment, medicines, and 
staff) and for the sharing of the cost  thereof and of any excess in the incidence of sickness benefit to Insured 
Persons between  the Corporation and the State Government.  
(4) In default of agreem ent between the Corporation and any State Government as  aforesaid, the nature 
and extent of the medical treatment to be provided by the State  Government and the proportion in which 
the cost thereof and of the excess in the incidence  of sickness benefit sha ll be shared between the 
Corporation and that Government, shall be  determined by an arbitrator who shall be appointed by the 
Central Government in  consultation with the State Government.  
(5) The State Government may, in addition to the Corporation under th is Code, with  the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish such organisation (by whatever  name called) to provide for 
certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and  employment injury:  
Provided that any reference to the State  Government in this Code relating to this  Chapter shall also 
include reference to the organisation as and when such organisation is  established by the State Government.  
(6) The organisation referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall have such structure, discharg e functions, 
exercise powers and undertake such activities as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(7) The Corporation may establish and maintain in a State such hospitals, dispensaries  and other 
medical and surgical services as it may think fit fo r the benefit of Insured Persons  and (where such medical 
benefit is extended to their families), their families.  
(8) The Corporation may enter into agreement with any local authority, private body  or individual in 
regard to the provision of medical treatment and attendance for Insured  Persons and (where such medical 
benefit is extended to their families) their families, in  any area and sharing the cost thereof.  
(9) The Corporation may also enter into agreement with any local authority, local  body or private body 
for commissioning and running Employees' State Insurance hospitals  through third party participation for 
providing medical treatment and attendance to Insured  Persons and (where such medical benefit has been 
extended to their families), to the ir families.  
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Chapter, the  Corporation may, 
in consultation with the State Government, undertake the responsibility  for providing medical benefit to 
Insured Persons and (where such medic al benefit is extended  to their families), to the families of such 
Insured Persons in the State subject to the condition  that the State Government shall share the cost of such 
medical benefit in such proportion  as may be agreed upon between the State Gover nment and the 
Corporation.  
(11) In the event of the Corporation exercising its power under sub -section ( 10), the  provisions relating 
to medical benefit under this Chapter shall apply, so far as may be, as if  a reference therein to the State 
Government were  a reference to the Corporation.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, in respect of establishments  located in the States 
where medical benefit is provided by the Corporation, the Central  Government shall be the appropriate 
Government.  
41. General provisions as to benefits. —(1) Save as may be provided in the regulations, no person 
shall be entitled to  commute for a lump sum any disablement benefit admissible under this Chapter.  
(2) Save as may be provided in the regulations, no person shall be entitled to sickness  benefit or 
disablement benefit for temporary disablement on any day on which he works or  remains on leave or on a 
holiday in respect of which he receives wages or on any day on  which he remains on strike.  
(3) A person who is in rece ipt of sickness benefit or disablement benefit (other than  benefit granted on 
permanent disablement) — 38 
 (a) shall remain under medical treatment at a dispensary, hospital, clinic or other  institution provided 
under this Chapter, and shall carry out the inst ructions given by  the medical officer or medical attendant 
in-charge thereof;  
(b) shall not while under treatment do anything which might retard or prejudice  his chances of 
recovery;  
(c) shall not leave the area in which medical treatment provided by this Chapter  is being given, 
without the permission of the medical officer, medical attendant or  such other authority as may be 
specified in this behalf by the regulations; and  
(d) shall allow himself to be examined by any duly appointed medical officer or othe r person 
authorised by the Corporation in this behalf.  
(4) An Insured Person shall not be entitled to receive for the same period — 
(a) both sickness benefit and maternity benefit; or  
(b) both sickness benefit and disablement benefit for temporary disablement;  or 
(c) both maternity benefit and disablement benefit for temporary disablement.  
(5) Where a person is entitled to more than one of the benefits mentioned in  sub-section ( 4), he shall be 
entitled to choose which benefit he shall receive.  
(6) If a person dies during any period for which he is entitled to a cash benefit under  this Chapter, the 
amount of such benefit up to and including the day of his death shall be  paid to any person nominated by 
the deceased person in writing in such form as may  be specified in the regulations or, if there is no such 
nomination, to the heir or legal  representative of the deceased person.  
(7) (a) Any person eligible for availing dependant or disablement benefit under this  Chapter shall not 
be entitled to claim Emp loyees’ Compensation from his employer under  Chapter VII.  
(b) Any women employee eligible for availing maternity benefit under this Chapter  shall not be entitled 
to claim maternity benefit from her employer under Chapter VI.  
(8) Where any person has receiv ed any benefit or payment under this Chapter when  he is not lawfully 
entitled thereto, he shall be liable to repay to the Corporation the value  of the benefit or the amount of such 
payment, or in the case of death, his legal representative  shall be liable to repay the same from the assets of 
the deceased devolved on him.  
(9) The value of any benefits received other than cash payments shall be determined  by such authority 
as may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf and the decision  of such aut hority shall be final.  
(10) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered in the manner  specified under 
sections 129 to 132.  
42. Corporation’s rights when an employer fails to register, etc. — (1) If any employer, — 
(a) fails or neglects to insure under section 28, an employee at the time of his  appointment or within 
such extended period as may be prescribed by the Central  Government, as a result of which the 
employee becomes disentitled to any benefit  under this Chapter; or  
(b) insures under  section 28, an employee on or after the date of accident which  resulted in personal 
injury to such employee which has the effect of making such  employee disentitled to receive any 
dependant benefit or disablement benefit from  the Corporation; or  
(c) fails  or neglects to pay any contribution which under this Chapter he is  liable to pay in respect of 
any employee and by reason thereof such employee becomes  disentitled to any benefit or becomes 
entitled to a benefit on a lower scale,   
then, the Corporation may, on being satisfied in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government that the 
benefit is payable to the employee, pay to the employee benefit at  such rate to which he is entitled or would 
have been entitled if the failure or neglect would  not have oc curred, and the Corporation shall be entitled 
to recover from the employer,  subject to the employer being given an opportunity of being heard, the 39 
 capitalised value of  the benefit paid to the employee, to be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government:  
Provided that the capitalised value to be calculated may be adjusted for the payment  of any contribution 
and interest or damages that the employer is liable to pay for delay in  the payment of or non -payment of 
such contribution.  
(2) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered as if it were an arrear  of land revenue 
or recovered in the manner specified under sections 129 to 132.  
43. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc., for excessive sickness benefit. — (1) Where the 
Corporation considers that the incidence of sickness among Insured  Persons is excessive by reason of — 
(a) insanitary working conditions in a factory or other establishment or the  neglect of the owner or 
occupier of the factory or other establis hment to observe any  health regulations enjoined on him by or 
under any enactment for the time being in  force, or  
(b) insanitary conditions of any tenements or lodgings occupied by Insured  Persons and such 
insanitary conditions are attributable to the neglect of the owner of  the tenements or lodgings to observe 
any health regulations enjoined on him by or  under any enactments for the time being in force,  
then, the Corporation may send to the owner or occupier of the factory or other establishment  or to the 
owner of the tenements or lodgings, as the case may be, a claim for the payment of  the amount of the extra 
expenditure incurred by the Corporation as sickness benefit; and if  the claim is not settled by agreement, 
the Corporation may refer the matter, with a statement  in support of its claim, to the appropriate 
Government.  
(2) If the appropriate Government is of the opinion that a prima facie case for inquiry  is made out, it 
may appoint a competent person or persons to hold an inquiry into the  matter re ferred under sub -section 
(1). 
(3) If upon inquiry under sub -section ( 2), it is proved to the satisfaction of the person  or persons holding 
the inquiry that the excess in incidence of sickness among the Insured  Persons is due to the default or neglect 
of the owner or occupier of the factory or other  establishment or the owner of the tenements or lodgings, as 
the case may be, the said  person or persons shall determine, the amount of the extra expenditure incurred 
as sickness  benefit as well as the person or p ersons by whom the whole or any part of such amount  shall be 
paid to the Corporation.  
(4) A determination under sub -section ( 3) may be enforced as if it were a decree for  payment of money 
passed in a suit by a Civil Court.  
(5) For the purposes of this sect ion, “owner ” of tenements or lodgings shall include  any agent of the 
owner and any person who is entitled to collect the rent of the tenements  or lodgings as a lessee of the 
owner.  
44. Scheme for other beneficiaries. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central 
Government  may, by notification, frame, amend, vary or rescind scheme for other beneficiaries and the  
members of their families for providing medical facility in any hospital established by the  Corporation in 
any area which is und erutilised on payment of user charges, and prescribe  the terms and conditions subject 
to which the scheme may be operated.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “other beneficiaries ” means persons other than employees insured under  section 2 8; 
(b) “underutilised hospital ” means any hospital not fully utilised by the  employees insured under 
section 28; and  
(c) “user charges ” means the amount which is to be charged from other  beneficiaries for medical 
facilities as may be specified in the regulations after prior  approval of the Central Government.  
45. Schemes for unorganized workers, gig workers and platform workers. — (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Government  may, by notification, frame scheme for 40 
 unorga nised workers, gig workers and platform  workers and the members of their families for providing 
benefits admissible under this  Chapter by the Corporation.  
(2) The contribution, user charges, scale of benefits, qualifying and eligibility  conditions and othe r 
terms and conditions subject to which the scheme may be operated  shall be such as may be specified in the 
scheme.  
46. Exemption of factories or other establishments belonging to Government or any local 
authority .—The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Corporation, by  notification and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt  any factory or other establishment 
belonging to the Government or any local authority,  from the operation of this Chapter if t he employees in 
any such factory or other establishment  are otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior 
to the benefits provided  under this Chapter.  
47. Contributions, etc., due to Corporation to have priority over other debts. —Notwi thstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  any amount due under this Chapter shall be 
the charge on the assets of the establishment  to which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance 
with the provisions of the  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 
48. Constitution of Employees’ Insurance Court. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification, 
constitute an Employees' Insurance  Court for such local area as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The Employees’ Insurance Court shall consist of such number of Judges as the  State Government 
may think fit.  
(3) Any person who is or has been a judicial officer or is a legal practitioner of five  years' standing shall 
be qualified to be a Judge of the Emp loyees' Insurance Court.  
(4) The State Government may appoint the same Court for two or more local areas or  two or more 
Employees’ Insurance Courts for the same local area.  
(5) Where more than one Employees’ Insurance Court has been appointed for the  same local area, the 
State Government may by general or special order regulate the distribution  of business between them.  
49.Matters to be decided by Employees’ Insurance Court .—(1) If any question or dispute or claim 
arises as to — 
(a) whether any person is an employee within the meaning of this Code relating  to this Chapter or 
whether he is liable to pay the employee's contribution; or  
(b) the rate of wages or average daily wages of an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter; or  
(c) the rate of contribution p ayable by an employer in respect of any employee  under this Chapter; or  
(d) the person who is or was the employer in respect of any employee for the  purposes of this Chapter; 
or 
(e) the right of any person to any benefit under this Chapter and as to the  amount and duration thereof; 
or 
(f) any direction issued by the Corporation on a review of any payment of  dependants' benefit under 
this Chapter; or  
(g) any other matter which is in dispute between an employer and the Corporation  relating to this 
Chapter, or between an employer and a Contractor relating to this  Chapter or between a person and the 
Corporation relating to this Chapter or between  an employee and an employer or Contractor relating to 
this Chapter, in respect of any  contribution or benefit or ot her dues payable or recoverable under this 
Code relating  to this Chapter; or  
(h) claim for the recovery of contributions from the employer under this Code  relating to this Chapter; 
or 
(i) claim under sub -section ( 8) of section 41 for the recovery of the value or  amount of the benefits 
received by a person when he is not lawfully entitled thereto;  or 41 
 (j) claim against an employer under section 42; or  
(k) order of the appellate authority under section 126 in respect of Chapter IV;  or 
(l) claim by an employe r to recover contributions from any contractor under  this Code relating to this 
Chapter; or  
(m) any other claim for the recovery of any benefit admissible under this Chapter,  such matter shall 
be decided by the Employers' Insurance Court.  
(2) No matter whi ch is in dispute between an employer and the Corporation in respect  of any 
contribution or any other dues under this Chapter shall be raised by the employer in  the Employees' 
Insurance Court unless he has deposited with that Court fifty per cent. of  the am ount due from him as 
claimed by the Corporation:  
Provided that the Employees' Insurance Court may, for reasons to be recorded in  writing, waive or 
reduce the amount to be deposited under this sub -section.  
(3) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decid e or deal with any question or  dispute as specified in 
sub-section ( 1) or to adjudicate on any liability which by or under  this Code relating to this Chapter is to be 
decided by a medical board, or by a medical appeal  tribunal or by the Employees' Insuranc e Court.  
50. Powers of Employees’ Insurance Court. — (1) The Employees' Insurance Court shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court for  the purposes of summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses, 
compelling the  discovery and production of documents and material objects, administering oath and  
recording evidence and such court shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the meaning  of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(2) The Employees' Insurance Court sh all follow such procedure as may be prescribed  by the State 
Government.  
(3) All costs incidental to any proceeding before an Employees' Insurance Court  shall, subject to such 
rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government, be in the  discretion  of that court.  
(4) An order of the Employees' Insurance Court shall be enforceable by it as if it were  a decree passed 
in a suit by a Civil Court.  
51. Proceedings of Employees’ Insurance Courts. —(1) The manner of commencement of 
proceedings before the Employees’ Insurance  Court, fees and procedure thereof shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that the limitation for initiating the proceedings by the aggrieved person in  the Employees' 
Insurance Court shall be three ye ars from the date on which the cause of  action arises:  
Provided further that the “arising of cause of action ” in respect of a claim by the  Insured Person or 
dependants; by the Corporation for recovering contribution (including  interests and damages) from t he 
employer; and the claim by the employer for recovering  contributions from a Contractor and the time within 
which such claims, recovery or  contribution, from employer by the Corporation and recovery of 
contribution by the employer  from the Contractor, shall be as specified in the regulations.  
(2) Any application, appearance or act required to be made or done by any person to,  or before, an 
Employees' Insurance Court (other than appearance of a person required for  the purpose of his examination 
as a witn ess) may be made or done by a legal practitioner or  by an officer of a registered trade union 
authorised in writing by such person or with the  permission of that Court, by any other person so authorised.  
(3) An Employees' Insurance Court may submit any que stion of law for the decision  of the High Court 
and if it does so shall decide the question pending before it in accordance  with such decision.  
52. Appeal to High Court. — (1) Save as expressly provided in this section, no appeal shall lie from 
an order of  an Employees' Insurance Court.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of an Employees' Insurance  Court, if it involves 
a substantial question of law.  42 
 (3) The appeal shall be filed under this section within a period of sixty days from the  date of the order 
made by the Employees' Insurance Court.  
(4) The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963)  shall apply to  appeals 
under this section.  
(5) Where the Corporation has presented an appeal against an order of the Employees'  Insurance Court, 
that Court may, and if so directed by the High Court, shall, pending the  decision of the appeal, withhold the 
payment of any sum directed to be paid by the order  appealed against.  
CHAPTER V  
GRATUITY  
53. Payment of gra tuity. — (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his 
employment  after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years, — 
(a) on his superannuation; or  
(b) on his retirement or resignation; or  
(c) on his death or disablement du e to accident or disease; or  
(d) on termination of his contract period under fixed term employment; or  
(e) on happening of any such event as may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided that in case of working journalist as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the  Working 
Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Condition of Service) and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1955  (45 of 1955) , the expression “five years ” occurring in this  sub-section shall be deemed to be three 
years:  
Provided further tha t the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be  necessary where 
the termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or  disablement or expiration of fixed 
term employment or happening of any such event as  may be notified by t he Central Government:  
Provided also that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to him shall  be paid to his 
nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where any  such nominees or heirs is a minor, 
the share of such minor,  shall be deposited with the  competent authority as may be notified by the 
appropriate Government who shall invest  the same for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other 
financial institution, as may be  prescribed by the appropriate Government, until  such minor attains majority.  
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the  employer shall pay 
gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days' wages or such  number of days as may be notified by the 
Central Govern ment, based on the rate of wages  last drawn by the employee concerned:  
Provided that in the case of a piece -rated employee, daily wages shall be computed  on the average of 
the total wages received by him for a period of three months immediately  preceding the termination of his 
employment, and, for this purpose, the wages paid for any  overtime work shall not be taken into account:  
Provided further that in the case of an employee who is employed in a seasonal  establishment and who 
is not so employed througho ut the year, the employer shall pay the  gratuity at the rate of seven days' wages 
for each season:  
Provided also that in the case of an employee employed on fixed term employment or  a deceased 
employee, the employer shall pay gratuity on pro rata basis.  
(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not exceed such amount as  may be notified by 
the Central Government.  
(4) For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an employee who is employed,  after his 
disablement, on reduced wages, his wa ges for the period preceding his disablement  shall be taken to be the 
wages received by him during that period, and his wages for the  period subsequent to his disablement shall 
be taken to be the wages as so reduced.  43 
 (5) Nothing in this section shall affec t the right of an employee to receive better terms  of gratuity under 
any award or agreement or contract with the employer.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have been terminated for any act, wilful omission or 
negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of,  property belonging to the employer, shall 
be forfeited to the extent of the damage or  loss so caused;  
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee may be wholly or partiall y forfeited — 
(i) if the services of such employee have been terminated for his riotous  or disorderly conduct or 
any other act of violence on his part, or  
(ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act  which constitutes an offence 
involving moral turpitude, provided such offence  is committed by him in the course of his employment.  
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this Chapter, employee does not include any  such person who 
holds a post under the Central Government or a State Governm ent and is  governed by any other Act or by 
any rules providing for payment of gratuity.  
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section, disablement means such disablement  as incapacitates 
an employee for the work which he was capable of performing before  the accident or disease, resulting in 
such disablement.  
Explanation 3.— For the purposes of this section, it is clarified that in the case of a  monthly rated 
employee, the fifteen days' wages shall be calculated by dividing the monthly  rate of wages last drawn by 
him by twenty -six and multiplying the quotient by fifteen.  
54. Continuous service. —For the purposes of this Chapter, —(A) an employee shall be said to be in 
continuous service for a period if he has,  for that period, been in uninterrupted service, including service 
which may be  interrupted on account of sickness, accident, leave, absence from duty without leave  (not 
being absence in respect of which an order treating the absence as break in  service has been passed in 
accordance with the standing ord ers, rules or regulations  governing the employees of the establishment), 
lay-off, strike or a lock -out or cessation  of work not due to any fault of the employee, whether such 
uninterrupted or interrupted  service was rendered before or after the commencemen t of this Code;  
(B) where an employee (not being an employee employed in a seasonal  establishment) is not in 
continuous service within the meaning of clause ( A), for any  period of one year or six months, he shall be 
deemed to be in continuous service  under  the employer — 
(a) for the said period of one year, if the employee during the period of  twelve calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation  is to be made, has actually worked under the 
employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundred and ninety days, in the case of any employee  employed below the ground in a 
mine or in an establishment which works  for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for the said period of six months, if the empl oyee during the period of  six calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which the calculation  is to be made, has actually worked under the 
employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of an employee employed below the  ground in a mine or in an 
establishment which works for less than six  days in a week; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, the number of days on  which an employee has 
actually worked under an employe r shall include the  days on which — 44 
 (i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by  standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders)  Act, 1946  (20 of 1946) , or under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or und er any other  law applicable to the establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages, earned in the previous  year;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by  accident arising out of and in the 
course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so,  however, that the total period of 
such maternity leave does not exceed  twenty -six weeks;  
(C) where an employee, employed in a seasonal establishment, is not in  continuous service within the 
mean ing of clause ( A), for any period of one year or six  months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous 
service under the employer for such  period if he has actually worked for not less than seventy -five per cent. 
of the number  of days on which the establishme nt was in operation during such period.  
55.  Nomination. —(1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service, shall make, a 
nomination  within such time, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed by the appropriate  
Government.  
(2) An employ ee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity payable to  him under this 
Chapter amongst more than one nominee.  
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination  shall be made in 
favour of one or more members of his family, and any nomination made  by such employee in favour of a 
person who is not a member of his family shall be void.  
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the nomination  may be made in 
favour of any person or persons but if the employee subsequently acquires  a family, such nomination shall 
forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make,  within such time as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government, a fresh nomination  in favour of one or more members  of his family.  
(5) A nomination may, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), be modified  by an employee 
at any time, after giving to his employer a written intimation in such form  and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate G overnment, of his intention  to do so.  
(6) If a nominee predeceases the employee, the interest of the nominee shall revert to  the employee 
who shall make a fresh nomination, in the form prescribed by the appropriate  Government, in respect of 
such interest.  
(7) Every nomination, fresh nomination or alteration of nomination, as the case may  be, shall be sent 
by the employee to his employer, who shall keep the same in his safe  custody.  
56. Determination of amount of gratuity. —(1) A person who is eligible for pa yment of gratuity under 
this Chapter or any  person authorised, in writing, to act on his behalf shall send a written application to the  
employer, within such time and in such form, as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government, for 
payment of such gratuity.  
(2) As soon as gratuity becomes payable, the employer shall, whether an application  referred to in sub -
section ( 1) has been made or not, determine the amount of gratuity and  give notice in writing to the person 
to whom the gratuity is payable and  also to the competent  authority specifying the amount of gratuity so 
determined.  
(3) The employer shall arrange to pay the amount of gratuity within thirty days from  the date it becomes 
payable to the person to whom the gratuity is payable.  
(4) If the amo unt of gratuity payable under sub -section ( 3) is not paid by the employer  within the period 
specified in sub -section ( 3), the employer shall pay, from the date on  which the gratuity becomes payable 
to the date on which it is paid, simple interest at such  rate, not exceeding the rate notified by the Central 
Government from time to time for  repayment of long term deposits:  45 
 Provided that no such interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to  the fault of the 
employee and the employer has obtai ned permission in writing from the  competent authority for the delayed 
payment on this ground.  
(5) (a) If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity payable to an employee  under this Chapter or 
as to the admissibility of any claim of, or in relation  to, an employee  for payment of gratuity, or as to the 
person entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer  shall deposit with the competent authority such amount 
as he admits to be payable by him  as gratuity.  
(b) Where there is a dispute with regard to a ny matter or matters specified in  clause ( a), the employer 
or employee or any other person raising the dispute may make an  application to the competent authority in 
the form prescribed by the appropriate Government  for deciding the dispute.  
(c) The compete nt authority shall, after due inquiry and after giving the parties to the  dispute a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the matter or matters in dispute  and if, as a result of such 
inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the employee, the  competent authority shall direct the 
employer to pay such amount or, as the case may be,  such amount as reduced by the amount already 
deposited by the employer.  
(d) The competent authority shall pay the amount deposited, including the excess  amount, if an y, 
deposited by the employer, to the person entitled thereto.  
(e) As soon as may be after a deposit is made under clause ( a), the competent authority  shall pay the 
amount of the deposit — 
(i) to the applicant where he is the employee; or  
(ii) where the appl icant is not the employee, to the nominee or, as the case may  be, the guardian of 
such nominee or heir of the employee if the competent authority is  satisfied that there is no dispute as 
to the right of the applicant to receive the amount  of gratuity.  
(6) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under sub -section ( 5), the competent  authority shall have 
the same powers as are vested in a court, while trying a suit, under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 
1908) , in respect of the following matters, name ly:— 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.  
(7) Any inquiry under this section shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of  section 193, 
section 228 and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(8) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 5) may, within sixty days  from the date of the 
receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the appropriate Government or  such other authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may  be, m ay, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring  the appeal within the said 
period of sixty days, extend the said period by a further period of  sixty days:  
Provided further that no appeal by an employer shall be a dmitted unless at the time  of preferring the 
appeal, the appellant either produces a certificate of the competent authority  to the effect that the appellant 
has deposited with him an amount equal to the amount of  gratuity required to be deposited under sub -
section ( 5), or deposits with the appellate  authority such amount.  
(9) The appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may be, may,  after giving the 
parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm,  modify, or reve rse the decision of 
the competent authority.  46 
 57. Compulsory insurance. —(1) With effect from such date as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government  in this behalf, every employer, other than an employer or an establishment belonging to, or  
under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, shall, subject to the  provisions of sub -
section ( 2), obtain an insurance in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government, for his liability for 
payment towards the gratuity under this Chapter, fr om any insurance company regulated by the Authority 
as defined under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999  (41 of 1999) : 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different estab lishments or class  of establishments 
or for different areas.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed  by the Central 
Government, exempt any employer who had already established an approved  gratuity fund in respect  of his 
employees and who desires to continue such arrangement,  and every employer employing five hundred or 
more persons who establishes an approved  gratuity fund in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government from the provisions of  sub-section ( 1). 
(3) For the purposes of effectively implementing the provisions of this section, every  employer shall 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government get his  establishment registered with the 
competent authority in the manner prescribed by t he appropriate Government and no employer shall be 
registered under the provisions of this section unless he has taken an insurance referred to in sub -section 
(1) or has established an  approved gratuity fund referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The appropriate Government may provide for the composition of the Board of  Trustees of the 
approved gratuity fund and for the recovery by the competent authority of  the amount of the gratuity payable 
to an employee from the insurer with whom an insurance  has b een taken under sub -section ( 1), or as the 
case may be, the Board of Trustees of the  approved gratuity fund, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where an employer fails to make any payment by way of premium in respect of the  insurance 
referred to in s ub-section ( 1) or by way of contribution to an approved gratuity  fund referred to in  
sub-section ( 2), he shall be liable to pay the amount of gratuity due under  this Chapter (including interest, 
if any, for delayed payments) forthwith to the competent  authority.  
Explanation. — In this section, “approved gratuity fund ” shall have the same meaning  as assigned to it 
in sub -section ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) . 
58. Competent authority. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint any officer 
of that  Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by that  Government to 
be a competent authority for implementation of any provision of this Chapter  for such area as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) Where more than one competent authority has been appointed for any area, the  appropriate 
Government may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business  among them.  
(3) Any competent authority may, for the purpose of de ciding any matter referred to  him for decision 
under this Chapter, choose one or more persons possessing special  knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under reference to assist him in holding the  inquiry relating thereto.  
CHAPTER VI  
MATERNITY BENE FIT 
59. Emplo yment of, or work by, women prohibited during certain period .—(1) No employer shall 
knowingly employ a woman in any establishment during the  six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery, miscarriage or medical termination  of pregnancy.  
(2) No woman shall work in any establishment during the six weeks immediately  following the day of 
her delivery, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 62, no pregnant woman shall, on a request being 
made by her in this behalf, be required by her employer to do, during the  period specified in sub -section 
(4), any work which is of an arduous nature or which  involves long hours of standing or which in any way 47 
 is likely to interfere with h er pregnancy  or the normal development of the foetus or is likely to cause her 
miscarriage or otherwise to  adversely affect her health.  
(4) The period referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be — 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the period of six weeks,  before the date of her 
expected delivery;  
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks for which the pregnant  woman does not avail of 
leave of absence under section 62.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “any work of arduous  nature ” shall mean 
any work which involve or require strenuous effort or is difficult and  tiring in nature.  
60. Right to payment of maternity benefit. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Code, every 
woman shall be entitled to,  and h er employer shall be liable for, the payment of maternity benefit at the rate 
of the  average daily wage for the period of her actual absence, that is to say, the period immediately  
preceding the day of her delivery, and any period immediately following tha t day.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “the average daily wage ” means  the average of the 
woman's wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked  during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from whi ch she  absents herself on account of maternity, subject to 
the minimum rate of wage fixed or  revised under the Code on Wages, 2019  (29 of 2019) . 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she has actually worked in  an establishment 
of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of  not less than eighty days in the 
twelve months immediately preceding the date of her  expected delivery.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of calculating the period under this sub -section,  the da ys on which a 
woman has actually worked in the establishment, the days for which  she has been laid off or was on holidays 
declared under any law for the time being in force  to be holidays with wages, during the period of twelve 
months immediately preceding  the expected date of her delivery shall be taken into account.  
(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit  shall be twenty -
six weeks of which not more than eight weeks shall precede the expected  date of her delivery:  
Provided that the maximum period entitled to maternity benefit by a woman having  two or more 
surviving children shall be twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks  shall precede the date of her 
expected delivery:  
Provided further that where a woman dies  during this period, the maternity benefit  shall be payable 
only for the days up to and including the day of her death:  
Provided also that where a woman, having been delivered of a child, dies during her  delivery or during 
the period immediately following the date of her delivery for which she  is entitled for the maternity benefit, 
leaving behind in either case the child, the employer  shall be liable for the maternity benefit for that entire 
period but if the child also dies  during the said period, then, fo r the days up to and including the date of the 
death of the  child.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this sub -section, “child ” includes a stillborn  child.  
(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the age of three months or a  commissioning mother 
shall be entitled to maternity benefit for a period of twelve weeks  from the date the child is handed over to 
the adopting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be.  
(5) In case the work assigned to a woman is of such nature that she may work from  home, the employer 
may allow her to do so after availing of the maternity benefit for such  period and on such conditions as the 
employer and the woman may mutually agree.  
61. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. — Every woman entitle d to the 
payment of maternity benefit under this Chapter,  shall, notwithstanding the application of Chapter IV to 
the factory or other establishment  in which she is employed, continue to be so entitled until she becomes 
qualified to claim  maternity benefit  under section 32.  48 
 62. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof. —(1) Any woman employed in an 
establishment and entitled to maternity benefit  under the provisions of this Chapter may give notice in 
writing in such form as may be  prescribed  by the Central Government, to her employer, stating that her 
maternity benefit  and any other amount to which she may be entitled under this Chapter may be paid to her 
or to such person as she may nominate in the notice and that she will not work in any  establishment during 
the period for which she receives maternity benefit.  
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall state the date from  which she will be 
absent from work, not being a date earlier than eight weeks from the date  of her exp ected delivery.  
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she was pregnant may give such  notice as soon as 
possible after her delivery.  
(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such woman to absent herself  from the 
establishment during  the period for which she receives the maternity benefit.  
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period preceding the date of her expected  delivery shall be 
paid in advance by the employer to the woman on production of such  proof as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government that the woman is pregnant, and  the amount due for the subsequent period shall be 
paid by the employer to the woman  within forty -eight hours of production of such proof as may be 
prescribed by the Central  Government that the woman  has been delivered of a child.  
(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not disentitle a woman to  maternity benefit or any 
other amount under this Chapter if she is otherwise entitled to  such benefit or amount and in any such case 
an Inspec tor-cum-Facilitator may either of his  own motion or on an application made to him by the woman, 
order the payment of such  benefit or amount within such period as may be specified in the order.  
63. Payment  of maternity benefit in case of death of a woman .—If a woman entitled to maternity 
benefit or any other amount under this Chapter,  dies before receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or 
where the employer is liable for  maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 60, 
the em ployer  shall pay such benefit or amount to the person nominated by the woman in the notice given  
under section 62 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative.  
64. Payment of medical bonus. —Every woman entitled to maternity benefit und er this Chapter shall 
also be entitled  to receive from her employer a medical bonus of three thousand five hundred rupees or  such 
amount as may be notified by the Central Government, if no pre -natal confinement  and post -natal care is 
provided for by the em ployer free of charge.  
65. Leave for miscarriage etc. —(1) In case of miscarriage, or medical termination of pregnancy, a 
woman shall, on  production of such proof as may be prescribed by the Central Government, be entitled to  
leave with wages at the rate of  maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks immediately  following the day 
of her miscarriage or, as the case may be, her medical termination of  pregnancy.  
(2) In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, on production of such proof as  may be prescribed  
by the Central Government, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate  of maternity benefit for a period of 
two weeks immediately following the day of her  tubectomy operation.  
(3) A woman suffering from illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, prematur e birth of child, 
miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy shall, on production of  such proof as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government, be entitled, in addition to the  period of absence allowed to her under section 
62, or, as the case may be, under  sub-section ( 1), to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a 
maximum period of  one month.  
66.Nursing breaks. —Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after such delivery shall, 
in addition to the interval for rest allowed to her, be allowed in the course of her daily work two  breaks of 
such duration as may be prescribed by the Central Government, for nursing the  child until the child attains 
the age of fifteen months.  
67. Creche facility. —(1) Every establishment to which th is Chapter applies, in which fifty employees 
or such number of employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, are employed shall have 49 
 the facility of crèche within such distance as may be prescribed by the Central  Government, either 
separately o r along with common facilities:  
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the crèche by the woman,  which shall also 
include the intervals of rest allowed to her:  
Provided further that an establishment may avail common crèche facility of the Central  Government, 
State Government, municipality or private entity or provided by non -Governmental organisation or by any 
other organisation or group of establishments who  may pool their resources for setting up of common crèche 
in the manner as they  may agree  for such purpose.  
(2) Every establishment to which this Chapter applies shall intimate in writing and  electronically to 
every woman at the time of her initial appointment in such establishment  regarding every benefit available 
under this Chapter.  
68. Dismissal for absence during pregnancy. —(1) When a woman absents herself from work in 
accordance with the provisions  of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dismiss 
her during or  on account of such absence or to give notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day that  the 
notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the  conditions of her service:  
Provided that the discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time during her pregnancy,  if the woman 
but for such discharge or dismissal would have been entitled to maternity  benefit or medical bonus under 
this Chapter, shall not have the effect of depriving her of  the maternity benefit or medical bonus:  
Provided further that where the dismis sal is for any gross misconduct as may be  prescribed by the 
Central Government, the employer may, by order in writing,  communicated to the woman, deprive her of 
the maternity benefit or medical bonus, or  both.  
(2) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or  medical bonus, or both, or discharged  or dismissed 
under sub -section ( 1), may, within sixty days from the date on which order of  such deprivation or discharge 
or dismissal is communicated to her, appeal to the competent  authority, and the decision of that  authority 
on such appeal, whether the woman should or  should not be deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus 
or both, or discharged or  dismissed, shall be final.  
69. No deduction of wages in certain cases. —No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages 
of a woman entitled to  maternity benefit under the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by reason only 
of— 
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of the provisions contained in  section 59; or  
(b) breaks for nursing the child allow ed to her under the provisions of  section 66.  
70. Forfeiture of maternity benefit. —A woman who works for remuneration during the period she 
has been permitted  by an employer to absent herself for availing the maternity benefits provided under this  
Chapter shall not be entitled to receive maternity benefit for such period.  
71. Duties of employer. —An abstract of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules relating thereto 
in the  language or languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place by the  employer in 
every part of the establishment in which women are employed.  
72. Power of Inspector -cum-Facilitator to direct payments to be made. —(1) Any woman claiming 
that,— 
(a) maternity benefit or any other amount to which she is entitled under thi s Chapter and any person 
claiming that payment due under this Chapter has been  improperly withheld;  
(b) her employer has discharged or dismissed her during or on account of her  absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,  
may make a  complaint to the Inspector -cum-Facilitator.  
(2) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may, on receipt of a complaint referred to in  sub-section ( 1), make 
an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that — 50 
 (a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made  in accordance with 
his order in writing;  
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on account of her absence  from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,  
may pass such orders as he deems just and proper according to the circumstances of the  case.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Inspector -cum-Facilitator under  sub-section ( 2) may, 
within thirty days from the date on which such order is communicated  to such person, appeal to the authorit y 
prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(4) The decision of the authority referred to in sub -section ( 3), where an appeal has  been preferred to it 
under that sub -section or of the Inspector -cum-Facilitator where no  such appeal has been preferred, shall  
be final.  
CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYEE'S COMPENSATION  
73. Reports of fatal accident s and serious bodily injuries. —(1) Where, by any law for the time being 
in force, notice is required to be given to  any authority, by or on behalf of an employer, of any accident 
occurring in his premises  which results in death or serious bodily injury, the person required to give the 
notice shall,  within seven days of the death or serious bodily injury, send a report to the competent  authority 
giving the circumstances attending th e death or serious bodily injury:  
Provided that where the State Government has so specified, the person required to  give the notice may 
instead of sending such report to the competent authority send it to the  authority to whom he is required to 
give the no tice. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “serious bodily injury ” means  an injury which 
involves, or in all probability will involve the permanent loss of the use of,  or permanent injury to, any 
limb, or the permanent loss of or injury to th e sight or hearing,  or the fracture of any limb, or the enforced 
absence of the injured person from work for a  period exceeding twenty days.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, extend the provisions of  sub-section ( 1) to any class of 
premises other than those coming within the scope of that  sub-section, and may, by such notification, 
specify the persons who shall send the report  to the competent authority.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to establishments to which Chapter IV, relating  to Employees' 
State Insurance Corporation, applies.  
74. Employer’s liability for compensation. —(1) If personal injury is caused to an employee by 
accident or an occupational  disease listed in the Third Schedule arising out of and in the course of his 
employ ment, his  employer shall be liable to pay compensation in accordance with the provisions of this  
Chapter:  
Provided that the employer shall not be so liable — 
(a) in respect of such injury which does not result in the total or partial  disablement of the employee 
for a period exceeding three days; and  
(b) in respect of such injury, not resulting in death or permanent total disablement  caused by an 
accident which is directly attributable to — 
(i) the employee having been at the time thereof under the influen ce of  drink or drugs, or  
(ii) the wilful disobedience of the employee to an order expressly given,  or to a rule expressly 
framed, for the purpose of securing the safety of employees,  or 
(iii) the wilful removal or disregard by the employee of any safety guard  or other device which he 
knew to have been provided for the purpose of securing  the safety of employee.  
(2) An accident or an occupational disease referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  deemed to arise out of 
and in the course of an employee's emplo yment notwithstanding  that he is at the time of the accident or at 51 
 the time of contracting the occupational disease,  referred to in that sub -section, acting in contravention of 
the provisions of any law applicable  to him, or of any orders given by or on be half of his employer or that 
he is acting without  instructions from his employer, if — 
(a) such accident or contracting of such occupational disease would have been  deemed so to have 
arisen had the act not been done in contravention as aforesaid or  without instructions from his employer, 
as the case may be; and  
(b) the act is done for the purpose of, and in connection with, the employer's  trade or business.  
(3) If an employee employed in any employment specified in the Second Schedule  contracts any disease 
specified in the Third Schedule, being an occupational disease peculiar  to that employment whilst in the 
service of an employer in whose service he has been  employed for a continuous period of not less than six 
months, then, such disease shall be  deemed to  be an injury by accident within the meaning of this section 
and unless the  contrary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of  
the employment.  
(4) An accident occurring to an employee while commuting from his reside nce to  the place of 
employment for duty or from the place of employment to his residence after  performing duty, shall be 
deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of employment if  nexus between the circumstances, time 
and place in which the accident o ccurred and his  employment is established.  
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, after giving, by notification,  not less than three 
months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification,  modify or add any description of 
employ ment to the employments specified in the Second  Schedule, and occupational diseases specified in 
the Third Schedule and shall specify in  the case of employments so modified or added, the diseases which 
shall be deemed for the  purposes of this section to be  occupational diseases peculiar to those employments  
respectively, and thereupon the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply, in the case of a  notification by the 
Central Government, within the territories to which this Code extends  or, in case of a noti fication by the 
State Government, within that State as if such diseases  had been declared by this Code to be occupational 
diseases peculiar to those employments.  
(6) Save as provided by sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), no compensation shall be payable  to an employee 
in respect of any accident or disease unless the accident or disease is  directly attributable to a specific injury 
by accident or disease arising out of and in the  course of his employment.  
(7) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to confer an y right to compensation  on an employee in 
respect of any accident or disease if he has instituted in a civil court a suit  for damages in respect of the 
accident or disease against the employer or any other person;  and no suit for damages shall be maintaina ble 
by an employee in any Court of law in respect  of such accident or disease — 
(a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in respect of the accident or  disease before a competent 
authority; or  
(b) if an agreement has been made between the employee and his employer  providing for the payment 
of compensation in respect of the accident or disease in  accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
75. Compensation in case of death of or injury in plantation. — If death or injury is caused to any 
worker or  a member of his family as a result of  the collapse of a house provided by the employer in a 
plantation, and the collapse is not  solely and directly attributable to a fault on the part of any occupant of 
the house or to a  natural calamity, the employer sha ll be liable to pay compensation under section 76 and 
the Sixth Schedule, so far as may be applicable.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “worker ” means a  person employed in 
a plantation for hire or reward, whether directly or through any agency,  to do any work, skilled, unskilled, 
manual or clerical, and includes a person employed on  contract for more than sixty days in a year, but does 
not include — 
(i) a medical officer employed in the plantation;  52 
 (ii) any person employed in t he plantation (including any member of the medical  staff) whose 
monthly wages exceed the amount as determined by the appropriate  Government, by notification, from 
time to time;  
(iii) any person employed in the plantation primarily in a managerial or  admini strative capacity, 
notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed the  amount as determined by the appropriate 
Government, by notification, from time to  time;  
(iv) any person temporarily employed in the plantation in any work relating to  the construct ion, 
development or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, drains or  canals.  
76. Amount of compensation. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the amount of 
compensation shall  be,— 
(a) where death results from the injury, an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the  monthly wages of 
the deceased employee multiplied by the relevant factor or an  amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government from time to time, whichever is  more;  
(b) where permanent total disablement results from the injury, a n amount equal  to sixty per cent. of 
the monthly wages of the injured employee multiplied by the  relevant factor or an amount as may be 
notified by the Central Government from time  to time, whichever is more:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by no tification, from time to time, enhance  the amount of 
compensation specified in clauses ( a) and ( b). 
Explanation. —For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), “relevant factor ”, in relation  to an employee 
means the factor specified in column (3) of the Sixth Schedule relating to  factors against the corresponding 
entry in column (2) thereof, specifying the number of  years which are the same as the completed years of 
the age of the employee on his last  birthday immediately preceding the date on which the compens ation fell 
due; 
(c) where permanent partial disablement results from the injury, — 
(i) in the case of an injury specified in Part II of the Fourth Schedule, such  percentage of the 
compensation which would have been payable in the case of  permanent total dis ablement as is 
specified therein as being the percentage of  the loss of earning capacity caused by that injury; and  
(ii) in the case of an injury not specified in the Fourth Schedule, such  percentage of the 
compensation payable in the case of permanent total disablement as is proportionate to the loss of 
earning capacity (as assessed by  the medical practitioner) permanently caused by the injury.  
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this clause, where more injuries than one are  caused by the same 
accident,  the amount of compensation payable under this head shall be  aggregated but not so in any case as 
to exceed the amount which would have been payable  if permanent total disablement had resulted from the 
injuries.  
Explanation 2.—In assessing the loss of earn ing capacity under sub -clause ( ii), the  medical practitioner 
shall have due regard to the percentage of loss of earning capacity in  relation to different injuries specified 
in the Fourth Schedule;  
(d) where temporary disablement, whether total or partial, results from the  injury, a half -monthly 
payment of the sum equivalent to twenty -five per cent. of  monthly wages of the employee, to be paid 
in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 4). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), whi le fixing the amount  of compensation 
payable to an employee in respect of an accident which occurred outside  India, the competent authority 
shall take into account the amount of compensation, if any,  awarded to such employee in accordance with 
the law of t he country in which the accident  occurred and shall reduce the amount fixed by him by the 
amount of compensation awarded  to the employee in accordance with the law of that country.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes o f sub-section ( 1), such 
monthly wages in relation to an employee as it may consider necessary.  53 
 (4) The half -monthly payment referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be  payable on the 
sixteenth day — 
(i) from the date of disablement where such disablement lasts for a period of  twenty -eight days or 
more; or  
(ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from the date of disablement,  where such 
disablement lasts for a period of less than twenty -eight days; and thereafter  half-monthly duri ng the 
disablement or during a period of five years, whichever is  shorter:  
Provided that — 
(a) there shall be deducted from any lump sum or half -monthly payments  to which the employee is 
entitled, the amount of any payment or allowance  which the employee ha s received from the employer 
by way of compensation  during the period of disablement prior to the receipt of such lump sum or of 
the first half -monthly payment, as the case may be, and such payment or allowance  which the employee 
has received from the empl oyer towards his medical  treatment shall not be deemed to be a payment or 
allowance received by him by  way of compensation;  
(b) no half -monthly payment shall in any case exceed the amount, if any,  by which half the amount 
of the monthly wages of the employ ee before the  accident exceeds half the amount of such wages which 
he is earning after the  accident.  
(5) The employee shall be reimbursed, the actual medical expenditure incurred by him  for treatment of 
injuries caused during the course of employment, by h is employer.  
(6) On the ceasing of the disablement before the date on which any half -monthly  payment falls due, 
there shall be payable in respect of that half -month a sum proportionate  to the duration of the disablement 
in that half -month.  
(7) If the injur y of the employee results in his death, the employer shall, in addition to  the compensation 
under sub -section ( 1), deposit with the competent authority a sum of not  less than fifteen thousand rupees 
or such amount as may be prescribed by the State  Government, for payment of the same to the eldest 
surviving dependant of the employee  towards the expenditure of the funeral of such employee or where the 
employee did not  have a dependant or was not living with his dependant at the time of his death, to t he 
person who actually incurred such expenditure:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification from time to time, enhance  the amount 
specified in this sub -section.  
77. Compensation to be paid when due and damages for default. —(1) Compensation under section 
76 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.  
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for compensation to the  extent claimed, he 
shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of  liability which he accepts, and, such 
payment shall be deposited with the competent authority  or made to the employee, as the case may be, 
without prejudice to the right of the employee  to make any further claim.  
(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation due und er this  Chapter within one 
month from the date it fell due, the competent authority shall, — 
(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay  interest at such rate as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, on the amount  due; and  
(b) if in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer  shall, in addition 
to the amount of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum  not exceeding fifty per cent. of such 
amount of arrears by way of damages:  
Provided that an order for the payment of damages shall not be passed under  clause ( b) without giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause as  to why it should not be passed.  
(4) The interest and the damages payable under sub -section ( 3) shall be paid to the  employee or his 
dependant, as the case may be.  54 
 78. Method of calculating monthly wages for purposes of compensation. — For the purposes of this 
Chapter, the expression “monthly wages ” means the  amount of wages deemed to be payable for a month's 
service (whether the wages are  payable by the month or by whatever other period or at piece rates), and 
calculated as  follows, namely: — 
(a) where the employee has, during a continuous period of not less than twelve  months immediately 
preceding the accident, been in the service of the employer who  is liable to pay compensation, the 
monthly wages of the employee shall be one-twelfth  of the total wages which have fallen due for 
payment to him by the employer  in the last twelve months of t hat period;  
(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service immediately preceding  the accident during 
which the employee was in the service of the employer who is  liable to pay the compensation was less 
than one month, the monthly wages of the  empl oyee shall be the average monthly amount which, during 
the twelve months  immediately preceding the accident, was being earned by an employee employed on  
the same work by the same employer, or, if there was no employee so employed, by an  employee 
employed o n similar work in the same locality;  
(c) in other cases including cases in which it is not possible for want of necessary  information to 
calculate the monthly wages under clause ( b), the monthly wages shall  be thirty times the total wages 
earned in respect  of the last continuous period of  service immediately preceding the accident from the 
employer who is liable to pay  compensation, divided by the number of days comprising such period.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “a period of service ” shall be deemed  to be continuous 
which has not been interrupted by a period of absence from work exceeding  fourteen days.  
79. Review. —(1) Any half -monthly payment payable under this Chapter, either under an  agreement 
between the parties or under the order  of a competent authority, may be reviewed  by the competent 
authority, on the application either of the employer or of the employee  accompanied by the certificate of a 
medical practitioner that there has been a change in the  condition of the employee or, s ubject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the State  Government, on application made without such certificate.  
(2) Any half -monthly payment may, on review under this section, subject to the  provisions of this 
Chapter, be continued, increased, decrea sed or ended, or if the accident  is found to have resulted in 
permanent disablement, be converted to the lump sum to which  the employee is entitled less any amount 
which he has already received by way of half -monthly  payments.  
80. Commutation of half -monthly payments. —Any right to receive half -monthly payments may, by 
agreement between the  parties or, if the parties cannot agree and the payments have been continued for not 
less than six months, on the application of either party to  the competent authority be redeemed  by the 
payment of a lump sum of such amount as may be agreed to by the parties or  determined by the competent 
authority, as the case may be.  
81. Distribution of compensation. —(1) No payment of compensation in respect of  an employee 
whose injury has  resulted in death, and no payment of a lump sum as compensation to a woman or a person  
under a legal disability, shall be made otherwise than by deposit with the competent authority,  and no such 
payment made directly by an emp loyer shall be deemed to be a payment of  compensation:  
Provided that, in the case of a deceased employee, an employer may make to any  dependant, advances 
on account of compensation of an amount equal to three months'  wages of such employee and so much of 
such amount as does not exceed the compensation  payable to that dependant shall be deducted by the 
competent authority from such  compensation and repaid to the employer.  
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than five thousand rupees which is payable  as compensation 
may be deposited with the competent authority on behalf of the person  entitled thereto.  
(3) The receipt of the competent authority shall be a sufficient discharge in respect  of any compensation 
deposited with him.  
(4) (a) On the deposit of any money under sub -section ( 1) as compensation in respect  of a deceased 
employee, the competent authority shall, if he thinks necessary, cause notice  to be published or to be served 55 
 on each dependant in such manner as he thinks fit, calling  upon the dependant s to appear before him on 
such date as he may fix for determining the  distribution of the compensation.  
(b) If the competent authority is satisfied after any inquiry which he may deem  necessary, that no 
dependant exists, he shall repay the balance of the m oney to the employer  by whom it was paid.  
(c) The competent authority shall, on an application by the employer, furnish a statement  showing in 
detail all disbursements made.  
(5) The compensation deposited in respect of a deceased employee shall, subject to  any deduction made 
under sub -section ( 1), be apportioned by order by the competent  authority among the dependants of the 
deceased employee or any of them in such proportion  as the competent authority thinks fit, or may, in the 
discretion of the competent authority,  be allotted to any one dependant:  
Provided that the competent authority shall not make any order under this  sub-section without hearing 
the dependants and shall record reasons in the order for the  apportionment of such compensation among 
dependa nts or any of them, as the case may  be. 
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the competent authority is payable to  any person, other 
than a woman or a person under legal disability, the competent authority  may pay the compensation to the 
person entitl ed thereto.  
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the competent authority is payable to a  woman or a person 
under a legal disability, such sum may be invested, applied or otherwise  dealt with for the benefit of the 
woman, or of such person during his disability, in such  manner as the competent authority may direct; and 
where a half -monthly payment is payable  to any person under a legal disability, the competent authority 
may, of his own motion or on  an application made to him in this behalf, order that  the payment be made 
during the  disability to any dependant of the employee or to any other person, whom the competent  authority 
thinks fit to provide for the welfare of the employee.  
(8) Where, on application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the c ompetent  authority is satisfied 
that, on account of neglect of children on the part of a parent or on  account of the variation of the 
circumstances of any dependant or for any other sufficient  cause, an order of the competent authority as to 
the distributi on of any sum paid as  compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable to any such 
dependant is to be  invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought to be varied, the competent authority 
may make such orders for the variation of the former order  as he thinks just in the circumstances  of the 
case:  
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless such  person has been given 
an opportunity of showing cause as to why the order should not be  made, or shall be made in any case in 
which it would involve the repayment by a dependant  of any sum already paid to him.  
(9) Where the competent authority varies any order under sub -section ( 8) by reason  of the fact that 
payment of compensation to any person has been obtained by fraud,  impersonation or other improper 
means, any amount so paid to or on behalf of such person  may be recovered in the manner as specified in 
sub-section ( 10). 
(10) The competent authority may recover as an arrear of land revenue any amount  referred to in  
sub-section (9), and for such purpose the competent authority shall be deemed  to be a public officer within 
the meaning of section 5 of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890  (1 of 1890) . 
82. Notice and claim. —(1) No claim for compensation shall be entertained by a compet ent authority  
unless notice of the accident has been given in the manner hereinafter provided as soon as  practicable after 
the happening thereof and unless the claim is preferred before him within  two years of the occurrence of 
the accident or, in case of death, within two years from the  date of death:  
Provided that where the accident is the contracting of a disease in respect of which  the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 74 are applicable, the accident shall be deemed  to have occurred on the first of 
the days during which the employee was continuously  absent from work in consequence of the disablement 
caused by the disease:  56 
 Provided further that in case of partial disablement due to the contracting of any  such disease and which 
does not force the em ployee to absent himself from work, the  period of two years shall be counted from the 
day the employee gives notice of the  disablement to his employer:  
Provided also that if an employee who, having been employed in an employment for  a continuous 
period spe cified under sub -section ( 3) of section 74 in respect of that  employment, ceases to be so employed 
and develops symptoms of an occupational disease peculiar to that employment within two years of the 
cessation of employment, the accident  shall be deemed to  have occurred on the day on which the symptoms 
were first detected.  
(2) The want of or any defect or irregularity, in a notice given under sub -section ( 1), shall not be a bar 
to the entertainment of a claim — 
(a) if the claim is preferred in respect of the  death of an employee resulting from  an accident which 
occurred on the premises of the employer, or at any place where the  employee at the time of the accident 
was working under the control of the employer or  of any person employed by him, and the employee  
died on such premises or at such  place, or on any premises belonging to the employer, or died without 
having left the  vicinity of the premises or place where the accident occurred, or  
(b) if the employer or any one of several employers or any person respo nsible  to the employer for the 
management of any branch of the trade or business in which  the injured employee was employed had 
knowledge of the accident from any other  source at or about the time when it occurred:  
Provided that the competent authority may  entertain and decide any claim to  compensation in any case 
notwithstanding that the notice has not been given, or the  claim has not been preferred in due time as 
provided under sub -section ( 1), if he is  satisfied that the failure so to give the notice or prefer the claim, as 
the case may be,  was due to sufficient cause.  
(3) Every such notice shall give the name and address of the person injured and shall  state the cause of 
the injury and the date on which the accident happened, and shall be  served on the e mployer or upon any 
one of several employers, or upon any person  responsible to the employer for the management of any branch 
of the trade or business in  which the injured employee was employed.  
(4) The appropriate Government may require that any class of employers as may be  prescribed by that 
Government shall maintain, at their premises at which employees are  employed, a notice -book, in such 
form as may be prescribed by that Government, which  shall be readily accessible at all reasonable times to 
any injur ed employee employed on  the premises and to any person acting bona fide on his behalf.  
(5) A notice under this section may be served by delivering it at, or sending it by  registered post 
addressed to, the residence or any office or place of business of the  person  on whom it is to be served, or 
where possible, electronically or, where a notice -book is  maintained, by entry in the notice -book.  
83. Special provisions relating to accidents occurring outside Indian territory. —(1) The provisions 
of this section shall, subject to the modifications specified in  this section, apply in case of employees who 
are— 
(a) masters of ships or seamen; or  
(b) captain and other members of crew of aircraft;  
(c) persons recruited by companies registered in India and working as s uch abroad;  
(d) persons sent for work abroad along with motor vehicles registered under  the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988  (59 of 1988)  as drivers, helpers, mechanics, cleaners or other  employees.  
(2) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation by a person injured may  be served on the 
following persons, as if they were the employer — 
(a) in case of accident where the person injured is a seamen, but not the master  of the ship, on the 
master of the ship;  
(b) in case of accident where the person injured  is a member of crew of an  aircraft, but not the captain 
of the aircraft, on the captain of the aircraft;  57 
 (c) in case of persons recruited by companies registered in India and working as  such abroad, on the 
local agent of the company;  
(d) in case of persons sent for work abroad along with motor vehicles as drivers,  helpers, mechanics, 
cleaners or other employees, on the local agent of the owner of  the motor vehicle, in the country of the 
accident:  
Provided that where the accident happened and the disa blement commenced  on board, the ship or 
aircraft, as the case may be, then, it shall not be necessary for  any seaman or members of the crew of aircraft 
to give any notice of the accident.  
(3) The claim of compensation shall be made — 
(a) in the case of the death of an employee referred to in sub -section ( 1), one  year after the news of 
the death has been received by the claimant;  
(b) in the case where the ship or the aircraft as the case may be, has been or is  deemed to have been 
lost with all hands, eighteen  months of the date on which the  ship or the aircraft was, or is deemed to 
have been, so lost:  
Provided that the competent authority may entertain any claim to compensation  in any case 
notwithstanding that the claim has not been preferred in due time as  provided in this sub -section, if he is 
satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was  due to sufficient cause.  
(4) Where an injured employee referred to in sub -section ( 1) is discharged or left  behind in any part of 
India or in any foreign country, th en, any depositions taken by any  Judge or Magistrate in that part or by 
any Consular Officer in the foreign country and  transmitted by the person by whom they are taken to the 
Central Government or any  State Government shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claim, be 
admissible in  evidence — 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the Judge, Magistrate  or Consular Officer 
before whom it is made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity  by himself or his 
agent to cross -examine the witness; and  
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal proceeding, on proof  that the deposition 
was made in the presence of the person accused,   
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prov e the signature or official character of the  person appearing 
to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by such person that  the defendant or the person accused 
had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness  and that the deposition if made in a criminal proceeding 
was made in the presence of the  person accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, be sufficient evidence 
that he had that  opportunity and that it was so made.  
(5) No half -monthly payment shall be payable in respect of the period du ring which  the owner of the 
ship is, under any law for the time being in force relating to merchant  shipping, liable to defray the expenses 
of maintenance of the injured master or seaman.  
(6) Failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence proceedings  within the time  required by this 
section shall not be a bar to the maintenance of proceedings under this  Chapter in respect of any personal 
injury, if such proceedings under this Chapter are  commenced within one month from the date on which 
the certificat e of the State to that  effect Government was furnished to the person commencing the 
proceedings.  
84. Medical examination. —(1) Where an employee has given notice of an accident, he, shall, if the 
employer,  before the expiry of three days from the time at which service of the notice has been  effected, 
offers to have him examined free of charge by a medical practitioner, submit  himself for such examination, 
and any employee who is in receipt of a half -monthly payment under this Chapter shall, if so required,  
submit himself for such examination from time to  time:  
Provided that an employee shall not be required to submit himself for examination by  a medical 
practitioner at more than such frequent interval as may be prescribed by the State  Government.  58 
 (2) If an employee, on being required to do so by the employer under sub -section ( 1) or by the 
competent authority at any time, refuses to submit himself for examination by a  medical practitioner or in 
any way obstructs the same, his right to compensation shall be  suspended during the continuance of such 
refusal or obstruction unless in the case of  refusal, he was prevented by any sufficient cause from so 
submitting himself.  
(3) If an employee, before the expiry of the period within which he is liable under  sub-section (1) to be 
required to submit himself for medical examination, voluntarily leaves  the vicinity of the place in which he 
was employed without having been so examined, his  right to compensation shall be suspended until he 
returns and offers himself for such examination:  
Provided that where such employee proves before the medical practitioner that he  could not so submit 
himself for medical examination due to the circumstances beyond his  control and he was also handicapped 
to communicate such information i n writing, the  medical practitioner may after recording such reasons in 
writing, condone the delay and his  right to compensation shall be revived as if no such suspension was 
made.  
(4) Where an employee, whose right to compensation has been suspended under  sub-section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 3), dies without having submitted himself for medical  examination as required by either of those 
sub-sections, the competent authority may, if he  thinks fit, direct the payment of compensation to the 
dependants of the decea sed employee.  
(5) Where under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), a right to compensation is  suspended, no 
compensation shall be payable in respect of the period of suspension, and,  if the period of suspension 
commences before the expiry of the waiting per iod referred to in  clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 
76, the waiting period shall be increased by the  period during which the suspension continues.  
(6) Where an injured employee has refused to be attended by a medical practitioner  whose services 
have been offered to him by the employer free of charge or having accepted  such offer has deliberately 
disregarded the instructions of such medical practitioner, then,  if it is proved that the employee has not 
thereafter been regularly attended by a medical  practitioner or having been so attended has deliberately 
failed to follow his instructions  and that such refusal, disregard or failure was unreasonable in the 
circumstances of the  case and that the injury has been aggravated thereby, the injury and resulti ng 
disablement  shall be deemed to be of the same nature and duration as they might reasonably have been  
expected to be if the employee had been regularly attended by a medical practitioner, whose  instructions he 
had followed, and compensation, if any, shal l be payable accordingly.  
85. Contracting .—(1) Where any employer in the course of or for the purposes of his trade or  business 
contracts with a contractor for the execution by or under the contractor of the  whole or any part of any work 
which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the  employer, the employer shall be liable to pay to any 
employee employed in the execution of  the work any compensation, which he would have been liable to 
pay if that employee had  been immediately employed by h im; and that the amount of compensation shall 
be calculated  with reference to the wages of the employee under the employer by whom he is immediately  
employed.  
(2) Where the employer is liable to pay compensation under this section, he shall be  entitled to be 
indemnified by the contractor, or any other person from whom the employee  could have recovered the 
compensation and where a contractor who is himself an employer  is liable to pay compensation or to 
indemnify an employer under this section, he shall be  entitled to be indemnified by any person standing to 
him in relation of a contractor from whom the employee could have recovered the compensation, and all 
questions as to the  right to and the amount of any such indemnity shall, in default of agreement, be s ettled 
by the competent authority.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing an employee from  recovering compensation 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) from the contractor instead of the  employer.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in any case where the accident  occurred elsewhere 
than on, in or about the premises on which the employer has undertaken  or usually undertakes, as the case 
may be, to execute the work or which are otherwise  under his control or management.  59 
 86. Remedies of employer against stranger. —Where an employee has recovered compensation in 
respect of any injury caused  under circumstances creating a legal liability of some person other than the 
person by  whom the compensation was paid to pay damages in respec t thereof, the person by whom  the 
compensation was paid and any person who has been called on to pay an indemnity  under section 85 shall 
be entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay damages  as aforesaid.  
87. Insolvency of employ er.—(1) Where any employer has entered into a contract with any insurers 
in respect  of any liability under this Chapter to any employee, then, in the event of the employer  becoming 
insolvent or making a composition or scheme of arrangement with his creditors  or, if the employer is a 
company, in the event of the company having commenced to be  wound up, the rights of the employer 
against the insurers as respects that liability shall,  notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being 
in force relating to insolven cy or  the winding up of companies, be transferred to and vest in the employee, 
and upon any  such transfer the insurers shall have the same rights and remedies and be subject to the  same 
liabilities as if they were the employer, so, however, that the insure rs shall not be  under any greater liability 
to the employee than they would have been under the employer.  
(2) If the liability of the insurers to the employee is less than the liability of the  employer to the 
employee, the burden of proof shall lie on the employee for the balance in  the insolvency proceedings or 
liquidation.  
(3) Where in any case such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the contract of the  employer with the 
insurers is void or voidable by reason of non -compliance on the part of  the employ er with any terms or 
conditions of the contract (other than a stipulation for the  payment of premium), the provisions of that sub -
section shall apply as if the contract were  not void or voidable, and the insurers shall be entitled to prove in 
the insolvenc y proceedings  or liquidation for the amount paid to the employee:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply in any case in which  the employee fails 
to give notice to the insurers of the happening of the accident and of any  resulting disablement as soon as 
practicable after he becomes aware of the institution of  the insolvency or liquidation proceedings.  
(4) There shall be deemed to be included among the debts which under the Insolvency  and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016  (31 of 2016)  or under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  are in the  
distribution of the assets of an insolvent or in the distribution of the assets of a company  being wound up 
to be paid in priority to all other debts, the amount due in respect of any compensation, the liability accrued 
before the date of the order of adjudication of the  insolvent or the date of the commencement of the winding 
up, as the case may be, and the  provisions of that Code and Act shall have effect accordingly.  
(5) Where th e compensation is a half -monthly payment, the amount due in respect  thereof shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be taken to be the amount of the lump sum  for which the half -monthly payment 
could, if redeemable, be redeemed if applications  were made fo r that purpose under section 80, and a 
certificate of the competent authority  as to the amount of such sum shall be conclusive proof thereof.  
(6) The provisions of sub -section ( 4) shall apply in the case of any amount for which  an insurer is 
entitled to pr ove under sub -section ( 3), but otherwise those provisions shall  not apply where the insolvent 
or the company being wound up has entered into such a  contract with insurers as is referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply where a company is wound up  voluntarily merely for 
the purposes of reconstruction or of amalgamation with another  company.  
88. Power to required from  employers statements regarding fatal accidents. —(1) Where a 
competent authority receives information  from any source that an  employee has died as a result of an 
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment,  he may send by registered post or where 
possible, electronically a notice to the employee's  employer requiring him to submit, within t hirty days of 
the service of the notice, a statement,  in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, giving 
the circumstances  attending the death of the employee, and indicating whether, in the opinion of the 
employer,  he is or is not liable to  deposit compensation on account of the death and a copy of such  notice 
shall also be sent by the competent authority in the same manner to the dependants  of such employee 
ascertained by the competent authority.  60 
 (2) If the employer is of the opinion that h e is liable to deposit compensation, he shall  make the deposit 
within thirty days of the service of the notice.  
(3) If the employer is of the opinion that he is not liable to deposit compensation, he  shall in his 
statement indicate the grounds on which he disclaims liability.  
(4) Where the employer has so disclaimed liability, the competent authority, after  such inquiry as he 
may think fit, may inform any of the dependants of the deceased employee,  that it is open to the dependants 
to prefer a claim for com pensation, and may give them such  other further information as he may think fit.  
(5) Where in the opinion of the competent authority, a dependant of the deceased  employee is not in a 
position to engage an advocate to file a claim for compensation, the  comp etent authority may provide an 
advocate to such dependant, from the panel of  advocates maintained by the State Government.  
89. Registration of agreements. — (1) Where the amount of any lump sum payable as compensation 
has been settled  by agreement, whether by way of redemption of a half -monthly payment or otherwise, or  
where any compensation has been so settled as being payable to a woman, or a person  under a legal 
disability, a memorandum thereof shall be sent by the employer to the competent  authority, who  shall, on 
being satisfied as to its genuineness, record the memorandum in a  register, electronically or otherwise, in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that — 
(a) no such memorandum shall be recorded before seven days  after communication by the competent 
authority of notice to the parties concerned;  
(b) the competent authority may at any time rectify the register;  
(c) where it appears to the competent authority that an agreement as to the  payment of a lump sum 
whether by way of redemption of a half -monthly payment or  otherwise, or an agreement as to the 
amount of compensation payable, to a woman or  a person under a legal disability ought not to be 
registered by reason of the inadequacy  of the sum or amount, or by reason  of the agreement having 
been obtained by fraud  or undue influence or other improper means, the competent authority may refuse 
to record the memorandum of the agreement and may make such order including an  order as to any 
sum already paid under the agreeme nt, as the competent authority  thinks just in the circumstances.  
(2) An agreement for the payment of compensation which has been registered under  sub-section ( 1) 
shall be enforceable under this Code notwithstanding anything contained  in the Indian Contract  Act, 1872  
(9 of 1872) , or in any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) Where a memorandum of any agreement, the registration of which is required  under this section, is 
not sent to the competent authority as required by this section, the  employer shall be liable to pay the full 
amount of compensation which he is liable to pay  under the provisions of this Chapter, and notwithstanding 
anything contained in the proviso  to sub -section ( 1) of section 76, shall not, unless the competent authority 
otherwi se directs,  be entitled to deduct more than half of any amount paid to the employee by way of  
compensation whether under the agreement or otherwise.  
90. Reference to competent authority. —(1) If any question arises in any proceedings under this 
Chapter as t o the liability  of any person to pay compensation (including any question as to whether a person 
injured  is or is not an employee) or as to the amount or duration of compensation (including any  question 
as to the nature or extent of disablement), the quest ion shall, in default of agreement,  be settled by a 
competent authority.  
(2) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question  which is by or 
under this Chapter required to be settled, decided or dealt with by a competent  authority or to enforce any 
liability incurred under this Chapter.  
91. Appointment of competent authority. —(1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint 
any person who is or has  been a member of a State Judicial Service for a period of not less than five years 
or is or  has been for not less than five years an advocate or is or has been a Gazetted Officer for not  less 
than five years having educational qualifications and experience in personnel  management, human resource 
development, industrial re lations and legal affairs or such  other experience and qualifications as may be 61 
 prescribed by the appropriate Government  to be a competent authority for the purposes of this Chapter and 
for such area as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) Where more than one competent authority has been appointed for any area, the  State Government 
may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business  amongst them.  
(3) Any competent authority may, for the purpose of deciding any matter referred to  him for decision 
under this Chapter, choose one or more persons possessing special  knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under inquiry to assist him in holding the  inquiry.  
92. Venue of proceedings and transfer. — (1) Where any matter under this Chapter is to be done by 
or before a competent  authority, the same shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and in the manner  
prescribed in this behalf by the State Government, be done by or before the competent  authority for the area 
in which — 
(a) the accident took place which resulted in the injury; or  
(b) the employee or in case of his death, the dependant claiming the  compensation ordinarily resides; 
or 
(c) the employer has his registered office:  
Provided that no matter shall be processed before  or by a competent authority, other  than the competent 
authority having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident took  place, without his giving notice 
electronically or otherwise in the manner prescribed by the  Central Government to the competent a uthority 
having jurisdiction over the area and the  State Government concerned:  
Provided further that, where the employee, being the master of a ship or a seaman or  the captain or a 
member of the crew of an aircraft or an employee in a motor vehicle or a  company, meets with the accident 
outside India, any such matter may be done by or before a competent authority for the area in which the 
owner or agent of the ship, aircraft or motor  vehicle resides or carries on business or the registered office 
of the comp any is situate, as  the case may be.  
(2) If a competent authority, other than the competent authority with whom any  money has been 
deposited under section 81, proceeds with a matter under this Chapter, the  former may for the proper 
disposal of the matter call for transfer of any records or moneys  remaining with the latter and on receipt of 
such a request, he shall comply with the same.  
(3) If a competent authority is satisfied that any matter arising out of any proceedings  pending before 
him can be more co nveniently dealt with by any other competent authority,  whether in the same State or 
not, he may, subject to rules made under this Code relating to  this Chapter, order such matter to be 
transferred to such other competent authority either  for report or for  disposal, and, if he does so, shall 
forthwith transmit to such other competent  authority all documents relevant for the decision of such matter 
and, where the matter is  transferred for disposal, shall also transmit in the manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government any money remaining in his hands or invested by him for the benefit of  any party 
to the proceedings:  
Provided that the competent authority shall not, where any party to the proceedings  has appeared before 
him, make any order of transfe r relating to the distribution among  dependants of a lump sum without giving 
such party an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The competent authority to whom any matter is so transferred shall, subject to  rules made under this 
Code relating to this Chapter, i nquire therein to and, if the matter was  transferred for report, return his report 
thereon or, if the matter was transferred for disposal,  continue the proceedings as if they had originally 
commenced before him.  
(5) On receipt of a report from a competent authority to whom any matter has been  transferred for report 
under sub -section ( 3), the competent authority by whom it was referred  shall decide the matter referred to 
in conformity with such report.  
(6) The State Government may transfer any matter from an y competent authority  appointed by it to any 
other competent authority appointed by it.  62 
 93. Form of application. —(1) Where an accident occurs in respect of which liability to pay 
compensation  under this Chapter arises, a claim for such compensation may, subject to the provisions of  
this Chapter, be made before the competent authority.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no application for the settlement of  any matter by 
competent authority, other than an application by a dependant or joint  application by dependants for 
compensation, shall be made unless and until some question  has arisen between the parties in connection 
therewith which they have been unable to  settle by agreement.  
(3) An application to a competent authority for claim under s ub-section ( 1) or settlement  under  
sub-section ( 2) may be made electronically or otherwise in such form and in such  manner accompanied by 
such fee, if any, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The time -limit for the disposal of applications  under this section and the costs  incidental to the 
proceedings under this section to be imposed by the competent authority  shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
94. Power of competent authority to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident. —(1) Where 
any sum has been deposited by an employer as compensation payable  in respect of an employee whose 
injury has resulted in death, and in the opinion of the  compete nt authority such sum is insufficient, the 
competent authority may, by notice in  writing stating his reasons, call upon the employer to show cause 
why he should not make  a further deposit within such time as may be stated in the notice.  
(2) If the employer  fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the competent authority,  the competent 
authority may make an award determining the total amount payable, and  requiring the employer to deposit 
the deficiency.  
95. Powers and procedure of competent authority. —The competent authority shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court under the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of taking 
evidence on oath (which such competent  authority is hereby empowered to impose) and of enforcing the 
attendance of  witnesses  and compelling the production of documents and material objects, and the 
competent  authority shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and of  Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
96. Appearance of parties. — Any appearance, application or act required to be made or done by any 
person  before or to a competent authority (other than an appearance of a party which is required for  the 
purpose of his examination as a witness) may be made or done  on behalf of such person  by a legal 
practitioner or by an official of an Insurance Company or a registered Trade Union  or by an Inspector -cum-
Facilitator appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 122 or by any  other officer specified by the State 
Government in this behalf, authorised in writing by such  person, or, with the permission of the competent 
authority, by any other person so authorised.  
97. Method of recording evidence. —The competent authority shall make a brief memorandum of the 
substance  of the  evidence of every witness as the examination of the witness proceeds, and such  
memorandum shall be authenticated under the hand of the competent authority or in the  manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government and shall form part of the reco rd: 
Provided that, if the competent authority is prevented from making such  memorandum, he shall record 
the reason of his inability to do so and shall cause such  memorandum to be made in writing from his 
dictation and shall sign the same, and such  memorand um shall form part of the record:  
Provided further that the evidence of any medical witness shall be taken down as  nearly as may be word 
for word.  
98. Power to submit cases. — A competent authority may, if he thinks fit, submit any question of law 
for the  decision of the High Court and, if he does so, shall decide the question in conformity with  such 
decision.  
99. Appeal against order of competent authority. — (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from 
the following orders of a competent  authority under this Chapter, namely: — 63 
 (a) an order awarding as compensation a lump sum whether by way of redemption  of a half -monthly 
payment or otherwise or disallowing a claim in full or in part for a  lump sum;  
(b) an order awarding interest or damages under section 77; 
(c) an order refusing to allow redemption of a half -monthly payment;  
(d) an order providing for the distribution of compensation among the dependants  of a deceased 
employee, or disallowing any claim of a person alleging himself to be  such dependant;  
(e) an order allowing or disallowing any claim for the amount of an indemnity  under the provisions 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 85; or  
(f) an order refusing to register a memorandum of agreement or registering the  same or providing for 
the registration of the same subject to conditions:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order unless a substantial question of  law is involved in 
the appeal, and in the case of an order other than an order referred to in  clause ( c), unless the amount in 
dispute in t he appeal is not less than ten thousand rupees  or such higher amount as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify:  
Provided further that no appeal shall lie in any case in which the parties have agreed  to abide by the 
decision of the competent a uthority, or in which the order of the competent  authority gives effect to an 
agreement arrived at by the parties:  
Provided also that no appeal by an employer under clause ( a) shall lie unless the  memorandum of appeal 
is accompanied by a certificate by the  competent authority to the  effect that the appellant has deposited with 
him the amount payable under the order appealed  against.  
(2) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall be sixty days from  the date of passing 
of the order.  
(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963) , shall be applicable to  appeal 
under this section.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING AND  
OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS  
100.  Levy and collection of cess. — (1) There  shall be levied and collected a cess for the purposes of 
social security  and welfare of building workers at such rate not exceeding two per cent. but not less than  
one per cent. of the cost of construction incurred by an employer, as the Central Governmen t may, by 
notification, from time to time, specify.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the cost of construction shall  not include, — 
(a) the cost of land; and  
(b) any compensation paid or payable to an employee or his kin under  Chapter VII.  
(2) The cess levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected from every employer  undertaking building 
or other construction work in such manner and at such time, including  deduction at source in relation to a 
building or other construction work of a Govern ment or  of a public sector undertaking or advance collection 
through a local authority where an  approval of such building or other construction work by such local 
authority or such other  authority notified by the State Government is required, as may be pre scribed by the 
Central  Government.  
(3) The proceeds of the cess collected under sub -section ( 2) shall be deposited by the  local authority or 
such other authority notified by the State Government to the Building  Workers' Welfare Board in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the  cess leviable under 
this Chapter including payment of such cess in advance may, subject to  final assessment to be made, be 64 
 collected at a uniform rate or rates as may be prescribed by  the Central Government on the basis of the 
quantum of the building or other construction  work involved.  
101.Interest payable on de lay in payment of cess. — If any employer fails to pay any amount of cess 
payable under section 100 within  such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, such 
employer shall be  liable to pay interest at such rate as may be prescribed by the Central Government, on 
the amount of cess, to be paid, for the period from  the date on which such payment is due till  such amount 
is actually paid.  
102.Power to exempt from cess. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the 
appropriate Government  may, by notification, exempt any employer or class of employers in a State from 
the payment  of cess payable under this Chapter where such cess is already levied and payable under  any 
corresponding law in force in that State.  
103. Self-assessment of cess. — (1) The employer shall, within sixty days or such period as may be 
notified by the  Central Government of the completion of his each building and other construction work,  
pay such cess (adjusting the advance cess already paid under section 100) payable under  this Chapter on 
the basis of his self -assessment on the cost of con struction worked out on  the basis of the documents and 
in the manner prescribed by the Central Government and  after such payment of cess, he shall file a return 
under clause ( d) of section 123.  
(2) If the officer or the authority to whom or to which the re turn has been filed under  sub-section ( 1) 
finds any discrepancy in the payment under the self -assessment and the  payment required under the return 
referred to in that sub -section, then, he or it shall, after  making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or 
it thinks fit and after such inquiry make  the appropriate assessment order.  
(3) An order of assessment made under sub -section ( 2) shall specify the date within  which the cess shall 
be paid by the employer, if any.  
104. Penalty for non -payment of cess wi thin the specified time. — If any amount of cess payable by 
any employer under section 103 is not paid  within the date specified in the order of assessment made under 
sub-section ( 2) of that  section, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority pre scribed by the Central  
Government in this behalf may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on such  employer a 
penalty not exceeding the amount of cess:  
Provided that, before imposing any such penalty, such employer shall be given a  reasonable opportunity 
of being heard and if after such hearing the said authority is satisfied  that the default was for any good and 
sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under  this section.  
105. Appeal to appellate authority. — (1) Any employer aggrieved by  an order of assessment made 
under section 103  or by an order imposing penalty made under section 104 may, within such time as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, appeal to such appellate authority in such form and  in such 
manner as may be prescri bed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fees  as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(3) After the receipt of any appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall,  after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal  as expeditiously as possible.  
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final and shall not be  called in question in 
any court of law.  
106.Regi stration of building workers as beneficiaries. — Every building worker who has completed 
eighteen years of age, but has not  completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in any building 
or other construction  work for not less than ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be 
registered  by the officer authorised by the Building Workers' Welfare Board as a beneficiary under  this 
Chapter in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
107.Cessation as a beneficiary. — (1) A building worker who has been registered as a beneficiary 
under section 106  shall cease to be as such when he attains the age of sixty years or when he is not engaged  
in building or other construction work for not less than ninety days in a year:  65 
 Provided  that in computing the period of ninety days under this sub -section, there  shall be excluded 
any period of absence from the building or other construction work due  to any personal injury caused to the 
building worker by accident arising out of and in the  course of his employment.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if a person had been a  beneficiary for at 
least three years continuously immediately before attaining the age of  sixty years, then, he shall be eligible 
to get such benefits as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
Explanation. —For computing the period of three years under this sub -section as a  beneficiary registered 
with a Building Workers' Welfare Board, there shall be added any  period for which a person had been a 
beneficiary registered with any other such Board  immediately before his registration with the Building 
Workers' Welfare Board.  
108. Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund and its application. —(1) There 
shall be constituted by a Buildi ng Workers' Welfare Board a fund to be  called the Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Welfare Fund and there shall be credited  thereto — 
(a) the amount of any cess levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 100;  
(b) any grants and loans made to the Building Workers' Welfare Board by the  Central Government; 
and 
(c) all sums received by the Building Workers' Welfare Board from such other  sources as may be 
decided by the Central Government.  
(2) The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Fund s hall be applied for  meeting — 
(a) expenses of the Building Workers' Welfare Board in the discharge of its  functions under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 7;  
(b) salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and  other employees of the 
Building Workers' Welfare Board; and  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Code.  
(3) No Building Workers' Welfare Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses  towards salaries, 
allowances and other remuneration to its members, o fficers and other  employees and for meeting the other 
administrative expenses exceeding five per cent. of  its total expenses during that financial year.  
CHAPTER IX  
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS, GIG WORKERS AND  
PLATFORM WORKERS  
109. Framing of sc hemes for unorganized workers. — (1) The Central Government shall frame and 
notify, from time to time, suitable  welfare schemes for unorganised workers on matters relating to — 
(i) life and disability cover;  
(ii) health and maternity benefits;  
(iii) old age protection;  
(iv) education; and  
(v) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) The State Government shall frame and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare  schemes for 
unorganised workers, including schemes relating to — 
(i) provident fund;  
(ii) employment injury benefit;  
(iii) housing;  
(iv) educational schemes for children;  66 
 (v) skill upgradation of workers;  
(vi) funeral assistance; and  
(vii) old age homes.  
(3) Any scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), may be — 
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State  Government; or  
(iii) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State  Government and partly 
funded thr ough contributions collected from the beneficiaries  of the scheme or the employers as may 
be specified in the scheme by the Central  Government; or  
(iv) funded from any source including corporate social responsibility fund  within the meaning of the 
Companie s Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  or any other such source as may be  specified in the scheme.  
(4) Every scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall  provide for such 
matters that are necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme  including the matters relating to 
all or any of the following, namely: — 
(i) scope of the scheme;  
(ii) authority to implement the scheme;  
(iii) beneficiaries of the scheme;  
(iv) resources of the scheme;  
(v) agency or agencies that will implement the scheme;  
(vi) redressal of grievances; and  
(vii) any other relevant matter,  
and a special purpose vehicle may also be constituted by the Central Government for the  purpose of 
implementation of any such scheme.  
110.  Funding of State Government schemes. — (1) Any sc heme notified by the State Government 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 109 may be — 
(a) wholly funded by the State Government; or  
(b) partly funded by the State Government, partly funded through contributions  collected from the 
beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be specified in  the scheme by the State 
Government; or  
(c) funded from any source including corporate social responsibility fund referred  to in clause ( iv) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 109 or any other such source as may be  specified in the scheme.  
(2) The State Government may seek financial assistance from the Central Government  for the schemes 
framed by it.  
(3) The Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State  Governments for the 
purpose of schemes f or such period and on such terms and conditions  as it may deem fit.  
111. Record keeping. —The Government formulating and notifying the scheme under this Chapter 
shall  provide therein the form and manner of keeping the records electronically or otherwise  relating to the 
scheme and the authority by whom such records shall be maintained:  
Provided that such records shall, as far as may be possible, bear continuous number  for the purpose of 
proper management of the scheme and for avoiding any duplication and  overlapping in records.  
112. Helpline, facilitation centre, etc., for unorganized workers, gig workers and platform 
workers. —The appropriate Government may set up a toll free call centre or helpline or such  facilitation 67 
 centres as may be considered necessary from time to time to perform any or more  of the following functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to disseminate information on available social security schemes for the  unorganised workers, gig 
workers and platform workers;  
(b) to facilitate filing, processing and forwar ding of application forms for  registration of unorganised 
workers, gig workers and platform workers;  
(c) to assist unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to obtain  registration; and  
(d) to facilitate the enrolment of the registered unorganis ed workers, gig workers  and platform 
workers in the social security schemes.  
113. Registration of unorganized workers, gig workers and platform workers. — (1) Every 
unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker shall be required to  be registered for the  purposes of 
this Chapter, subject to the fulfilment of the following  conditions, namely: — 
(a) he has completed sixteen years of age or such age as may be prescribed by  the Central 
Government;  
(b) he has submitted a self -declaration electronically or otherwise in such form  and in such manner 
containing such information as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(2) Every eligible unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker referred to in  sub-section ( 1) 
shall make an application for registra tion in such form along with such  documents including Aadhaar 
number as may be prescribed by the Central Government and  such worker shall be assigned a 
distinguishable number to his application:  
Provided that the system of electronic registration maintaine d by the appropriate  Government shall also 
provide for self registration by any such worker in such manner as  may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A registered unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker shall be eligible  to avail the ben efit 
of the concerned scheme framed under this Chapter.  
(4) The Central Government, or as the case may be, the State Government shall  make such contribution 
in a scheme as may be specified therein.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the term “Aadhaar ” shall have the  same meaning as is 
assigned to it in section 142.  
114. Schemes for gig works and platform workers. — (1) The Central Government may frame and 
notify, from time to time, suitable  social security schemes for gig workers and platform workers on matters 
relating to — 
(a) life and disability cover;  
(b) accident insurance;  
(c) health and maternity benefits;  
(d) old age protection;  
(e) crèche; and  
(f) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) Every scheme framed and notified under sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the manner of administration of the scheme;  
(b) the agency or agencies for implementing the scheme;  
(c) the role of aggregators in the scheme;  
(d) the sources of funding of the scheme; and  68 
 (e) any other matter as the Central Government may consider necessary for the  efficient 
administration of the scheme.  
(3) Any scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), may be — 
(a) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(b) partly funded  by the Central Government and partly funded by the State  Government; or  
(c) wholly funded by the contributions of the aggregators; or  
(d) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State  Government and partly 
funded through contribution s collected from the beneficiaries  of the scheme or the aggregators, as may 
be specified in the scheme framed by the  Central Government; or  
(e) funded from corporate social responsibility fund within the meaning of  Companies Act, 2013  (18 
of 2013) ; or 
(f) any other source.  
(4) The contribution to be paid by the aggregators for the funding referred to in  clause ( ii) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 141, shall be at such rate not exceeding two per  cent., but not less than one per 
cent., as may be notified by th e Central Government, of the  annual turnover of every such aggregator who 
falls within a category of aggregators, as  are specified in the Seventh Schedule:  
Provided that the contribution by an aggregator shall not exceed five per cent. of the  amount paid o r 
payable by an aggregator to gig workers and platform workers.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the annual turnover of an  aggregator shall not 
include any tax, levy and cess paid or payable to the Central Government.  
(5) The date of commencement of contribution from aggregator under this section  shall be notified by 
the Central Government.  
(6) The National Social Security Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 shall be the Board 
for the purposes of the welfare of gig wor kers and platform  workers under the provisions of this Code:  
Provided that while such Board serves the purposes of welfare of, or matters relating  to, gig workers 
and platform workers, the following members shall constitute the Board  instead of the members  specified 
in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 6,  namely: — 
(a) five representatives of the aggregators as the Central Government may  nominate;  
(b) five representatives of the gig workers and platform workers as the Central  Government may 
nominate;  
(c) Director General of the Corporation;  
(d) Central Provident Fund Commissioner of the Central Board;  
(e) such expert members as the Central Government may consider appropriate;  
(f) five representatives of the State Governments by such rotation as the Central  Government may 
consider appropriate;  
(g) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour and  Employment, who shall 
be the Member Secretary to the Board.  
(7) (i) The Central Government may provide that — 
(a) the authority to collect and to expend the proceeds of contribution collected;  
(b) the rate of interest to be paid by an aggregator in case of delayed payment,  less payment or non -
payment of contribution;  
(c) self -assessment of contribution by aggregators;  
(d) condition s for cessation of a gig worker or a platform worker; and  69 
 (e) any other matter relating to smooth functioning of the social security scheme  notified under this 
section,  shall be such as may be prescribed by that Government.  
(ii) The Central Government may by notification, exempt such aggregator or class of  aggregators from 
paying of contribution under sub -section ( 4), subject to such conditions  as may be specified in the 
notification.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an aggregator having more than one  business shall be 
treated as a separate business entity or aggregator.  
CHAPTER X  
FINANCE AND ACCOUNTS  
115. Accounts. —Each of the Social Security Organisations shall maintain proper accounts of its  
income and expenditure in such form and in such manner as the appropriate Government  may, after 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, specify.  
116. Audit .—(1) The accounts of each of the Social Security Organisations shall be audited  annually 
by the Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral of India and any expenditure incurred  by him in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the respective Social Security  Organisation to the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him  in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of a Social Security Organisation shall have  the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India has, in connection 
with th e audit of Government accounts  and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected  vouchers, documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Social 
Security  Organisation.  
(3) The accounts of a Socia l Security Organisation as certified by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General 
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together  with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded to the Social Security Organisation which  shall along with it s comments on the audit report of 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India forward the same to the appropriate Government.  
117. Budget estimates. — (1) Each of the Social Security Organisations shall in each year frame a 
budget  showing the probable rece ipts and the expenditure which it proposes to incur during the  following 
year and shall submit a copy of the budget for the approval of the appropriate  Government before such date 
as may be fixed by it in that behalf.  
(2) The budget shall contain provisions adequate in the opinion of the appropriate  Government for the 
discharge of the liabilities incurred by the Social Security Organisation  and for the maintenance of a 
working balance.  
118. Annual report. — (1) Each of the Social Security Organisations shall submit to the appropriate  
Government an annual report of its work and activities and the budget finally adopted by  the Social Security 
Organisation.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the annual report, budget and  the audited 
accounts together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India and the comments of 
the respective Social Security Organisation thereon to be laid  before each House of Parliament or the State 
legislature, as the case may be.  
119. Valuation of assets and liabilities. — Each of the fund maintained by a Social Security 
Organisation or by an  establishment under this Code shall have a valuation of its assets and liabilities made 
by a valuer or actuary, as the case may be, appointed, wit h the prior approval of the appropriate  Government, 
by such Social Security Organisation or the establishment, as the case may  be, in the following manner, 
namely: — 
(a) in case of Central Board, annually;  
(b) in case of Corporation, once in every three years;  70 
 (c) in case of any other Social Security Organisation or establishment, as  specified by the appropriate 
Government, by order:  
Provided that the appropriate Government, if it considers necessary, may direct such  valuation to be 
made at such intervals  other than provided in this section.  
120. Holding of property, etc, by Social Security Organisation. —(1) A Social Security Organisation 
(except Corporation) may, subject to such  conditions as may by Social Security Organisation be prescribed 
by the approp riate Government, acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, sell or otherwise  
transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in or have  been acquired by 
it and do all things necessary for such purposes and for the purp oses for  which the said Social Security 
Organisation is established.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government,  a Social Security 
Organisation may, from time to time invest any moneys vested in it, which  are not immediately required 
for expenses properly defrayable and may, subject to as aforesaid,  from time to time re -invest or realise 
such investments:  
Provided that in case of Provident Fund, Pension Fund or Insurance Fund, such  investment, re -
investment or real isation shall be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or  Pension Scheme or Insurance 
Scheme, as the case may be.  
(3) Each of the Social Security Organisations (except Corporation) may, with the  previous sanction of 
the appropriate Government and on such terms as may be prescribed  by such Government, raise loans and 
take measures for discharging such loans.  
(4) Each of the Social Security Organisations (except Corporation) may, with the  previous sanction of 
the appropriate Government and on such terms as m ay be prescribed  by such Government, constitute for 
the benefit of its officers and staff or any class of them,  such provident or other benefit funds as it may think 
fit: 
Provided that in case of officers and staff of the Central Board, such terms shall be  specified in the 
Provident Fund Scheme.  
121. Writing off of losses. —Subject to the conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government,  where any of the Social Security Organisations is of the opinion that the amount of  
contribution, cess, inter est and damages due to it, under this Code, is irrecoverable, the  concerned Social 
Security Organisation may sanction the writing off of the said amount in  such manner as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that in the case of Provide nt Fund, Pension Fund or Insurance Fund, such  writing off shall be 
specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or Pension Scheme or Insurance  Scheme, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER XI  
AUTHORITIES, ASSESSMENT, COMPLIANCE AND RECOVERY  
122. Appointment of Inspector -cum- Facilitators and their powers. —(1) The Central Government 
for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and  for the provisions in this Code relating to those Chapters, 
and the appropriate Government  for the purposes of other  provisions of this Code, may, by notification, 
appoint Inspectorcum -Facilitators who shall discharge his duties under this Code and exercise the powers 
conferred on them under sub -section ( 6) in accordance with the inspection scheme referred  to in sub -section 
(2). 
(2) The Central Government for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and for the  provisions in 
this Code relating to those Chapters and the appropriate Government in  respect of other provisions of this 
Code, may, by notification, lay down an  inspection  scheme which may provide for generation of a web -
based inspection and calling of  information relating to the inspection under this Code electronically and 
such scheme shall,  inter alia , have provisions to cater to special circumstances for assigning inspections 
and calling for information from the establishment or any other person.  71 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Central Government  for the purposes of 
Chapter III and Chapter IV and the other provisions in this  Code relating  to those Chapters and the 
appropriate Government in relation to other provisions of this  Code, may, by notification, confer such 
jurisdiction of randomised selection of inspection  for the purposes of this Code, to the Inspector -cum-
Facilitat ors as may be specified in  such notification.  
(4) Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government or the appropriate  Government, as the 
case may be, under this section, the inspection scheme may be designed  taking into account, inter alia , the 
following factors, namely: — 
(a) assignment of unique number to each establishment (which will be same as  the registration 
number allotted to that establishment), each Inspector -cum-Facilitator  and each inspection in such 
manner as may be notified for the pur poses of Chapter III  and Chapter IV and the other provisions of 
this Code relating to those Chapters, by  the Central Government, and in respect of other provisions of 
this Code, by the  appropriate Government;  
(b) timely uploading of inspection reports in s uch manner and subject to such  conditions as may be 
notified, for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and the  other provisions of this Code relating 
to those Chapters, by the Central Government,  and in respect of other provisions of this Code, by th e 
appropriate Government;  
(c) provisions for special inspections based on such parameters as may be  notified, for the purposes 
of Chapter III and Chapter IV and the other provisions of  this Code relating to those Chapters, by the 
Central Government, and in  respect of  other provisions of this Code, by the appropriate Government; 
and 
(d) the characteristics of employment relationships, the nature of work and  characteristics of the 
workplaces based on such parameters as may be notified, for  the purposes of Cha pter III and Chapter 
IV and the other provisions of this Code  relating to those Chapters, by the Central Government, and in 
respect of other  provisions of this Code, by the appropriate Government.  
(5) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may — 
(a) advice the employers and employees relating to compliance with the  provisions of this Code; and  
(b) inspect the establishments as assigned to him under the provisions of this  Code,   
subject to the instructions or guidelines issued by the appropriate Government from t ime to  time.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Inspector -cum-Facilitator  may, — 
(a) examine any person who is found in any premises of the establishment,  whom the Inspector -cum-
Facilitator has reasonable cause to believe, is an employee  of the establishment;  
(b) require any person whom the Inspector -cum-Facilitator has reasonable  cause to believe, is an 
employer of the establishment, to produce any document or to  give any information, which is in his 
power with respect to any of the purpo ses for  which the inspection is made;  
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or  portions thereof as the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator may consider relevant in respect of  an offence under this Code and which the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator has reason to  believe has been committed by the employer;  
(d) bring to the notice of the appropriate Government defects or abuses not  covered by any law for 
the time being in force; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by  the appropriate  Government.  
(7) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required  by an Inspector -
cum-Facilitator for the purposes of sub -section ( 6) shall be deemed to be  legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal  Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(8) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall, so far as may be,  apply 
to the search or seizure for the purposes of sub -section ( 6), as they apply to the  search or seizure made under 
the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said  Code.  72 
 123. Maintenance of records, registers, returns, etc. . — An employer of an establishment shall — 
(a) maintain records and registers in the form prescribed by the appropr iate Government, 
electronically or otherwise, containing such particulars and details with  regard to persons employed, 
muster roll, wages and such other particulars and details,  in such manner, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government including — 
(i) number of days for which work performed by employees;  
(ii) number of hours of work performed by the employees;  
(iii) wage paid;  
(iv) leave, leave wages, wages for overtime work and attendance;  
(v) employees identification number, by whatever nomenclatu re it may be  called;  
(vi) number of dangerous occurrences, accidents, injuries in respect of  which compensation has 
been paid by the employer and the amount of such  compensation relating to Chapter IV and Chapter 
VII, respectively;  
(vii) statutory deductio ns made by employer from the wages of an  employee in respect of Chapter 
III and Chapter IV;  
(viii) details as to cess paid in respect of building and other construction  work;  
(ix) total number of employees (regular, contractual or fixed term  employment) on  the day 
specified;  
(x) persons recruited during a particular period;  
(xi) occupational details of the employees; and  
(xii) vacancies for which suitable candidates were not available during  the specified period.  
(b) display notices at the workplaces of the  employees in such manner and form  as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government;  
(c) issue wage slips to the employees, in electronic forms or otherwise; and  
(d) file such return electronically or otherwise to such officer or authority in  such manner  and during 
such periods as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that matters to be provided under the rules required to be made under  this section relating to 
Chapter III shall, instead of providing them in rules to be made  by the Central Government, be provided in 
the Provident Fund Scheme or the Pension  Scheme or the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be:  
Provided further that the forms of records and registers and that of the returns  to be filed under Chapter 
IV shall be specified  in the regulations instead of providing  them in the rules.  
124. Employer not to reduce wages, etc. — No employer in relation to an establishment to which this 
Code or any scheme  framed thereunder applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the payme nt of any  
contribution under this Code, or any charges thereunder reduce whether directly or indirectly,  the wages of 
any employee to whom the provisions of this Code or any scheme framed  thereunder applies or the total 
quantum of benefits to which such em ployee is entitled  under the terms of his employment, express or 
implied.  
125.  Assessment and determination of dues from employer. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, authorise, such officers of the  Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, not below 
the rank of Group 'A' officer  of that Government, to function as the Authorised Officers for the purposes of 
Chapter III  or Chapter IV, as the case may be, who may, by order — 
(a) in a case where a dispute arises regarding the applica bility of Chapter III or  Chapter IV, as the 
case may be, to an establishment, decide such dispute; and  73 
 (b) determine the amount due from any employer under any provision of  Chapter III or Chapter IV, 
as the case may be, or the schemes, or rules, regulation s made under such Chapter; and  
(c) for any of the purposes relating to clause ( a) and clause ( b), conduct such  inquiry, as he may deem 
necessary for such purposes:  
Provided that no proceeding under this sub -section shall be initiated after the expiry  of th e period of 
five years from the date on which the dispute referred to in clause ( a) is alleged to have been arisen or, as 
the case may be, the amount referred to in clause ( b) is alleged to have been due from an employer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , the inquiry 
under sub -section ( 1), as far as practicable, shall be held on day -to-day basis and  endeavour shall be made 
to ensure that the inquiry is concluded within a period of two  years:  
Provided th at where the inquiry is not concluded within the said period of two years,  the Authorised 
Officer conducting such inquiry shall record the circumstances and reasons  for not having concluded so 
and submit the circumstances and reasons so recorded to the  Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the 
Director General of the Corporation, as the  case may be, or such other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf:  
Provided further that the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director  General of the 
Corpora tion, as the case may be, after considering the circumstances and  the reasons which have been 
submitted by the Authorised Officer may grant an extension  for a period up to one year to conclude the said 
inquiry:  
Provided also that the inquiries which are pe nding immediately before the date of  commencement of 
this Code shall be concluded by the Authorised Officer within a period  not exceeding two years from the 
date of such commencement.  
(3) The Authorised Officer conducting the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the  purposes of such 
inquiry have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
for trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examini ng him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses,   
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning  of sections 193 and 
228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(4) No order shall be made under sub -section ( 1), unless the employer concerned is  given a reasonable 
opportunity of representing his case.  
(5) Where the employer, employee or any other person required to attend the inquiry  under  
sub-section ( 1) fails to attend such inquiry without assigning any valid reason or  fails to produce any 
document or to file any report or return when called upon to do so by  the A uthorised Officer conducting 
the inquiry, such inquiry officer may decide the  applicability of the relevant provisions of this Code or 
determine the amount due from any  employer, as the case may be, on the basis of the evidence adduced 
during such inquiry and other documents available on record.  
(6) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is passed against an employer ex parte , he may, within three 
months from the date of communication of such order, apply to the  Authorised Officer for setting aside 
such order  and if the Authorised Officer is satisfied that  the show cause notice was not duly served or that 
such employer was prevented by any  sufficient cause from appearing when the inquiry was held, the 
Authorised Officer shall  make an order setting aside his ea rlier order and shall appoint a date for proceeding 
with the  inquiry:  74 
 Provided that no such order shall be set aside merely on the ground that there has  been an irregularity 
in the service of the show cause notice if the Authorised Officer is  satisfied tha t the employer had notice of 
the date of hearing and had sufficient time to  appear before the Authorised Officer.  
Explanation. —Where an appeal has been preferred under this Code against an order  passed ex parte 
and such appeal has been disposed of otherwise than on the ground that  the appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this sub -section for  setting aside the ex parte order.  
(7) No order passed under this section shall be set aside on any application under  sub-section ( 6) unless 
notice thereof has been served on the opposite party.  
126. Appeal against order of Authorised Officer relating to Chapter IV. . —If an employer is not 
satisfied with the order referred to in section 125 and relates  to Chapter IV, he may prefer an appeal to the 
appellate authority not below the rank of the  Joint Director of the Corporation as may be provided by 
regulations, within sixty days from  the date of such order after depositing twenty -five per cent. of the 
contribution so ordered  or the cont ribution as per his own calculation, whichever is higher, with the 
Corporation:  
Provided that the appellate authority shall decide the appeal within a period of six  months from the date 
of preferring the appeal:  
Provided further that if the employer finall y succeeds in the appeal, the Corporation  shall refund such 
deposit to the employer together with such interest as may be specified in  the regulations.  
127. Interest on amount due. — Except where expressly provided otherwise in this Code, the employer 
shall  be liable to pay simple interest at such rate as may be notified from time to time by the Central  
Government, from the date on which any amount has become due under this Code till the  date of its actual 
payment.  
128.  Power to recover damages. —Where an employer makes default in the payment of any 
contribution which he  is liable to pay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the 
case may be, or any scheme framed thereunder or in the transfer of accumulations under  Chapter III, o r in 
the payment of any charges payable under any other provision of this  Code, the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation,  as the case may be, or such other officer as may 
be authorised, by notification, by the  appropriate Government, may levy on, and recover from, the employer 
by way of damages,  an amount not exceeding the amount of arrears, in such manner as may be specified in 
the regulations for the purposes of Chapter IV and in respect of Provident Fund Scheme,  Pension Scheme 
and Insurance Scheme, such levy and recovery shall be in the manner as  may be specified in the respective 
schemes framed by the Central Government:  
Provided that before levying and recovering such damages, the employer shall be  given an oppo rtunity 
of being heard:  
Provided further that the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, may  reduce or waive 
the damages levied under this section in relation to an establishment for  which a resolution plan or 
repayment plan recommending suc h waiver has been approved  by the adjudicating authority established 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016)  subject to the terms and conditions as may 
be specified by notification, by the Central  Government.  
129. Recovery of amount due .— (1) Any amount due from an employer or any other person in relation 
to an  establishment including any contribution or cess payable, charges, interest, damages, or  benefit or any 
other amount may, if the amount is in arrear, be recovered in the manner  specified in this section and 
sections 130 to 132.  
(2) Where any amount is in arrear under this Code, the Authorised Officer, or the  competent authority, 
as the case may be, shall issue to the Recovery Officer referred to in  sub-section ( 4), a certificate 
electronically or otherwise, specifying the amount of arrears  and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such 
certificate, shall proceed to recover the amount  specified therein from the establishment or, as the case may 
be, the employer by one or more  of the modes mentioned below, namely: — 75 
 (a) attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the  establishment or, as the case 
may be, of the employer;  
(b) arrest of the employer and his detention in prison;  
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable  properties of the defaulter:  
Provided that the attachment and sale of any property under this section shall first be  effected against 
the properties of the establishment and where such attachment and sale is  insufficient for rec overing the 
whole of the amount or arrears specified in the certificate, the  Recovery Officer may move such proceeding 
against the property of the employer for  recovery of the whole or any part of such arrears.  
(3) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, may issue  a certificate under 
sub-section ( 2), notwithstanding that proceeding for recovery of the  arrears by any other mode has been 
taken.  
(4) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, may  forwa rd the certificate 
issued under this section, to the Recovery Officer within whose  jurisdiction the employer — 
(a) carries on his business or profession or within whose jurisdiction the  principal place of his 
establishment is situate; or  
(b) resides or any movable or immovable property of, the establishment or, the  employer is situated.  
(5) Where an establishment or the employer has property within the jurisdiction of  more than one 
Recovery Officer and the Recovery Officer to whom a certificate is sent by  the Authorised Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be — 
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable  or immovable, within 
his jurisdiction, or  
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting or se curing the recovery  of the whole or any 
part of the amount, it is necessary so to do,   
he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of  the certificate 
certified by him, specifying the amount to be recovered, to  the Recovery  Officer within whose jurisdiction 
the establishment or the employer has property or the  employer resides, and thereupon that Recovery 
Officer shall proceed to recover the amount  due under this section as if the certificate or the copy thereof  
had been the certificate sent  to him by the Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may 
be. 
130.Validity of certificate and amendment thereof. —(1) When the Authorised Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be,  issues a certificate to a Recovery Officer under section 129, it 
shall not be open to the  employer to dispute before the Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount, and 
no objection to the certificate on any other ground shall be entertained by the Recovery  Officer. 
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery Officer, the Authorised  Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, shall have power to withdraw the  certificate or correct any clerical 
or arithmetical mistake in the certifica te by sending intimation  to the Recovery Officer.  
(3) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall  intimate to the 
Recovery Officer any orders of withdrawing or cancelling a certificate or any  correction made by him in 
respe ct of the said certificate under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer for the  recovery of any 
amount, the Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may  be, may grant time to the 
employer for payment of the amount recoverable under the certificate  and thereupon the Recovery Officer 
shall stay the proceedings until the expiry of the time  so granted.  
(5) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the Authorised Off icer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, shall keep the Recovery Officer informed of any  amount paid or 
time granted for payment, subsequent to the issue of such certificate.  76 
 (6) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for which a certificate  for recovery has been 
issued under section 129 has been modified in appeal or other  proceeding under this Code, resulting in 
reduction of the demand but the order is the  subject matter of further proceeding under this Code, the 
Authorised Offic er or the competent  authority, as the case may be, shall stay the recovery of such part of 
the amount of the  certificate as pertains to the said reduction for the period for which the appeal or other  
proceeding remains pending.  
(7) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued and subsequently  the amount of the 
outstanding demand is reduced as a result of an appeal or other proceeding  under this Code, the Authorised 
Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be,  shall, when the ord er being the subject matter of 
such appeal or other proceeding becomes  final and conclusive, amend the certificate or withdraw it, as the 
case may be in consonance  with such finality or conclusion.  
131. other modes of recovery. — (1) Notwithstanding the iss ue of a certificate to the Recovery Officer 
under  section 129, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, 
as the case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  so authorised by it in this 
behalf, may, recover the amount by any one or more of the modes  provided in this section.  
(2) If any amount is due from any person to any employer who is in arrears, the Central  Provident Fund 
Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as the case may  be, or any other officer of such 
Social Security Organisation authorised by it in this behalf,  may, require such person to deduct from the 
said amount the arrears so due, and such  person shall comply with any such requisition and shall pay the 
sum so deducted to the  credit of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the 
Corporation,  as the case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation so authorised  by 
it in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing in thi s sub -section shall apply to any part of the amount  exempt from attachment 
in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
(3) (a) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the 
case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf may, 
at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing,  require any person from whom money is due or may 
become due to th e employer or, as the  case may be, the establishment or any person who holds or may 
subsequently hold money  for or on account of the employer or, as the case may be, the establishment, to 
pay to the  Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director Gener al of the Corporation, as the  case 
may be, or any other officer authorised by it in this behalf either forthwith upon the  money becoming due 
or being held at or within the time specified in the notice (not being  before the money becomes due or is 
held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the  amount due from the employer in respect of arrears 
or the whole of the money when it is  equal to or less than that amount.  
(b) A notice under this sub -section may be issued to any person who holds or may  subseq uently hold 
any money for or on account of the employer jointly with any other  person and for the purposes of this sub -
section, the shares of the joint holders in such  account shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be 
equal.  
(c) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the employer at his last address known  to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as  the case may be, or any other 
officer of such Social Security Organisation authorised by it  in thi s behalf and in the case of a joint account 
to all the joint holders at their last addresses  so known.  
(d) Save as otherwise provided in this sub -section, every person to whom a notice is  issued under this 
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular,  where any such notice is issued 
to a post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary  for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or 
any other document to be produced for the  purpose of any entry, endorsement or the lik e being made before 
payment is made  notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(e) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this  sub-section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any  demand contained in the notice.  77 
 (f) Where a person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by  statement on oath 
that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the employer or  that he does not hold any mone y 
for or on account of the employer, then, nothing contained  in this sub -section shall be deemed to require 
such person to pay any such sum or part  thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that such 
statement was false in any  material particula r, such person shall be personally liable to the Central Provident 
Fund  Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as the case may be, or any other  officer of 
such Social Security Organisation authorised by it in this behalf, to the extent of  his own liability to the 
employer on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the employer's  liability for any sum due under this 
Code, whichever is less.  
(g) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the ca se 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, may, at 
any time or from time to time, amend or revoke any  notice issued under this sub -section or extend the time 
for making any payment in pursuance  of such notice.  
(h) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, shall grant 
a receipt for any amount paid in  compliance with  a notice issued under this sub -section, and the person so 
paying shall be fully discharged  from his liability to the employer to the extent of the amount so paid.  
(i) Any person discharging any liability to the employer after the receipt o f a notice  under this  
sub-section shall be personally liable to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner  or the Director General 
of the Corporation, as the case may be, or any other officer of such  Social Security Organisation authorised 
by it in this behalf, to the extent of his own liability  to the employer so discharged or to the extent of the 
employer's liability for any sum due  under this Code, whichever is less.  
(j) If the person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent fails to make paymen t in pursuance 
thereof to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of  the Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, he shall be 
deemed to be an employe r in default in respect of  the amount specified in the notice and further proceeding 
may be moved against him for the  realisation of the amount as if it were an arrear due from him, in the 
manner provided in  sections 129 to 132 and the notice shall have th e same effect as an attachment of amount 
in arrears by the Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under section 129.  
(4) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of suc h Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf may apply 
to the court in whose custody there is money  belonging to the employer for payment to him of the entire 
amount of such money, or if it is  more than the amount due, an amount sufficien t to discharge the amount 
due. 
(5) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, if so 
authorised by the Ce ntral Government by general or  special order, recover any arrears of amount due from 
an employer or, as the case may be,  from the establishment by distraint and sale of his or its movable 
property in the manner laid  down in the Third Schedule to the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) . 
132.  Application of certain provisions of Income -tax Act .—The provisions of the Second Schedule 
and the Third Schedule to the Incometax  Act, 1961 and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time  to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and 
the rules  referred to the amount in arrears of the amount mentioned in section 129 of this Code  instead of 
to the income -tax: 
Provided that any reference in the said provisions  and the rules to the “assessees ” shall be construed as 
a reference to an employer or establishment, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
133. Penalty for failure to pay contributions, etc. — If any person, — 78 
 (a) being an employer, fails to  pay any contribution which he is liable to pay  under this Code or rules, 
regulations or schemes made thereunder; or  
(b) deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages of an employee, the whole or  any part of employer's 
contribution; or  
(c) in contravention of the provisions of this Code, reduces the wages or any  privilege or benefits 
admissible to an employee; or  
(d) in contravention of the provisions of Chapter IV or Chapter VI or rules,  regulations or schemes 
made or framed under this Code respectively, re lating to such  Chapters, dismisses, discharges, reduces 
in rank or otherwise penalises a woman  employee; or  
(e) fails or refuses to submit any return, report, statement or any other information  required under this 
Code or any rules, regulations or schemes made or framed  thereunder; or  
(f) obstructs any Inspector -cum-Facilitator or other officer or staff of the Central  Board or the 
Corporation or other Social Security Organisation or a competent authority  in the discharge of his 
duties; or  
(g) fails to pay a ny amount of gratuity to which an employee is entitled under  this Code; or  
(h) fails to pay any amount of compensation to which an employee is entitled  under this Code; or  
(i) fails to provide any maternity benefit to which a woman is entitled under this  Code; or  
(j) fails to send to a competent authority a statement which he is required to  send under Chapter VII; 
or 
(k) fails to produce on demand by the Inspector -cum-Facilitator any register or  document in his 
custody kept in pursuance of this Code or the  rules, regulations or  schemes made or framed thereunder; 
or 
(l) fails to pay the cess for building workers which he is liable to pay under this  Code; or  
(m) is guilty of any contravention of or non -compliance with any of the  requirements of this Code or 
the rules or the regulations or schemes made or framed  thereunder in respect of which no special penalty 
is provided in this Chapter; or  
(n) obstructs executive officer in exercising his functions under Chapter XIII; or  
(o) dishonestly makes a false return,  report, statement or information to be  submitted thereunder; or  
(p) fails or makes default in complying with any condition subject to which  exemption under section 
143 was granted; or  
(q) fails to pay any administrative or inspection charges payable under  any of  the schemes framed 
under Chapter III,   
he shall be punishable, — 
(i) where he commits an offence under clause ( a), with imprisonment for a term  which may extend 
to three years, but — 
(a) which shall not be less than one year, in case of failure to pay the  employee's contribution 
which has been deducted by him from the employee's  wages and shall also be liable to fine of one 
lakh rupees;  
(b) which shall not be less than two months but may be extended to six  months, in any other case 
and shall also be  liable to fine of fifty thousand  rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be  recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a lesser term;  
(ii) where he commits an offence under clause ( g), with impriso nment for a term  which may extend to 
one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees,  or with both;  79 
 (iii) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( d), (f), (i), (k), (l) or (o), with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which  may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both;  
(iv) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( b), (c), (e), (h), (j), (m), (n), (p) or ( q), with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
134.  Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction. —Whoever, having been 
convicted by a court of an offence punishable under this  Code, commits the same offence shall, for second, 
or every subsequent such offence, be  punishable with imprisonme nt for a term which may extend to two 
years and with fine of two  lakh rupees:  
Provided that where such second or subsequent offence is for failure by the employer  to pay any 
contribution, charges, cess, maternity benefit, gratuity or compensation which  under this Code he is liable 
to pay, he shall, for such second or subsequent offence, be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years but which shall  not be less than two years and shall also be liable to fine of three 
lakh rupees.  
135. Offences by companies. — (1) Where an offence under this Chapter has been committed by a 
company,  every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was  
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of  the company, as well as the  company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person  liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence has  been committed b y a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,  secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, secretary or other officer shall a lso be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and  punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association  of individuals ; 
and 
(b) “Director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
136. Cognizance of offences. — (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Code,  except on a complaint made by an aggrieved person or such officer as may be  notified by  the Central 
Government for the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III and Chapter IV and the rules, regulations 
or schemes made or framed under this Code relating to those  Chapters, and for the purposes of offences 
relating to other prov isions of this Code and the  rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, 
by the officer notified by the  appropriate Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no prosecution under  this Code shall be 
instituted, excep t by or with the previous sanction of the authority  notified by the Central Government for 
the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III and  Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or schemes made 
or framed under this Code relating to  those Chapters; and for the purposes of offences relating to other 
provisions of this Code  and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, the authority 
notified by  the appropriate Government.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of  the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Chapter.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a single complaint may  be filed under that 
sub-section by more than one aggrieved persons if they are agg rieved  by the same or similar offence 
committed at a place or different places within the jurisdiction  of the court.  80 
 137.Prior opportunity before prosecution. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator  or any other officer notified for the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III 
and Chapter IV  and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed under this Code relating to those  
Chapters, by the Central Government; and for the purposes of offences relating to ot her provisions of this 
Code and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed under this  Code relating thereto, by the 
appropriate Government, shall, before initiation of prosecution  proceeding against an employer for any 
offence under this Chapter, giv e an opportunity to  the employer to comply with the aforesaid relevant 
provisions by way of a written direction,  which shall lay down a time period for such compliance, and, if 
the employer complies with  the direction within such period, then, no such proc eeding shall be initiated 
against the  employer; but no such opportunity shall be accorded to an employer, if the violation of the  same 
nature of such provisions is repeated within a period of three years from the date on  which such first 
violation was comm itted and in such case the prosecution shall be initiated  in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter.  
138. Compounding of offences. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence committed for the first time, punishable under this Chapter, being 
an offence — 
(i) punishable with fine only; or  
(ii) punishable with imprisonment for a term which is not more than one year  and also with fine,  
may, on an application made, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be  compounded by 
an officer authorised by the Central Government for the purposes of  offences relating to Chapter III and 
Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or schemes made  or framed under this Code relating to those Chap ters, 
by the Central Government; and for  the purposes of offences relating to other provisions of this Code and 
the rules, regulations  or schemes made or framed under this Code relating thereto, by the appropriate 
Government,  in such manner as may be presc ribed by the Central Government on payment by the offender  
to the appropriate Government the amount — 
(i) in the case of an offence punishable with fine only, the half of the maximum  fine provided for that 
offence; and  
(ii) in the case of an offence punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which is  not more than one 
year and also with fine, the three -fourth of the maximum fine  provided for that offence.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a  person for the second 
time or thereafter within a period of three years from the date — 
(i) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded; or  
(ii) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier convicted.  
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound  an offence, 
subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government for  the purposes of offences 
relating to Chapter III and Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or  schemes made or framed under this Code 
relating to those Chapters; and for the purposes  of offences relating to other provisions of this Code and the 
rules, regulations or schemes  made or framed under this Code relating thereto, by the appropriate 
Government.  
(4) Every ap plication for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such form  and in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no  prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to  whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(6) Where the compounding of any offence is made after the institution of any  prosecution, such 
compounding shall be brought to the notice of the court in w hich the  prosecution is pending in writing by 
the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), and on such  notice of the compounding of the offence being given 
to the court, the person against  whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  81 
 (7) Any perso n who fails to comply with the order made by the officer referred to in  sub-section ( 1), 
shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum  fine provided for the offence, in 
addition to such fine.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION  AND MONITORING  
139.Reporting of vacancies to career centres. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, require that from such date  as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every 
establishment or any class or  category of establishments, before filling up any vacancy in any employment 
in that  establishment or such class or category of establishments, as the case may be, shall report  or cause 
to be reported, that vacancy to such career centre as may be specified in the  notification, and the employer 
shall thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may prescribe  the following, 
namely: — 
(i) the manner in which the vacancies, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall b e reported to the career 
centres electronically or otherwise;  
(ii) the form in which such vacancies shall be reported to the career centres; and  
(iii) the manner and form of filing the return by the employer, to the concerned  career centre.  
(3) Nothing in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to impose any obligation  upon any employer 
to recruit any person through the career centre to fill any vacancy  merely because such vacancy has been 
reported.  
(4) The executive officer shall have access to any record  or document in the possession  of any employer 
required to furnish any information or returns for the purposes of this  Chapter and may enter, at any 
reasonable time, any premises where he believes such record  or document to be and inspect or take copies 
of such records or documents or ask any  question necessary for obtaining any information required.  
140. Exclusions from application of this Chapter. — (1) The provisions of section 139 shall not apply 
in relation to vacancies, — 
(a) in any employment in agricu lture (including horticulture) in any establishment  in private sector 
other than employment in plantation; or  
(b) in any employment in domestic service; or  
(c) in any employment connected with the staff of Parliament or any State  Legislature; or  
(d) in any  employment the total duration of which is less than ninety days; or  
(e) in any class or category of establishments as may be notified by the Central  Government; or  
(f) in any establishment (other than Government establishment) with less than  twenty or such number 
of employees as may be notified by the Central Government;  and 
(g) in any other employment as may be notified by the Central Government.  
(2) Unless the Central Government, by notification direct, the provisions of this  Chapter shall not apply 
in relation to — 
(a) vacancies which are proposed to be filled through promotion or by absorption  of surplus staff of 
any branch or department of the same establishment or through  independent recruitment agencies such 
as Union Public Service Commission, Sta ff Selection Commission or a State Public Service 
Commission or any other agencies as  may be notified by the Central Government; or  
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a monthly remuneration of less  than an amount notified 
by the appropriate Gover nment.  
  82 
 CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
141. Social Security Fund. —(1) There shall be established by the Central Government a Social 
Security Fund  for social security and welfare of the unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers  
and the sources of the fund shall comprise of funding received — 
(i) under sub -section ( 3) of section 109;  
(ii) under sub -section ( 3) of section 114;  
(iii) from the composition of the offences under this Code relating to Central  Government and from 
any other Social Security F und established under any other  central labour law.  
(2) A separate account shall be established and maintained for the funding mentioned  under each of the 
clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii). 
(3) Social Security Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be expende d for the  purposes for which 
each separate account has been established and maintained under  sub-section ( 2). 
(4) The Social Security Fund shall be established and administered in the manner  prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(5) There shall be established by the State Government a Social Security Fund for the  welfare of the 
unorganised workers in which there shall be credited the amount received  from — 
(i) the composition of offences under this Code relating to the State Government; and  
(ii) such  other sources as may be prescribed by the State Government,  and the fund shall be 
administered and expended for the welfare of the unorganised workers  in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
 
142.  Application of Aadhaar. — (1) An empl oyee or unorganised worker or any other person, as the 
case may be,  for— 
(a) registration as member or beneficiary; or  
(b) seeking benefit whether in kind, cash or medical sickness benefit or pension,  gratuity or maternity 
benefit or any other benefit or f or withdrawal of fund; or  
(c) availing services of career centre; or  
(d) receiving any payment or medical attendance as Insured Person himself or  for his dependants,  
under this Code or rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, shall establish  his identity or, 
as the case may be, the identity of his family members or dependants through  Aadhaar number and for such 
purpose the expression “Aadhaar ” shall have the meaning as  defined in clause ( a) of section 2 of the 
Aadhaar (The Targeted D elivery of Financial and  Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 
2016) : 
Provided that any foreigner employee shall obtain and submit Aadhaar number for  establishing his 
identity, as soon as possible, on becoming resident within the meaning  of clause ( v) of section 2 of the 
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,  Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 
2016) . 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Aadhaar number issued to an individual  shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of  Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 2016) . 
143. Power to exempt establishment. —(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the 
appropriate Governmen t may, by notification, and subject to the conditions which may include the 
eligibility conditions  to be fulfilled prior to grant of exemption and the conditions to be complied with after  
exemption, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this be half, grant exemption  to an 83 
 establishment or class of establishments (including factory or other establishments  under the control of 
Central Government or State Government or local bodies) or employees  or class of employees, from any 
or all of the provisio ns of this Code or the scheme framed  thereunder as may be specified in the notification 
and may renew for further period such  exemption by like notification:  
Provided that no such exemption, — 
(i) in respect of Provident Fund Scheme, Pension Scheme and Insurance Scheme,  without prior 
consultation with the Central Board; and  
(ii) in respect of Chapter IV, without prior consultation with the Corporation,   
shall be granted or renewed and the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be,  shall on such 
consultation forward its view to the appropriate Government within such time  as may be prescribed by that 
Government.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1), specify therein 
conditions as may be prescrib ed by that Government, which the exempted  establishment or the class of 
establishments or an employee or class of employees, as the  case may be, shall comply with after such 
exemption:  
Provided that for the purpose of grant of exemption in respect of Provi dent Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, the terms and conditions of exemption  shall be specified in such respective 
schemes.  
(3) The exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) to an establishment or class of  establishments or an 
employee or cla ss of employees, as the case may be, shall be initially  for a period of three years from the 
date of publication of such notification and may be  extended by the appropriate Government to the extent 
of such period as may be prescribed  by the Central Governm ent: 
Provided that for the purpose of grant of exemption in respect of Provident Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, exemption may be extended for such  period as may be specified in such 
respective schemes.  
(4) The exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) shall only be granted if the employees  in the 
establishment or class of establishments or an employee or the class of employees so  exempted are 
otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior to the benefits  provided in the provisions 
of the Code or the scheme framed thereunder.  
(5) For the purposes of administering the fund, managing the investments, maintaining  accounts of the 
contributions, withdrawals, credit of interest in respect of each employee of  the fund created, an d any other 
matter specified in the scheme for any exempted establishment  or class of establishments, or employees or 
class of employees, a board of trustees shall be  constituted by the employer which will be a legal entity 
which can sue and can be sued an d the conditions for management of the trust shall be prescribed by the 
appropriate  Government as part of the conditions for exemption:  
Provided that conditions for administering the fund, managing the investments,  maintaining accounts 
of the contributions, withdrawals, credit of interest in respect of each  employee of the fund created, in 
respect of exemption from Provident Fund Scheme, Pension  Scheme and Insurance Scheme shall be 
specified in such respective schemes.  
(6) Where an exemption is  granted under this section from operation of any or all the  provisions of the 
Code or any of the scheme under Chapter III, to any establishment, class  of establishments, employee or 
class of employees, the employer in relation to such  establishment shall furnish such returns electronically 
in respect of persons employed,  accounts maintained in respect of employees, investments made from the 
fund, provide  facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charges as the Central Government may  
direct.  
(7) If employer in relation to any establishment or class of establishments or employee  or class of 
employees in respect of whom the exemption has been granted under  sub-section ( 1), fails to comply with 
any of the conditions specified under this section,  then, t he appropriate Government may on such failure, 
cancel the exemption so granted.  84 
 (8) Where any exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) is cancelled, the entire amount  of surplus and 
reserves, if any, and accumulations to the credit of every employee, to who m such exemption applied, in 
the exempted fund of the establishment in which he is employed,  shall be transferred to the respective 
statutory fund created under this Code within such  time and manner as specified in the conditions for grant 
of exemption:  
Provided that in respect of any cancellation of exemption from the Provident Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, the time limit, form and manner of transfer  of accumulations of exempted 
employees from the exempted funds to such respective  funds  shall be specified in such respective schemes.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the employer of an  establishment exempted 
under sub -section ( 1), after the resolution of the board of trustees  of the establishment to that effect may 
make an application to the appropriate Government  for surrender of the exemption granted under that sub -
section from the date specified in the  application and the appropriate Government may on receipt of that 
application, allow the  employer to remit the contribution in the statutory funds under this Code from the 
date specified in the application and process the application for cancellation of exemption and  on such 
cancellation, the employer and the board of trustees shall transfer accumulation of  each em ployee and 
surplus and reserves from the fund referred to in sub -section ( 5), to the  concerned statutory funds under this 
Code within such time and in such manner as may be  notified by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that in respect of any surrender o f exemption from the Provident Fund  Scheme, the Pension 
Scheme and the Insurance Scheme, the time limit, form and manner of  transfer of accumulation of exempted 
employees and surplus and reserves from the fund  referred to in sub -section ( 5), to the concern ed statutory 
funds under this Code shall be  such as may be specified in the concerned schemes framed under Chapter 
III. 
144.Power to defer or reduce. — Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter III or Chapter IV, 
the Central  Government may by order, def er or reduce employer's contribution, or employee's contribution,  
or both, payable under Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the case may be, for a period up to three  months at a 
time, in respect of establishment to which Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the case  may be, applies, for whole 
of India or part thereof in the event of pandemic, endemic or  national disaster.  
145. Liability in case of transfer of establishment. — Where an employer transfers his establishment 
in whole or in part, by sale, gift,  lease or licence or in any other manner whatsoever, the employer and the 
person to whom  the establishment is so transferred shall jointly and severally be liable to pay the amount  
due in respect of any liabilities, cess or any other amount payable under this Code i n respect of the periods 
up to the date of such transfer:  
Provided that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the value of the assets  obtained by him 
by such transfer.  
146. Members officers and staff to be public servants. — Every member of a Social Security 
Organisation and the officers and staff thereof,  any Inspector -cum-Facilitator, competent authority, 
Authorised Officer, Recovery Officer  and any other person discharging any function under this Code, shall 
be deemed to be a  public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
  85 
 147. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) a Social Security Organisation;  
(iv) a competent authority;  
(v) any officer or staff of a Social Security Organisation; or  
(vi) any other person or authority,  discharging the functions or exercising the powers under this Code, 
for anything which is  in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Code or of any 
rules,  regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder.  
148. Misuse of benefits. —If the appropriate Government is satisfied in the manner prescribed by it 
that any  establishment or any other person has misused any benefit provided to him under this  Code or 
rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, then, such Government  may, by notification, 
deprive such establishment or other person, as the case may be, from  such benefit for suc h time as may be 
specified in the notification:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless an opportunity of being heard is  given to such 
establishment or other person, as the case may be:  
Provided further that the manner to ascertain misuse of any  benefit under this section  relating to Chapter 
III, shall be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or the Pension  Scheme or the Insurance Scheme, as 
the case may be.  
149. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government and Social Secur ity 
Organisations. —The Central Government may give directions to — 
(i) any State Government or a State Board constituted under section 12 to  execute in that State, of 
any of the provisions of this Code; or  
(ii) any of the Social Security Organisations in respect of the matters relating to  the implementation 
of the provisions of this Code.  
150. Power to frame schemes. — The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous  publication, frame schemes not inconsistent with this Code, for the purposes of giving  effect to 
the provisions thereof.  
151. Protection against attachment etc. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in  force, the amount standing to be credited in favour of the employee under Chapters 
III, IV,  V, VI or VII of any member of any fund under this Code, or of any exempted employee in a  
provident fund maintained by his employer, shall not in any way be capable of being  assigned or charged 
and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any  Court in respect of any debt or liability 
incurred by such employee or member or the exempted  employee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any amount standing to the credit of a member in the fund or of an exempted  employee in a 
provident fund maintained by his employer at the time of the death of such  member or the exempted 
employee, as the case may be, and payable to his nominee or in  case of failure of nomination, to his family 
under the scheme or the rules of the fund shall,  subject to any d eduction authorised by the said scheme or 
rules, as the case may be, vest  in the nominee or such family and shall be free from any debt or other liability 
incurred by  the deceased or the nominee before his death and shall also not be liable to attachment  under 
any decree or order of any court.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  any amount due 
under the Chapters referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be the charge on the  assets of the establishment to 
which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance  with the provisions of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 86 
 152. Power to amend Schedule. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to  do, it may, b y notification amend the First Schedule, Fourth Schedule, Fifth Schedule, Sixth  
Schedule and Seventh Schedule by way of addition or deletion therein and upon such  addition or deletion, 
the Schedules shall stand to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) If the appropriate Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to  do, it may, by 
notification amend the Second Schedule and Third Schedule by way of  addition therein and not otherwise, 
and upon such addition, the Schedules shall stand to  have bee n amended accordingly.  
153. Transitional provisions. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the following 
organisations  constituted or established under the enactments repealed under section 164, namely: — 
(i) the Central Board constituted under section 5A of the Employees' Provident  Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
(ii) Executive Committee constituted under section 5AA of the Employees'  Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
(iii) the Corpor ation established under section 3 of the Employees' State  Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 
1948) ; 
(iv) the Medical Benefit Council constituted under section 10 of the Employees'  State Insurance Act, 
1948  (34 of 1948) ; 
(v) the Standing Committee of the Corporation constituted under section 8 of  the Employees' State 
Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 1948) ; and  
(vi) the Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 of the Building  and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Condition of S ervice)  Act, 1996,  shall, after the 
commencement of this Code, continue to exercise the powers and discharge  the functions of the 
corresponding organisations under this Code, respectively, the Central  Board of Trustees for Employees 
Provident Fund constitu ted under section 4, the Executive  Committee constituted under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 4, the Employees State Insurance  Corporation, constituted under section 5, the Medical 
Benefit Committee constituted under  sub-section ( 5) of section 5, the Standing Committee constituted 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 5, Building Workers' Welfare Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 7,  as if such organisations constituted or, as the case may be, established under such repealed  
enactments, had been cons tituted under the respective provisions of this Code, till such  corresponding 
organisations are constituted under this Code or till their respective time  period under the repealed 
enactments expire, whichever is earlier.  
154. Power of appropriate Government to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, and subject to the condition  of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code 
for the purpose of  giving effect to the provisions thereof.  
(2) In particular an d without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme of the  beneficiaries under 
clause ( c), the education al schemes for the benefit of children of  the beneficiaries under clause ( d) and 
the medical expenses for treatment of major  ailments of a beneficiary or, such dependant under clause 
(e) of sub -section ( 6) of section 7;  
(b) manner and time within which sec ond appeal may be filed to the Employees'  Insurance Court by 
the Insured Person or the Corporation under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 7) of section 37;  
(c) the manner of commencement of proceedings before the Employees'  Insurance Court, fees and 
procedure thereof under sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(d) bank or other financial institution in which the gratuity shall be invested for  the benefit of minor 
under the third proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 53;  87 
 (e) the time, form and manner of nomination by an employee under sub -section ( 1), the time to make 
fresh nomination under sub -section ( 4), the form and manner of  modification of a nomination under 
sub-section ( 5) and the form for fresh nomination  under sub -section ( 6) of section 55;  
(f) time within whi ch and the form in which a written application shall be made  under sub -section ( 1) 
and the form of application to the competent authority under  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) of section 56;  
(g) the manner of registration of an establishment by the employer under  sub-section ( 3) and the 
manner of composition of the Board of Trustees of the  approved gratuity fund and the manner in which 
the competent authority may recover  the amount of the gratuity payable to an employee from the insurer 
under  sub-section ( 4) of section 57;  
(h) the qualifications and experience of the officer appointed as the competent  authority under sub -
section ( 1) of section 58;  
(i) authority to whom an appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 3) of section 72;  
(j) class of employers and t he form of notice -book under sub -section ( 4) of section 82;  
(k) the manner of recording the memorandum in a register by the competent authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 89;  
(l) such other experience and qualifications for appointment as a competent  authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 91;  
(m) time limit to pay the amount of cess under section 101;  
(n) fees for appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 105;  
(o) conditions to acquire, hold, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or  immov able property under 
sub-section ( 1), conditions to invest moneys, re -invest or  realise investments under sub -section ( 2) 
terms to raise loans and take measures for  discharging such loans under sub -section ( 3) and terms to 
constitute for the benefit  of offi cers and staff or any class of them, provident or other benefit funds 
under  sub-section ( 4) of section 120;  
(p) conditions and manner of writing off irrecoverable dues under section 121;  
(q) other powers of Inspector -cum-Facilitator under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 6) of section 122;  
(r) form and manner for maintenance of records and registers and other particulars  and details under 
clause ( a), manner and form for display of notices at the work places  of the employees under clause ( b) 
and the manner and period of filing returns to the  officers or authority under clause ( d) of section 123;  
(s) the form and manner of application for compounding of an offence under  sub-section ( 4) of section 
138; 
(t) the manner and form for reporting vacancies and form for f iling the return by  the employer, to the 
concerned career centre under sub -section ( 2) of section 139;  
(u) the time within which the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may  be, shall forward its 
view to the appropriate Government under sub -sectio n (1), conditions which the exempted 
establishment or the class of establishments or an  employee or class of employees, as the case may be, 
shall comply with after such  exemption under sub -section ( 2) and conditions for management of the 
trust under  sub-section ( 5) of section 143;  
(v) manner of determining the misuse of any benefit by an establishment or by  any other person under 
section 148; and  
(w) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the  appropriate Government 
under the prov isions of this Code.  
155. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, and subject to the condition of  previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code, 
for the purpose of giving  effect to the provisions thereof.  88 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner, and the conditions subject to which, the provisions of Chapter II I shall be made 
inapplicable to an establishment by the Central Provident Fund  Commissioner, under sub -section ( 5) 
and the manner, and the conditions subject to  which the provisions of that Chapter IV shall be made 
inapplicable to an establishment  by the D irector General of the Corporation under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 1;  
(b) manner of establishment and maintenance of career centre and the career  services under clause 
(9), the income of dependant parents (including father -in-law and mother -in-law of a woman 
employee), under sub -clause ( e) of clause ( 33) and  other authority who shall be deemed to be the 
occupier under sub -clause ( c) and the  matters which are directly related to the condition of ship, for 
which the owner of ship  shall be deemed to be the occupier under the proviso to the said sub -clause ( c) 
of clause ( 52), of section 2;  
(c) the time and manner of registration of establishment, the manner of making  application for 
cancellation of the registration, the conditions subject to which the  registr ation shall be cancelled and 
the procedure of cancellation and other matters  relating thereto in respect of an establishment to which 
Chapter III or Chapter IV  applies, and whose business activities are in the process of closure, under 
section 3;  
(d) the manner of administration of the funds vested in the Central Board under  sub-section ( 1), the 
manner to assist the Central Board in performance of its functions  by Executive Committee under sub -
section ( 3), the terms and conditions, including  tenure of offi ce of members of the Central Board and 
Executive Committee under  sub-section ( 6) and the other functions and the manner of performing such 
functions  under sub -section ( 7), of section 4;  
(e) the manner of administration of the Corporation and the manner of  representation of States under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), the manner of constitution  of Standing Committee under sub -section ( 3), 
the manner of administration of the  affairs of the Corporation, exercise of powers and performance of 
functions by the  Standing Committee under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4), the duties and powers of  
Medical Benefit Committee under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) and the terms and  conditions, including 
tenure of office, subject to which a member of the Corporation  and Standing Committee shall discharge 
their respective duties under sub -section ( 7) of section 5;  
(f) the manner of exercising the powers and performance of the functions by the  National Social 
Security Board under sub -section ( 1), the manner of nomination of  members,  their term of office and 
other conditions of service, procedure to be followed  in the discharge of their functions and manner of 
filling vacancies under sub -section ( 4) and time, place and rules of procedure relating to the transaction 
of business under  sub-section ( 6) of section 6;  
(g) other welfare measures and facilities under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 6) of section 7;  
(h) the intervals at which Social Security Organisation or any Committee thereof  shall meet and the 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at meetings  under sub -section ( 1), and the fee and 
allowances of members of such Social Security  Organisation or Committee under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 9;  
(i) manner of reconstitution of the Corporation or the Central Board or t he National Social Security 
Board or the State Unorganised Workers' Board or the Building  Workers' Welfare Board or any of the 
Committees under sub -section ( 1) and the  alternate arrangements for the purpose of administration of 
the relevant provisions of  this Code under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(j) the manner of maintenance of a provident fund account in relation to the  establishment under sub -
section ( 1) of section 21;  
(k) the form, manner, time limits and fees for filing of appeal under sub -section (2) of section 23;  89 
 (l) salary and allowances of the Director General or the Financial Commissioner  under sub -section 
(3), their powers and duties under sub -section ( 4) and maximum  monthly salary limit under the proviso 
to sub -section ( 7) of section 24;  
(m) the manner of investment of Employees' State Insurance Fund or any other  money which is held 
by Corporation under sub -section ( 4) of section 25;  
(n) limits for defraying of expenditure under clause ( k) of section 26;  
(o) conditions to acquire, hold, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or  immovable property under 
sub-section ( 1), conditions to invest moneys by the  Corporation under sub -section ( 2) and the terms to 
raise loans and taking measures  for discharging such loans under sub -section ( 3) of section  27; 
(p) manner of insurance of employees under sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(q) the rate of contributions under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(r) the type of administrative expenses and percentage of income which may be  spent on expenses 
and the limits  for such expenses under section 30;  
(s) the limit for the amount of payment under the proviso to clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1), and the 
qualifications to claim benefits, conditions, rate and period  thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 32;  
(t) the limi ts within which the Corporation may incur expenditure from the  Employees' State 
Insurance Fund under section 33;  
(u) the manner and time within which the Insured person or the Corporation  may file appeal under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 37;  
(v) the rates, periods and conditions for payment of dependants' benefit under  sub-section ( 1) and to 
other dependants under sub -section ( 2), of section 38;  
(w) the qualification of an Insured Person and his family to claim medical benefit  and the conditions 
subject to which such benefit may be given and the scale and  period thereof, under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 39, and the payment of contribution  and other conditions under the third proviso thereof;  
(x) the structure, functions, powers and acti vities of the organisation for  providing certain benefits to 
employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment  injury, under sub -section ( 6) of section 40;  
(y) extended period for insurance, the manner of satisfaction and the manner of  calculation of  
capitalised value of benefit payable to the employee under sub -section ( 1) of section 42;  
(z) terms and conditions subject to which the scheme may be operated under  section 44;  
(za) the manner of obtaining an insurance by every employer, other than an  employer or an 
establishment belonging to, or under the control of, the Central  Government or a State Government 
under sub -section ( 1) and conditions to exempt  and manner of establishing an approved gratuity fund 
under sub -section ( 2) and the time  limit to ge t establishment registered by the employer under  
sub-section ( 3), of section 57;  
(zb) the form of notice under sub -section ( 1) and the proof of pregnancy and  proof of delivery under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 62;  
(zc) the proof of miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy under  sub-section ( 1), the proof of 
tubectomy operation under sub -section ( 2) and the  proof of illness under sub -section ( 3) of section 65;  
(zd) the duration of breaks under section 66;  
(ze) the number of employees and distance for  crèche facility under sub -section ( 1) of section 67;  
(zf) gross misconduct under the second proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(zg) rate of interest to be paid by the employer under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 77;  
(zh) the manner of no tice under sub -section ( 1) and the manner of transmitting  money under  
sub-section ( 3), of section 92;  90 
 (zi) the form, manner and fee for application for claim or settlement under  sub-section ( 3) of section 
93; 
(zj) the manner and time of collection of cess  under sub -section ( 2), manner of  deposit of the cess so 
collected under sub -section ( 3), and the uniform rate or rates of  advance cess under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 100;  
(zk) the rate of interest in case of delayed payment of cess under section 101;  
(zl) the manner of self -assessment of cess under sub -section ( 1) of section 103;  
(zm) the authority to inquire and impose penalty under section 104;  
(zn) time limit to prefer appeal, appellate authority, form and manner of appeal  under sub -section ( 1) 
of se ction 105;  
(zo) manner of registration as beneficiary under section 106;  
(zp) benefits of a beneficiary under sub -section ( 2) of section 107;  
(zq) eligible age for registration under clause ( a) and form and manner of  information under clause 
(b), of sub -section ( 1) and the form of application, documents  for registration and manner of self 
registration under sub -section ( 2), of section 113;  
(zr) carrying out the matters specified in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 7) of section 114;  
(zs) manner of compounding of offences under sub -section ( 1) of section 138;  
(zt) the manner of establishment and administration of the Social Security Fund  under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 141;  
(zu) eligibility conditions to be fulfilled prior to grant of exemption and the  conditions to be complied 
with after exemption under sub -section ( 1); and extension  period of exemption under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 143; and  
(zv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the  Central Government under 
the provisions of t his Code.  
156. Power of State Government to make rules. — (1) The State Government may, by notification, 
and subject to the condition of  previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code, for the 
purpose of giving  effect to the provisions the reof. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of exercising the powers and performance of functions by State  Unorganised Worke rs' 
Board under sub -section ( 9), the manner of nomination of  members of the Board, their term of office 
and other conditions of service, the procedure  to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and 
the manner of filling vacancies  among the memb ers of, the Board under sub -section ( 12), and the time, 
place and  rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its meetings under  sub-section 
(14) of section 6;  
(b) the terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other  allowances payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Building Workers'  Welfare Board and the manner of filling 
of casual vacancies of such members, under  sub-section ( 4), the terms and conditions of appointment 
and the salary and allowances  payable to the Secretary and the other officers and employees of the said 
Board under  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 5) of section 7;  
(c) procedure to be followed by the Employees' Insurance Court under  sub-section ( 2) and the rules 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 50;  
(d) the amount to be deposited towards the expenditure of the funeral of the  employee with the 
competent authority by the employer under sub -section ( 7) of section 76;  91 
 (e) conditions when application for review is made without certificate of a  medical practitioner under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 79;  
(f) the frequent interval for medical examination under the proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 84;  
(g) the form of statement to be submitted by the employer under sub -section ( 1) of section 88;  
(h) the manner in which matters may be dealt with by or before a competent  authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 92;  
(i) time -limit for disposal of application and costs incidental to the proceedings  under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 93;  
(j) the manner  of authentication of memorandum under section 97;  
(k) such other sources of funding and the manner of administering and  expending of the fund under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 141; and  
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the State  Government under the 
provisions of this Code.  
157.Power of Corporation to make regulations. — (1) The Corporation may, by notification, and 
subject to the condition of previous  publication, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Code and the  
rules and schemes  made or framed thereunder, for the administration of the affairs of the Corporation and 
for carrying into effect the provisions of Chapter IV and the provisions of this Code relating to  that Chapter.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the cases and matters to be submitted for the decision of the Corporation  under clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 4) and the com position of committees under  sub-section ( 6) of section 5;  
(b) the areas in respect of which the Corporation may appoint Regional Boards  and local committees 
and the manner in which such Boards and committees shall  perform the functions and exercise the 
powers under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) such other functions of the Director General and the Financial Commissioner  under sub -section 
(4), the method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline  and other conditions of service of the 
officers an d employees under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 8) and minimum qualifying service for 
promotion to next higher grade  under the second proviso to sub -section ( 9) of section 24;  
(d) the unit in respect of which all contribution shall be payable under  sub-sectio n (3), and the days 
on which the contributions shall fall due under  sub-section ( 4) of section 29;  
(e) maintenance of register of employees by or through the contractor under  sub-section ( 7), and any 
matter relating or incidental to the payment and collect ion of  contribution under sub -section ( 9) of 
section 31;  
(f) qualifications and experience of other person to certify sickness under  clause ( a), authority to 
certify eligibility of a woman under clause ( b), authority to  certify eligibility for payment under clause 
(c) of sub -section ( 1), the conditions for  extension of medical benefits under sub -section ( 2) and any 
matter relating or  incidental to the accrual and payment of benefits under sub -section ( 4) of section 32;  
(g) continuous period in which the  employee contracts occupational disease  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 36;  
(h) constitution of medical board under sub -section ( 1) and constitution of  medical appeal tribunal 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 37;  
(i) the period and the nature of medical benefit which may be allowed to a  person under the first 
proviso, conditions for voluntary retirement scheme under the  second proviso, payment of contribution 
and other conditions for eligibility to receive  medical benefits under the second proviso and the  
conditions for grant of medical  benefits to the Insured Person during employment injury under the 
fourth proviso, to  sub-section ( 3), the time for which students of medical education institutions shall  92 
 serve the Corporation and the manner in which the bon d shall be furnished under  clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 4) and manner of carrying out occupational and  epidemiological surveys and studies for 
assessment of health and working conditions  of Insured Persons under sub -section ( 6) of section 39;  
(j) other autho rity for providing permission to leave the area in which medical  treatment provided 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3), form of nomination under  sub-section ( 6) and the authority to 
determine benefits under sub -section ( 9) of section 41;  
(k) user charges to be paid by other beneficiaries for medical facilities under  clause ( c) of the 
Explanation to section 44;  
(l) time within which the claims, recovery or contribution, from employer by the  Corporation and 
recovery of contribution by the employer from the C ontractor, shall  be made under the second proviso 
to sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(m) the forms of records and registers and of returns to be filed under the  second proviso to clause 
(d) of section 123;  
(n) the appellate authority not below the rank of the Joint Director of the  Corporation before whom 
appeal shall be preferred and the interest to be refunded to  the employer by the Corporation under 
section 126;  
(o) manner of levy and recovery of damages from the employer who makes  default in the payment 
of any contribution which he is liable to pay under section 128;  
(p) the circumstances in which and the condition subject to which any regulation  may be relaxed, the 
extent of such relaxation, and the authority by whom such relaxation  may be granted; and  
(q) any matter in respect of which regulations are required or permitted to be  made by this Code.  
158. Prior publication of rules regulations, etc. —The power to make rules, regulations and schemes 
under this Code (except the  schemes to be framed under Chapter III), shall be subject to the condition of 
the previous  publication of the same being made, in the following manner, namely: — 
(a) the date to be specified after a draft of such rules, regulations and schemes  under consideration, 
shall not be less t han forty -five days from the date on which the  draft of the proposed rules, regulations 
and schemes is published for general  information in the Official Gazette;  
(b) such rules, regulations and schemes shall finally be published in the Official  Gazette and , on 
such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this Code:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the circumstances of epidemic,  pandemic or disaster, 
dispense with the condition of previous publication under this  section.  
159. Rules to giv e effect to arrangements with other countries for the transfer of money paid as 
compensation. — (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the transfer to  any 
foreign country of money deposited with a competent authority under Chapter VII which has been awarded 
to or may be due to, any person residing or about to reside in such  foreign country and for the receipt, 
distribution and administration in any State of any  money deposited under the law relating to employees' 
compensation in any  foreign country,  which has been awarded to, or may be due to any person residing or 
about to reside in any  State:  
Provided that no sum deposited under Chapter VII in respect of fatal accidents shall  be so transferred 
without the consent of the employer co ncerned after the competent  authority receiving the sum has passed 
orders determining its distribution and apportionment  under section 81.  
(2) Where money deposited with a competent authority has been so transferred in  accordance with the 
rules made under this section, the provisions elsewhere contained in  this Code regarding distribution by the 
competent authority of compensation deposited  with him shall cease to apply in respect of any such money.  
160.Laying of rules, regulations and schemes, etc. —(1) Eve ry rule, regulation, notification and 
scheme made or framed by the Central  Government or the Corporation, as the case may be, under this Code 
shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made or framed, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 93 
 sessi on, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the  session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  in the rule, regulation, notification or 
scheme, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that  the rule, regulation, notification or scheme, as the 
case may be, should not be made, such  rule, regulation, notification or scheme shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  rule, 
regulation, notification or scheme, as the case may be.  
(2) Every rule and scheme made or framed, and every notification issued by, the State  Government 
under this Code, shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or framed,  before the State Legislatures, 
where it consists of  two Houses, or where such legislature  consists of one House, before that House.  
161. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Code. —(1) The provisions of this Code 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, or in the terms  of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after 
the coming  into force of this Code:  
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwis e, a person is 
entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him  than those to which he would 
be entitled under this Code, the person shall continue to be  entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect 
of that matter, notw ithstanding that he is  entitled to receive benefits in respect of other matters under this 
Code.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to preclude a person from  entering into an 
agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privile ges in respect  of any matter which are more 
favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled  under this Code.  
162.Delegation of powers. —The appropriate Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the  powers and functions which may be exercised or performed by that Government may, in  relation to 
such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified, be also  exercisable by the Central 
Board, the Corporation, the National Social Security Board, the  State Unorganised Workers' Board, 
Building Workers' Welfare Board or any officer or  authority subordinate to the Central Board, the 
Corporation, the National Social Security  Board, the State Unorganised Workers' Board, Building Workers' 
Welfare Board.  
163. Power to remove d ifficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Code, the  Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,  
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may be necessary  or expedient for  removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a  period of two years 
from the commencement of this Code.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be a fter it is  made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
164. Repeal and savings. —(1) The following enactments are hereby repealed, namely: — 
1. The Employee's Compensation Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) ; 
2. The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 1948) ; 
3. The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
4. The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies)  Act, 1959  (31 of 1959) ; 
5. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  (53 of 1961) ; 
6. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 197 2 (39 of 1972) ; 
7. The Cine -Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981  (33 of 1981) ; 
8. The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996  (28 of 1996) ; 94 
 9. The Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act, 2008  (33 of 2008) . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any action taken under the enactments so repealed  including any rule, regulation, 
notification (including the notifications issued by the  States), scheme, appointment, order or direction 
made thereunder or any benefit  provided  or given under any provision of such enactments, rules, 
regulations,  notifications or schemes made thereunder for any purpose shall be deemed to have  been 
done or taken or provided for such purpose under the corresponding provisions  of this Code including  
any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, appointment, order  or direction made thereunder and shall 
be in force to the extent they are not contrary  to the provisions of this Code including any rule, 
regulation, notification, scheme,  appointment, order o r direction made thereunder till they are repealed 
under the  corresponding provisions of this Code including any rule, regulation, notification,  scheme, 
appointment, order or direction made thereunder by the appropriate  Government;  
(b) the Employees' Provi dent Funds Scheme, 1952, the Employees' Deposit  Linked Insurance 
Scheme, 1976, the Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995 and the Tribunal  (Procedure) Rules, 1997 framed 
or made under the Employees' Provident Funds and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 19 52) 
and the rules, regulations and schemes made or  framed under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948  
(34 of 1948) , shall remain in force, to the  extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Code for a period of one  year from the date of  commencement of this Code;  
(c) any exemption given under any enactments so repealed shall continue to be  in force till its validity 
expires or it ceases to be in operation under the provisions of  this Code or till any direction is made 
thereunder for such  purpose.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of  section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the repeal of such enactments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 95 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 1( 4), (8) and  152 ( 1)] 
APPLICABILITY  
Chapter No.  Chapter Heading  Applicability  
(1) (2) (3) 
III Employees' Provident 
Fund  Every establishment in which twenty or more 
employees are employed.  
IV Employees’ State 
Insurance Corporation  Every establishment in which ten or  more 
persons are employed other than a seasonal 
factory:  
Provided that Chapter IV shall also be 
applicable to an establishment, which carries on 
such hazardous or life threatening occupation as 
notified by the Central Government, in which 
even a single employee is employed:  
Provided further that an employer of a 
plantation, may opt the application of Chapter 
IV in respect of the plantation by giving 
willingness to the corporation, where the 
benefits available to the employees under that 
Chapter are bette r than what the employer is 
providing to them:  
Provided also that the contribution from the 
employers and employees of an establishment 
shall be payable under section 29 on and from 
the date on which any benefits under Chapter IV 
relating to the Employees State Insurance 
Corporation are provided by the Corporation to 
the employees of the establishment and such 
date shall be notified by the Central 
Government.  
V Gratuity  (a) every factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port 
and railway company; and  
(b) every shop or establishment in which ten or 
more employees are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve 
months; and such shops or establishments as 
may be notified by the appropriate Government 
from time to time.  
VI Maternity Benefit  (a) to every establishment being a factory, mine 
or plantation including any such establishment 
belonging to Government; and  
(b) to every shop or establishment in which ten 
or more employees are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve 
months; and such other  shops or establishments 
notified by the appropriate  Government.  
   96 
 VII Employee's Compensation  Subject to the provisions of the Second 
Schedule, it applies to the employers and 
employees to whom Chapter IV does not apply.  
VIII Social  Security and Cess 
in respect of Building and 
Other Construction 
Workers  Every establishment which falls under the 
building and other construction work.  
IX Social Security for 
Unorganised Workers'  Unorganised sector, unorganised workers', gig 
worker, plat form worker.  
XIII Employment Information 
and Monitoring  Career centres, vacancies, persons seeking 
services of career centres and employers.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 97 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( 26), 74( 3), (5), 132 and 152( 2)] 
LIST OF PERSONS  WHO ARE EMPLOYEES WITHIN THE MEANING OF  
THE THIRD PROVISO TO CLAUSE ( 26) OF SECTION 2  
The following persons are employees within the meaning of third proviso to  clause ( 26) of section 2 
and subject to the said proviso, any person who is — 
(i) employed in railways, in connection with the operation, repair or maintenance  of a lift or a 
vehicle propelled by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity or  in connection with the loading 
or unloading of any such vehicle; or  
(ii) employed, in any premises wh erein or within the precincts whereof a  manufacturing process as 
defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948), is being carried on, or in any 
kind of work whatsoever incidental to or  connected with any such manufacturing proce ss or with the 
article made whether or  not employment in any such work is within such premises or precincts, and 
steam,  water or other mechanical power or electrical power is used; or  
(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, repairing, ornamenti ng, finishing or otherwise 
adapting for use, transport or sale any article or part of an  article in any premises; or  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, persons employed outside  such premises or 
precincts but in any work incidental to, or connect ed with, the work  relating to making, altering, 
repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting  for use, transport or sale of any article or part 
of an article shall be deemed to be  employed within such premises or precincts; or  
(iv) employed in th e manufacture or handling of explosives in connection with  the employer's trade 
or business; or  
(v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines  Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), 
in any mining operation or in any kind of work, incidental to or  connected with any mining operation 
or with the mineral obtained, or in any kind of  work whatsoever below ground; or  
(vi) employed as the master or as a seaman of — 
(a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part by steam or other  mechanical power o r by 
electricity or which is towed or intended to be towed by  a ship so propelled; or  
(b) any sea going ship not included in sub -clause ( a) provided with  sufficient area for 
navigation under sails alone; or  
(vii) employed for the purpose of — 
(a) loading, unloading, fuelling, constructing, repairing, demolishing,  cleaning or painting any 
ship of which he is not the master or a member of the  crew, or handling or transport within the 
limits of any port subject to the Ports  Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), or the Major  Port Trusts Act, 1963 
(38 of 1963), of goods  which have been discharged from or are to be loaded into any vessel; or  
(b) warping a ship through the lock; or  
(c) mooring and unmooring ships at harbour wall berths or in pier; or  
(d) removing or replacing dry dock caissons when vessels are entering or  leaving dry docks; or  
(e) the docking or undocking of any vessel during an emergency; or  98 
 (f) preparing splicing coir springs and check wires, painting depth marks  on lock -sides, 
removing or replacing fenders w henever necessary, landing of  gangways, maintaining life -buoys 
up to standard or any other maintenance  work of a like nature; or  
(g) any work on jolly -boats for bringing a ship's line to the wharf; or  
(viii) employed in the construction, maintenance, repai r or demolition of — 
(a) any building which is designed to be or is or has been more than one  storey in height above 
the ground or twelve feet or more from the ground level  to the apex of the roof; or  
(b) any dam or embankment which is twelve feet or more i n height from its  lowest to its highest 
point; or  
(c) any road, bridge, tunnel or canal; or  
(d) any wharf, quay, sea -wall or other marine work including any moorings  of ships; or  
(ix) employed in setting up, maintaining, repairing or taking down any telegr aph or telephone line 
or post or any overhead electric line or cable or post or standard or  fittings and fixtures for the same; or  
(x) employed, in the construction, working, repair or demolition of any aerial  ropeway, canal, 
pipeline or sewer; or  
(xi) emp loyed in the service of any fire brigade; or  
(xii) employed upon a railway as defined in clause ( 31) of section 2 and  sub-section ( 1) of section 
197 of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989), either directly or  through a sub -contractor, by a person 
fulfilling  a contract with the railway  administration; or  
(xiii) employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van peon in the Railway  Mail Service or as a 
telegraphist or as a postal or railway signaller, or employed in any  occupation ordinarily involving 
outdoor  work in the Indian Posts and Telegraphs  Department; or  
(xiv) employed, in connection with operation for winning natural petroleum or  natural gas; or  
(xv) employed in any occupation involving blasting operations; or  
(xvi) employed in the making of any exca vation for which explosives have been  used, or whose 
depth from its highest to its lowest point exceeds twelve feet; or  
(xvii) employed in the operation of any ferry boat capable of carrying more than  ten persons; or  
(xviii) employed on any estate which is  maintained for the purpose of growing  cardamom, 
cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; or  
(xix) employed in the generating, transforming, transmitting or distribution of  electrical energy or 
in generation or supply of gas; or  
(xx) employed in a lighthouse as de fined in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Indian  Lighthouse Act, 
1927 (17 of 1927); or  
(xxi) employed in producing cinematograph pictures intended for public  exhibition or in exhibiting 
such pictures; or  
(xxii) employed in the training, keeping or working of  elephants or wild  animals; or  
(xxiii) employed in the tapping of palm -trees or the felling or logging of trees, or  the transport of 
timber by inland waters, or the control or extinguishing of forests  fires; or  
(xxiv) employed in operations for the catchin g or hunting of elephants or other  wild animals; or  99 
 (xxv) employed as a diver; or  
(xxvi) employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or within the precincts  of,— 
(a) any warehouse or other place in which goods are stored; or  
(b) any market; or  
(xxvii) employed in any occupation involving the handling and manipulation of  radium or X -rays 
apparatus, or contact with radioactive substances; or  
(xxviii ) employed in or in connection with the construction, erection, dismantling,  operation or 
maintenance of an aircraft as defined in section 2 of the Indian Aircraft  Act, 1934 (22 of 1934); or  
(xxix) employed in horticultural operations, forestry, bee -keeping or farming by  tractors or other 
contrivances driven by steam or other mechanical power or by  electricity; or  
(xxx) employed in the construction, working, repair or maintenance of a  tube-well; or  
(xxxi) employed in the maintenance, repair or renewal of electric fittings in a  building; or  
(xxxii ) employed in a circus; or  
(xxxiii ) employed as watchman in any factory or establishment; or  
(xxxiv ) employed in any operation in the sea for catching fish; or  
(xxxv) employed in any employment which requires handling of snakes for the  purpose of 
extraction of venom or for the purpose of looking after s nakes or handling  any other poisonous animal 
or insect; or  
(xxxvi ) employed in handling animals like horses, mules and bulls; or  
(xxxvii ) employed for the purpose of loading or unloading any mechanically  propelled vehicle or 
in the handling or transport of  goods which have been loaded in  such vehicles; or  
(xxxviii ) employed in cleaning of sewer lines or septic tanks within the limits of  a local authority; 
or 
(xxxix ) employed on surveys and investigation, exploration or gauge or discharge  observation of 
rivers including drilling operations, hydrological observations and  flood forecasting activities, ground 
water surveys and exploration; or  
(xl) employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds; or  
(xli) employed in cultivation of land or rearing and  maintenance of live -stock or  forest operations 
or fishing; or  
(xlii) employed in installation, maintenance or repair of pumping equipment  used for lifting of 
water from wells, tube -wells, ponds, lakes, streams and the like; or  
(xliii) employed in the cons truction, boring or deepening of an open well or  dug well, bore well, 
bore-cum-dug well, filter point and the like; or  
(xliv) employed in spraying and dusting of insecticides or pesticides in  agricultural operations or 
plantations; or  
(xlv) employed in mec hanised harvesting and threshing operations; or  
(xlvi) employed in working or repair or maintenance of bulldozers, tractors,  power tillers and the 
like; or  100 
 (xlvii) employed as artist for drawing pictures on advertisement boards at a  height of 3.66 metres 
or more from the ground level; or  
(xlviii ) employed in any newspaper establishment as defined in the Working  Journalists and Other 
Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955) 
and engaged in outdoor work; o r 
(xlix) employed as sales promotion employee; or  
(l) any other employee or class of employee employed in an establishment or  class of 
establishments to which the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923)  was applicable in any 
State immediately before the commencement of this Code.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  101 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 ( 51), 36( 1), 74 ( 1), (3), (5), 131( 5), 132 and 152( 2)] 
LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES  
Serial No.  Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
PART A  
1. Infectious and parasitic diseases contracted in 
an occupation where there is a particular risk of 
contamination  (a) all work involving exposure to health or  
laboratory work;  
(b) all work involving exposure to veterinary  
work;  
(c) work relating to handling animals, animal  
carcasses, part of such carcasses, or  merchandise 
which may have been  contaminated by animals or 
animal carcasses;  
(d) other work carrying a particular risk of  
contamination.  
2. Diseases caused by work in compressed air  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
3. Diseases caused by lead or its toxic compounds  3. All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Poisoning by nitrous fumes  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Poisoning by organo phosphorus compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
PART B  
1. Diseases caused by phosphorus or  its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
2. Diseases caused by mercury or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
3. Diseases caused by benzene or its toxic 
homologues  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Diseases caused by nitro and amido toxic 
derivatives of benzene or its  homologues  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Diseases caused by chromium or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
6. Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
7. Diseases caused by radioactive substances and 
ionising radiations  All work involving exposure to the action of 
radioactive substances or ionising radiations . 
8. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin 
caused by tar, pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, 
anthracene, or the compoun ds, products or 
residues of these substances  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
9. Diseases caused by the toxic halogen  
derivatives of hydrocarbons (of the aliphatic and 
aromatic series).  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
10. Diseases caused by carbon disulphide  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
11. Occupational cataract due to infra -red 
radiations  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  102 
 12. Diseases caused by manganese or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
13. Skin diseases caused by physical, chemical or 
biological agents not included in other items  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
14. Hearing impairment caused by noise  All wor k involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a homologue or 
by substituted dinitro -phenol or by the salts of 
such substances  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
16. Diseases caused by beryllium or its toxic  
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
17. Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
18. Occupational asthma caused by  recognised 
sensitising agents inherent to the work pr ocess  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
19. Diseases caused by fluorine or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
20. Diseases caused by nitroglycerin or other 
nitroacid esters  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
21. Diseases caused by alcohols and ketones  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants, carbon 
monoxide and its toxic derivatives, hydrogen 
sulphide  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
23. Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused by 
asbestos  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
24. Primary neoplasm of the epithelial lining of 
the urinary bladder or the kidney or the ureter  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
25. Snow blindness in snow bound areas  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
26. Diseases due to effect of heat in extreme hot 
climate  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
27. Diseases due to effect of cold in extreme cold 
climate  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
PART C  
1. Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic mineral 
dust (silicoses, anthraoosilicosis, asbestosis) and 
silico -tuberculosis provided that silicosis is an 
essential factor in causi ng the resultant incapacity  
or death  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
2. Bagassosis  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
3. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by cotton, 
flax hemp and sisal  dust (Byssionsis).  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Extrinsic allergic alveelitis caused by the 
inhalation of organic dusts  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by hard 
metals  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
6. Acute Pulmonary oedema of high altitude.  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
 103 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( 55), (56), 76( 1) and 152( 1)] 
PART I  
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  
TOTAL DISABLEMENT  
Serial 
No. Description of Injury  Percentage of  
loss of earning capacity  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites  100 
2. Loss of a hand and a foot  100 
3. Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation 
through leg or thigh on one side and loss of other foot  100 
 
4. Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant 
unable to perform any work for which eye -sight is essential  100 
5. Very severe facial disfigurement  100 
6. Absolute deafness  100 
 
PART II  
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  
PARTIAL DISABLEMENT  
Serial 
No. Description of Injury  Percentage of  
loss of earning capacity  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Amputation through shoulder joint  90 
2. Amputation below shoulder with stump less than [20.32  
Cms.] from tip of acromion  80 
 
3. Amputation form [20.32 Cms.] from tip of acromion to less 
than [11.43 Cms.] below tip of olecranon  70 
 
4. Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand 
or amputation from [11.43 Cms.] below tip of olecranon  60 
 
5. Loss of thumb  30 
6. Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone  40 
7. Loss of four fingers of one hand  50 
8. Loss of three fingers of one hand  30 
9. Loss of two fingers of one hand  20 
10. Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb  20 
11. Guillotine amputation of tip of thumb without loss of bone  10 
Amputation cases -lower limbs  
12. Amputation of both feet resulting in end bearing stumps  90 
13. Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  80 
 
14. Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarso -phalangeal 
joint 40 
 
15. Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal inter -
phalangeal joint  30 
 
16. Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal inter -
phalangeal joint  20 
 
17. Amputation at hip  90 
18. Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding [12.70 
Cms.] in length measured from tip of great trenchanter  
 80 
 
19. Amputation below hip with stump exceeding [12.70 Cms.] 
in length measured from tip of great trenchanter but not  
beyond middle thigh  70 
 
20. Amputation below middle thigh to [8.89 Cms.] below knee  60 
21. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding [8.89 Cms.] 
but not exceeding [12.70 Cms.]  50 
 104 
 22. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding [12.70 Cms.]  50 
23. Amputation of one foot resulting in end bearing  50 
24. Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  50 
25. Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  20 
 
Other injuries  
26. Loss of one eye, without complications, the other being 
normal  40 
 
27. Loss of vision of one eye, without complications or 
disfigurement of eye -ball, the other being normal  30 
 
28. Loss of partial vision of one eye  
Loss of — 10 
 
A-Fingers of right or left hand  
Index finger  
29. Whole  14 
30. Two phalanges  11 
31. One phalanx  9 
32. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  5 
Middle finger  
33. Whole  12 
34. Two phalanges  9 
35. One phalanx  7 
36. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  4 
Ring or little finger  
37. Whole  7 
38. Two phalanges  6 
39. One phalanx  5 
40. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  2 
B-Toes of right or left foot  
Great toe  
41. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  14 
42. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
Any other toe  
43. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  3 
44. Part, with some loss of bone  1 
Two toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
45. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  5 
46. Part, with some loss of bone  2 
Three toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
47. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  6 
48. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
Four toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
49. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  9 
50. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 105 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 15( 2) and 152( 1)] 
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE SCHEMES  
Any scheme framed under section 15 may provide for any or all of the matters as  
specified below, namely: — 
PART A  
 
Serial No.  Matters on which the Provident Fund Scheme may make provisions  
(1) (2) 
1. The employees or class of employees who shall join the Fund, and the conditions  
under which employees may be exempted from joining the Fund or from making  
any contribution.  
2. The time and manner in which contributions shall be made to the Fund by employers  
and by, or on behalf of, employees, (whether employe d by him directly or by or  
through a contractor), the contributions which an employee may, if he so desires,  
make under section 16, and the manner in which such contributions may be  
recovered.  
3. The manner in which employees' contributions may be recover ed by contractors  
from employees employed by or through such contractors.  
4. The payment by the employer of such sums of money as may be necessary to meet  
the cost of administering the Fund and the rate at which and the manner in which  
the payment shall be made.  
5. The constitution of any committee for assisting any board of trustees.  
6. The opening of regional and other offices of any board of trustees.  
7. The manner in which accounts shall be kept, the investment of moneys belonging  
to the Fund in ac cordance with any directions issued or conditions specified by  
the Central Government, the preparation of the budget, the audit of accounts and  
the submission of reports to the Central Government, or to any specified State  
Government.  
8. The conditions un der which withdrawals from the Fund may be permitted and any  
deduction or forfeiture may be made and the maximum amount of such deduction  
or forfeiture.  
9. The fixation by the Central Government in consultation with the boards of trustees  
concerned of the  rate of interest payable to members.  
10. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and his  
family whenever required.  
11. The nomination of a person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a  
member after his death and the cancellation or variation of such nomination.  
12. The registers and records to be maintained with respect to employees and the  
returns to be furnished by employers or contractors.  
13. The form or design of any identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying  
any employee, and for the issue, custody and replacement thereof.  
14. The fees to be levied for any of the purposes specified in this Schedule.  
15. The contraventions or defaults which shall be punishable under section 135.  
16. The further powers, if any, which may be exercised by Inspector -cum-Facilitators.  
17. The manner in which accumulations in any existing provident fund shall be  
transferred to the Fund and the mode of valuation of any assets which may be  
transferred by the e mployers in this behalf.  
18. The conditions under which a member may be permitted to pay premia on life  
insurance, from the Fund.  
19. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be  
necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.  
PART B  
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE PENSION SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Pension Scheme shall apply.  
2. The portion of employers' contribution to the Provident Fund which shall be credited  
to the Pension Fund and the manner in which it is credited.  
3. The regulation of the manner in which and the period of service for which, no  
contribution is received.  106 
 4. The manner in which employees' interest will be protected against default i n payment  
of contribution by the employer.  
5. The manner in which the accounts of the Pension Fund shall be kept and investment  
of moneys belonging to Pension Fund to be made subject to such pattern of  
investment as may be determined by the Central Govern ment.  
6. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the  
members of his family whenever required.  
7. The forms, registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees, required  
for the administration of the Pension Scheme.  
8. The scale of pension and pensionary benefits and the conditions relating to grant  
of such benefits to the employees.  
9. The manner in which the exempted establishments have to pay contribution towards  
the Pension Scheme and the submission of r eturns relating thereto.  
10. The mode of disbursement of pension and arrangements to be entered into with  
such disbursing agencies as may be specified for the purpose.  
11. The manner in which the expenses for administering the Pension Scheme will be  
met from the income of the Pension Fund.  
12. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Pension Scheme or which may  
be necessary or proper for the purpose of implementation of the Pension Scheme.  
PART C  
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE EMPLO YEES' DEPOSIT -LINKED  
INSURANCE SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees who shall be covered by the Insurance  
Scheme.  
2. The manner in which the accounts of the Insurance Fund shall be kept and the  
investment of moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund subject to such pattern of  
investment as may be determined, by order, by the Central Government.  
3. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the  
members of his family whenever required.  
4. The nomination of a person to receive the insurance amount due to the employee  
after his death and the cancellation or variation of such nomination.  
5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees; the form or  
design of any identity card, token or disc for the  purpose of identifying any  
employee or his nominee or member of his family entitled to receive the insurance  
amount.  
6. The scales of insurance benefits and conditions relating to the grant of such  
benefits to the employees.  
7. The manner in which the a mount due to the nominee or the member of the family of  
the employee under the scheme is to be paid including a provision that the amount  
shall not be paid otherwise than in the form of a deposit in a savings bank account,  
in the name of such nominee or me mber of family, in any corresponding new bank  
specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer  
of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
8. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Employees' Deposit -linked  
Insurance Scheme or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of  
implementing that Scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 107 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 75, 76( 1) and 152( 1)] 
FACTORS FOR WORKING OUT LUMP SUM EQUIVALENT OF COMPENSATION  
AMOUNT IN CASE OF PERMANENT DISABLEMENT AND DEATH  
                                                Completed years of age on the last birthday of the  
                                                employee immediately preceding the date on which  
                                                the compensation fell due  Factors  
(1) (2) (3) 
Not more than  16 228.54  
 17 227.49  
 18 226.38  
 19 225.22  
 20 224.00  
 21 222.71  
 22 221.37  
 23 219.95  
 24 218.47  
 25 216.91  
 26 215.28  
 27 213.57  
 28 211.79  
 29 209.92  
 30 207.98  
 31 205.95  
 32 203.85  
 33 201.66  
 34 199.40  
 35 197.06  
 36 194.64  
 37 192.14  
 38 189.56  
 39 186.90  
 40 184.17  
 41 181.37  
 42 178.49  
 43 175.54  
 44 172.52  
 45 169.44  
 46 166.29  
 47 163.07  
 48 159.80  
 49 156.47  
 50 153.09  
 51 149.67  
 52 146.20  
 53 142.68  
 54 139.13  
 55 135.56  
 56 131.95  
 57 128.33  
 58 124.70  
 59 121.05  
 60 117.41  
 61 113.77  
 62 110.14  
 63 106.52  
 64 102.93  
 65 or more  99.37  108 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 114( 4)] 
CLASSIFICATION OF AGGREGATORS  
Sl. No. Classification of Aggregator  
1. Ride sharing services  
2. Food and grocery delivery services  
3. Logistic services  
4. e-Market place (both market place and inventory model) for wholesale/  
retail sale of goods and/or services (B2B/B2C)  
5. Professional services provider  
6. Healthcare  
7. Travel and hospitality  
8. Content and media services  
9. Any other goods and services provider platform  
 
--------------------------The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN  NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION 
AND ADJOINING AREAS  ACT, 2021  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY  MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL  CAPITAL  REGION AND  ADJOINING  AREAS  
3. Constitution of Commission . 
4. Appointment of Chairperson, Members and Member -Secretary.  
5. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Members . 
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members . 
7. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances . 
8. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members . 
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission . 
10. Procedure to be regulated by Commission.  
11. Sub-Committees and other staff of Commission.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
12. Powers and functions of Commission.  
13. Annual report . 
14. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act, rules, order or direction.  
15. Environmental compensation.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Grants by Central Government.  
17. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Appeal.  
19. Constitution of special investigation teams.  
20. Power of Central Government to issue direction.  
21. Power of Central Government to call for information . 
22. Bar of jurisdiction . 
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
24. Members and officers to be public servants . 
25. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
26. Power of Commission to make regulations . 
27. Power to remove difficulties . 
28. Act to have overriding  effect . 2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Repeal and savings of order constituting Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority 
for National Capital Region.  
30. Savings.  
31. Repeal and savings.  
  3 
 THE COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT IN  NATIONAL CAPITAL 
REGION AND ADJOINING AREAS  ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 29 OF 2021  
[12th August , 2021 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas for better co -ordination, research, identification and 
resolution of problems surrounding the air quality index and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commission for Air 
Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall apply to the National Capital Region and also to adjoining areas in so f ar as it relates to 
matters concerning air pollution in the National Capital Region.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 13th April, 2021.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adjoining areas” means the areas in the States of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, 
adjoining the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the National Capital Region, where any source of 
pollution is located, causing adverse impact on air quality in the Nationa l Capital Region;  
(b) “Associate Member” means a member who is co -opted under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 ; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission for Air Quality Management in 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas referred to in  section 3 ; 
(d) “Commission” means the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital Region 
and Adjoining Areas constituted under  section 3 ; 
(e) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson thereof;  
(f) “National Capital  Region” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 
2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 (2 of 1985);  
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(2) The words used herein and not defined, but defined in the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (26 
of 1986), shall have the meaning as assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
COMMISSION FOR AIR QUALITY  MANAGEMENT IN NATIONAL  CAPITAL  REGION AND  ADJOINING  AREAS  
3. Constitution of Commission .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital 
Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to p erform the functions assigned 
to, that Commission under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall consist of the following Members, namely: — 
(a) a full -time Chairperson having experience of not less than fifteen years in the field of 
environment protection and pollution control or having administrative experience of not less than 
twenty -five years;  
(b) a representative of the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, who shall be an officer not below the rank  of Joint Secretary, ex officio ; 4 
 (c) five ex officio  Members who are either Chief Secretaries, or Secretaries in -charge of the 
department dealing with environment protection in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Raja sthan and Uttar Pradesh;  
(d) one full -time Member who is or has been a Joint Secretary to the Government of India;  
(e) three full -time independent technical Members to be appointed from amongst persons having 
specific knowledge and experience in matters re lating to air pollution;  
(f) one technical Member from the Central Pollution Control Board, ex officio ; 
(g) one technical Member to be nominated by the Indian Space Research Organisation, ex officio ; 
(h) three Members from non -Governmental organisations ha ving experience in matters concerning 
combating of air pollution;  
(i) one representative of the National Institution for Transforming India, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary or Adviser, ex officio ; 
(j) one officer in the rank of Joint Secretary to the  Government of India to be appointed by the 
Central Government as a full -time Member -Secretary of the Commission;  
(k) three members, being stakeholders from such sectors as agriculture, industry, transport or 
construction.  
(3) The Commission may co -opt the  following persons as Associate Members, namely: — 
(a) a representative of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India;  
(b) a representative of the Ministry of Power, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India;  
(c) a representative of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India;  
(d) a representative of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India;  
(e) a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India;  
(f) a representative of the Ministry of Commerce and Industr y, not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India;  
(g) a representative of any association of commerce or industry;  
(h) such other Associate Members, as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Member -Secretary shall be the Chief Co -ordinating Officer of the Commission and shall assist 
the Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and the Commission may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in the National Capital Region or 
adjoining areas.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, and 
notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the Commission shall have exclusive jurisdiction in  
the National Capital Region and adjoining areas in respect of matters covered by this Act and no other body, 
authority, individual or committee shall have any power or jurisdiction in such matters:  
Provided that in case of any conflict in the orders or di rections of the Commission and the Governments 
of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 
or the Central Pollution Control Board or the State Pollution Control Boards of the States of Punjab , 
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh or the Pollution Control Committee of the National Capital Territory 5 
 of Delhi or any other statutory authority set up or established under a State Act, the order as well as the 
direction of the Commission shall prevai l. 
4. Appointment of Chairperson, Members and Member -Secretary .—(1) The full -time Chairperson 
and full -time Members, other than ex officio  Members, of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall, subject to the provisions of second 
proviso, be made on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of — 
(a) Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in the 
Government of India --Chairperson;  
(b) Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in the Government of India --
member;  
(c) Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in the Government of India -
-member;  
(d) Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Science  and Technology in the Government of India --
member;  
(e) Cabinet Secretary --member:  
Provided further that in case where the Central Government appoints a serving officer as the 
Chairperson under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, or the full -time M ember under clause ( d) 
thereof, then, no recommendation of the Selection Committee shall be required.  
(2) No appointment of the Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy 
of any member in the Selection Committee referred to in  sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The appointment of the Member -Secretary of the Commission shall be made by the Central 
Government in such manner, subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed.  
5. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson or a Member, 
other than an ex officio  Member, may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his office.  
(2) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson or any Member, other than an ex officio  
Member, from his office, in such manner as may be prescribed, if such person — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent;  
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office;  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest;  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(f) is convicted and sentenc ed to imprisonment for an offence which in the opinion of the Central 
Government involves moral turpitude:  
Provided that no such Member shall be so removed, unless he has been given an opportunity of being 
heard.  
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .—The Chairperson or a Member, other than an            
ex officio  Member, shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and shall be eligible for                                  
re-appointment.  
7. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances .—(1) In 
the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of death, res ignation 
or otherwise, the Central Government may, by notification, authorise one of the Members to act as the 
Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy.  6 
 (2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on leave or otherwise, 
such one of the Members as the Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall 
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.  
8. Terms and co nditions of service of Chairperson and Members .—The salaries and allowances 
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members, other than            
ex officio  Members, shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission .—No act or procee dings of the 
Commission shall be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of the Commission.  
10. Procedure to be regulated by Commission .—(1) The Commission shall meet at such time and 
place as the Chairper son may think fit.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the 
power to lay down by regulations its own procedure.  
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Membe r-Secretary or any 
other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  
(4) The Commission may, by general or special order, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, 
as may be specified therein, delegate to the Chai rperson, full -time Member, Member -Secretary or any            
Sub-Committee constituted under section 11, such of its powers under this Act (except the power to make 
regulations under section 25), as it may deem necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and 
improving the quality of the air in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas.  
11. Sub-Committees and other staff of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall have at least the 
following three Sub -Committees — 
(a) Sub -Committee on Monitoring  and Identification;  
(b) Sub -Committee on Safeguarding and Enforcement;  
(c) Sub -Committee on Research and Development.  
(2) The Sub -Committee on Monitoring and Identification shall be headed by a Member of the 
Commission chosen by it and shall have the foll owing additional members, namely: — 
(a) one representative from the Central Pollution Control Board;  
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution Control Board or Committee, as the case 
may be, of  the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh;  
(c) one representative from the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute;  
(d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Sub -Committee on Safeguarding and Enforcement shall be headed by the full -time Chairperson 
of the Commission and shall have the following additional members, namely: — 
(a) one representative each, not below the rank of Secretary from the department tackl ing air 
pollution from the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh;  
(b) one representative each from the State Pollution Control Board or Committee, as the case may 
be, from the National Capital Te rritory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh;  
(c) one officer not below the rank of Inspector General of Police or equivalent from the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and U ttar Pradesh;  7 
 (d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.  
(4) The Sub -Committee on Research and Development shall be headed by a full -time technical Member 
of the Commission and shall have the following additional Members, namely: — 
(a) two technical representatives from the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute;  
(b) one technical representative each from research institutions or Universities or colleges or 
organisations in the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the State s of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh;  
(c) two technical representatives from the field of medicine and research working or studying on 
the impact of air pollution on living beings;  
(d) such other members as may be specified by regulations.  
(5) The Commission may also constitute such other Sub -Committees as it thinks fit.  
(6) The members of the Sub -Committees, other than ex officio  members, shall be paid such allowances 
as may be prescribed.  
(7) The Central Government, in consultation with the C ommission, shall determine the nature and the 
categories of officers and other staff required to assist the Commission in the discharge of its function and 
provide the Commission with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
(8) The officers and other staff of the Commission shall discharge their duties and functions under the 
general superintendence of the Chairperson.  
(9) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff appointed under 
sub-section ( 7) shall be s uch as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
12. Powers and functions of Commission .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in force, the Commission shall have the power to take all such m easures, issue directions 
and entertain complaints, as it deems necessary or expedient, for the purpose of protecting and improving 
the quality of the air in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas and shall also have the duty to take 
all such meas ures as may become necessary for protecting and improving the quality of air in the National 
Capital Region and adjoining areas.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall, for 
the purposes of sub -section ( 1), have the following powers to perform its duties, including taking measures 
to abate air pollution and to regulate or prohibit activities that are likely to cause or increase air pollution 
in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas, namely :— 
(i) co-ordination of actions by the Governments of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the 
States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, officers and other authorities under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder or under any other law for the time being in force, which is relatable to the 
objects of this Act;  
(ii) planning and execution of a programme for the region for prevention, control and abatement of 
air pollution;  
(iii) laying down parameters for the quality of air in its various  aspects;  
(iv) laying down parameters for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from various 
sources whatsoever that have implications on air quality in the region:  
Provided that different parameters for emission or discharge may be laid down u nder this clause 
from different sources having regard to the quality or composition  of the emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants from such sources that have implications on air quality in the region;  8 
 (v) restriction of areas in which any indust ries, operations or processes or class of industries, 
operations or processes, that have implications on air quality in the region, shall not be carried out or 
shall be carried out subject to certain safeguards;  
(vi) carrying out and requiring investigatio ns and research relating to problems of environmental 
pollution that have implications on air quality in the region;  
(vii) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machinery, manufacturing or other processes, 
materials or substances and giving, by ord er, of such directions to such authorities, officers or persons 
as it may consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution in 
the region;  
(viii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters re lating to air pollution in 
the region;  
(ix) preparation of manuals or codes or guidelines relating to the prevention, control and abatement 
of air pollution in the region;  
(x) appoint officers, with prior approval of the Central Government, with such desig nations, as it 
thinks fit, for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and functions under 
this Act or for the purposes of achieving the objects of this Act, as it may deem fit;  
(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, of ficer or any authority and such person, officer or 
authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
Explanation. —For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this section includes the power to direct — 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or  
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service.  
(3)     (a) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person authorised by the Comm ission 
in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times, and with such assistance as he 
considers necessary, any place, for the purpose of — 
(i) performing any of the functions of the Commission entrusted to him;  
(ii) determining whether and if so, in what manner any such functions are to be performed 
or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, order, 
direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under this Act is bein g or has been 
complied with;  
(iii) examining and testing any equipment, industrial plant, record, register, document or 
any other material object or for conducting a search of any building in which he has reasons 
to believe that an offence under this Act o r the rules made thereunder has been or is being or 
is about to be committed and for seizing any such equipment, industrial plant, record, register, 
document or other material object if he has reasons to believe that it may furnish evidence to 
the Commissi on of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder or that 
such seizure is necessary to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution;  
(b) every person carrying on any industry, operation or process or handling any hazardous 
substance sh all be bound to render all assistance to the person empowered by the Commission 
under clause ( a) for carrying out the functions under that clause and if he fails to do so without 
any reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence under this A ct; 
(c) if any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person authorised by the Commission under 
clause ( a) in the performance of his functions, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act;  
(d) the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to any 
search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under  section 94  of the said Code or, as the case may be, under the 
corresponding provisions of the said la w. 9 
 (4)     (a) The Commission or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, shall, for the purpose 
of analysis, have power to take samples of air from any factory, premises or other place in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) the result of any analysi s of a sample taken under clause ( a) shall not be admissible 
in evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of clauses ( c) and ( d) are complied 
with;  
(c) subject to the provisions of clause ( d), the person taking the sample under clause ( a) 
shall,— 
(i) serve on the occupier or his agent or person in -charge of the place, a notice, then and 
there, in such form as may be prescribed, of his intention to have it so analysed;  
(ii) in the presence of the occupier or his agent or person, collect a sample  for analysis;  
(iii) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and 
sealed and shall also be signed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his 
agent or person;  
(iv) send without delay, the container o r the containers to the laboratory established or 
recognised by the Central Government;  
(d) when a sample is taken for analysis under clause ( a) and the person taking the sample 
serves on the occupier or his agent or person, a notice under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( c), then,  — 
(i) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person wilfully absents himself, the person 
taking the sample shall collect the sample for analysis to be placed in a container or containers 
which shall be marked and sealed and shall a lso be signed by the person taking the sample; and  
(ii) in a case where the occupier or his agent or person present at the time of taking the 
sample refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of the sample as required 
under sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( c), the marked and sealed container or containers shall be 
signed by the person taking the samples , 
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person taking the sample for analysis to 
the laboratory established or recognised by the Central Government and such person shall inform the 
Government Analyst appointed or recognised, about the wilful absence of the occupier or his agent or 
person, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the container or containers.  
(5) In discharge of its functions and exercising of its authority, the Commission and the Sub -
Committees mentioned in section 11 shall be bound by such general or specific directions of the Central 
Government, as may be issued from time to time.  
(6) In particu lar and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Commission 
shall perform all or any of the following functions, namely: — 
(a) take up matters suo motu,  or on the basis of  complaints made by any individual, representative 
body or organisation functioning in the field of environment, against any individual, association, 
company, public undertaking or local body carrying on any industry, operation or process;  
(b) provide the mechanism and the means to implement in the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas — 
(i) the National Clean Air Programme;  
(ii) the National Air Quality Monitoring Programme;  
(iii) the National Ambient Air Quality Standards;  
(c) provide an effective fr amework and platform in the National Capital Region and adjoining areas 
for— 
(i) source identification of air pollutants on a periodic basis;  10 
 (ii) taking on -ground steps for curbing air pollution;  
(iii) specific research and development in the field of air  pollution;  
(iv) synergising the energies and efforts of all stakeholders in developing innovative ways to 
monitor, enforce and research on the issues concerning air pollution;  
(v) building a network between technical institutions working or researching in  the field of air 
pollution;  
(vi) international co -operation including sharing of international best practices in the field of 
air pollution;  
(vii) training and creating a special work -force for tackling the problem of air pollution;  
(d) provide an effecti ve frame work, action plan and take appropriate steps for — 
(i) tackling the problem of stubble burning;  
(ii) monitoring, assessing and inspecting air polluting agents;  
(iii) increasing plantation;  
(e) monitoring the measures taken by the States to prevent stubble burning;  
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of air pollution;  
(g) spread awareness regarding air pollution among various sections of society and promote awareness 
of the collective steps that the public may take through publications, t he media, seminars and other available 
means;  
(h) encourage the efforts of non -governmental organisations and institutions working in the field of air 
pollution;  
(i) any other functions as have been entrusted to any ad hoc  committee or commission or task force or 
body formed for the purpose of dealing with issues concerning air pollution, stubble burning or the 
monitoring of related factors, in pursuance of any judicial order passed from time to time;  
(j) such other functio ns as it may consider necessary for the prevention of air pollution in the National 
Capital Region and adjoining areas.  
13. Annual report .—(1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government an annual report 
containing such details of the steps taken, proposals made, researches awaited and other measures 
undertaken by it in pursuance of its functions under section 12, in such form and ma nner as may be specified 
by regulations.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report furnished under sub -section ( 1) to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
14. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act, rules, order or direction .—(1) Any non -
compliance or contravention of any provisions of this Act, rules made thereunder or any order or direction 
issued by the Commission, shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
up to five years or with fine which m ay extend up to one crore rupees or with both:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any farmer for causing air pollution by 
stubble burning or mismanagement of agricultural residue.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence under this Act shall be non -cognizable and triable by the Jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate of the 
First Class, who shall not take cognizance of the offe nce except upon a complaint made by the Commission 
or any officer authorised by the Commission in this behalf.  
(3) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time 
when the offence was committed, was directly in-charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  11 
 Provided that nothin g contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part  of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4),— 
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
(5) Where an offence under this Act has b een committed by any Department of the Government, the 
Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render suc h Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the  offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of 
the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(7) For the purpose of this section and the procedure to be followed thereunder, the provisions of the 
Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply.  
15. Environmental compensation .—The Commission may impose and collect environmental 
compensation from farmers causing air pollution by stubble burning, at such rate and in such manner, as 
may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
16. Grants by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as 
the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Com mission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
17. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall b e audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Co mptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller an d Auditor -General of India generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the o ffices of the Commission.  12 
 (4) The accounts of the Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Centra l Government by the Commission and the Central Government shall cause the audit 
report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Appeal .—An appeal shall lie to the National Green Tribunal constituted under the National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010) against any order, direction or action taken by or on behalf of the 
Commission constituted under section 3.  
19. Constitution of special investigation teams .—Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, or any judicial order by any Court, where the Commission considers it 
necessary so to do, it may constitute one or more special investigation teams, consisting of such officers or 
such persons, as  it thinks necessary, for the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act.  
20. Power of Central Government to issue direction .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, but subject to the provision of this A ct, the Central Government may 
issue in writing such direction, as it deems fit, to the Commission or any person, officer or authority 
authorised by the Commission, and the Commission, person, or authority, as the case may be, shall be 
bound to comply with  such direction.  
21. Power of Central Government to call for information .—The Central Government may, from 
time to time, call for such information and reports from the Commission, as it deems fit and the Commission 
shall be bound to provide such informatio n and report.  
22. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit, proceeding or 
dispute pertaining to or arising out of the actions taken or directions issued by the Commission in respect 
of any matter which the Commissio n is empowered by or under this Act.  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government, the Commission, or any Member thereof, or any person acting under the direction of 
either the Cen tral Government or the Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order made thereunder.  
24. Members and officers to be public servants .—Every Member of the Commissio n and every 
officer appointed or authorised by the Commission to exercise functions under this Act shall be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
25. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the other Associate Members under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the manner of removal of Chairperson or a Member under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(d) the allowance payable to the members, other than ex officio  members of the Sub -Committees, 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 11;  
(e) the appointment of officers and other staff under sub -section (7) of section 11;  
(f) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff under sub -section 
(9) of section 11;  
(g) the manner of taking samples under clause ( a) and the form of notice under sub -clause ( i) of 
clause (c), of sub -section ( 4) of section 12;  13 
 (h) the rate at which, and the manner in which, the environmental compensation shall be imposed 
and collected under section 15;  
(i) the form in which annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under su b-section ( 1) of section 
17; 
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of t hirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rul e or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything previously done under that rule.  
26. Power of Commission to make regulations .---(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder, the Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification , make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the procedure to be followed by  the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power may be delegated by the Commission 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(c) the members of each Sub -Committee under sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 11;  
(d) the form and the manner of furnishing annual report under section 13;  
(e) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
(3) Every regulation made by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
or the successive sessions a foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or 
both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however , that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.  
27. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
28. Act to have overriding effect .---(1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, any document, 
judgment, order, bye -law, rule, regulation, notification having the force of law in the territ ory of India.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or any judgment 
or any order of any Court and subject to the provisions of this Act, upon the notification of the constitution 
of the Commission under section  3, no other individual or body or authority constituted either under a law 
enacted by Parliament, or by a State, or appointed or nominated in terms of any judicial order, shall act 
upon or have jurisdiction in relation to the matters covered by this Act.  14 
 29. Repeal and savings of order constituting Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) 
Authority for National Capital Region .—(1) The Order made under  section 3  of the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) constituting the Environment Pollut ion (Prevention and Control) 
Authority for the National Capital Region vide notification number S.O. 93(E), dated the 29th January, 
1998 is hereby repealed and the Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority for the National 
Capital Region is hereby dissolved.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken by the Environment Pollution 
(Prevention and Control) Authority for the National Capital Region under the said Order, shall be deemed 
to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
30. Savings .—Notwithstanding the cessation of the Commission for Air Quality Management in 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2020 (Ord. 13 of 2020), anything done  or any 
action taken under the Ordinance so ceased, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act.  
31. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Commission for Air Quality Management in National Capital 
Region and Adjoining Ar eas Ordinance, 2021 (Ord. 4 of 2021) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Commission for Air 
Quality Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Ordinance, 2021 (Ord. 4 of 2021) 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The criminal procedure identification act 2022.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (IDENTIFICATION) ACT, 202 2 
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Taking of measurement.  
4. Collection, storing, preservation of measurements and storing, sharing, dissemination, 
destruction and disposal of records.  
5. Power of Magistrate to direct a person to give measurements.  
6. Resistance to allow taking of measurements.  
7. Bar of suit.  
8. Power to make rules.  
9. Power to remove difficulties.  
10. Repeal and saving.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (IDENTIFICATION ) ACT, 202 2 
ACT NO . 11 OF 2022 
 
[18th April , 202 2.] 
An Act to authorise for taking measurements of convicts and other persons for the purposes of 
identification and investigation in criminal matters and to preserve records and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title  and commencement.  — (1) This Act may be called the Criminal Procedure 
(Identification) Act, 2022.   
(2) It shall come into force on such date1  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions . — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Magistrate” means,—  
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area, the Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(ii) in relation to any other area, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class; or  
(iii) in relation to ordering someone to give security for his good behaviour or maint aining 
peace, the Executive Magistrate;  
(b) “measurements ” includes finger -impressions, palm -print impressions, foot -print 
impressions, photographs, iris and retina scan, physical, biological samples and their analysis, 
behavioural attributes including s ignatures, handwriting or any other examination referred to in 
section 53 or section 53A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 );  
(c) “police officer ” means the officer -in-charge of a police station or an officer not below the 
rank of Head Constable;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “prison officer ” means an officer of prison not below the rank of Head Warder.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860 ) and the Code of Cri minal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) shall have the same meanings 
respectively assigned to them in those Codes . 
3. Taking of measurement . —Any person, who has been, — 
(a) convicted of an offence punishable under any law for the time being in force; or  
(b) ordered to give security for his good behaviour or maintaining peace under                
section 117 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ) for a proceeding under           
section 107 or section 108 or section 109 or section 110 of the said Code; or  
(c) arrested in connection with an offence punishable under any law for the time being in force 
or detained under any preventive detention law,  
                                                           
1. 4th August , 2022, vide notification No. S.O. 3653 (E), dated 3rd August , 2022, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
 3 
 shall, if so required, allow his  measurement to be taken by a police officer or a prison officer in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government or the State Government:  
Provided that any person arrested for an offence committed under any law for the time being in 
force ( except for an offence committed against a woman or a child or for any offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a period not less than seven years) may not be obliged to allow taking of his 
biological samples under the provisions of this section.  
4. Collecti on, storing, preservation of measurements and storing, sharing, dissemination, 
destruction and disposal of records . — (1) The National Crime Records Bureau shall, in the interest 
of prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of any offence unde r any law for the time being 
in force,— 
(a) collect the record of measurements from State Government or Union territory 
Administration or any other law enforcement agencies;  
(b) store, preserve and destroy the record of measurements at national level;  
(c) process such record with relevant crime and criminal records; and  
(d) share and disseminate such records with any law enforcement agency,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The record of measurements shall be retained in digital or electronic form for a period of 
seventy -five years from the date of collection of such measurement:  
Provided that where any person, who has not been previously convicted of an offence punishab le 
under any law with imprisonment for any term, has had his measurements taken according to the 
provisions of this Act, is released without trial or discharged or acquitted by the court, after exhausting 
all legal remedies, all records of measurements so taken shall, unless the court or Magistrate, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing otherwise directs, be destroyed from records.  
(3) The State Government and Union territory Administration may notify an appropriate agency to 
collect, preserve and share t he measurements in their respective jurisdictions.  
5. Power of Magistrate to direct a person to give measurements. —Where the Magistrate is 
satisfied that, for the purpose of any investigation or proceeding under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ) or any  other law for the time being in force, it is expedient to direct any 
person to give measurements under this Act, the Magistrate may make an order to that effect and in 
that case, the person to whom the order relates shall allow the measurements to be take n in conformity 
with such directions.  
6. Resistance to allow taking of measurements. — (1) If any person who is required to allow the 
measurements to be taken under this Act resists or refuses to allow taking of such measurements, it 
shall be lawful for the  police officer or prison officer to take such measurements in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Resistance to or refusal to allow the taking of measurements under this Act shall be deemed to 
be an offence under section 186 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ). 
7. Bar of suit .— No suit or any other proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done, or 
intended to be done in good faith under this Act or any rule made thereunder.  4 
 8. Power to make rules. — (1) The Central Government or the State G overnment may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following m atters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of taking measurements under section 3;  
(b) the manner of collection, storing, preservation of measurements and sharing, 
dissemination, destruction and disposal of records under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(c) the manner of taking of measurements under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(d) any other matter which is to be prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made . 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soo n as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately followin g the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
9. Power to remove difficulties. — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made  under this section after the expiry of three years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
10. Repeal and saving. — (1) The Identificati on of Prisoners Act, 1920  (33 of 1920 ) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have done or 
taken including any rule, regulation, or any proceedings taken, any rule made or any direction giv en or 
any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The ment ion of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897 ) with regard to the effect 
of repeal.  
 
--------------------------The Dam Safety Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE DAM SAFETY ACT, 2021  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Declaration as to expediency of Union control . 
3. Application . 
4. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMITTEE  ON DAM SAFETY  
5. Constitution of National Committee .. 
6. Functions of National Committee . 
7. Meetings of National Committee . 
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  DAM SAFETY  AUTHORITY  
8. Establishment of National Dam Safety Authority . 
9. Functions of Authority . 
10. Officers and Employees of Authority . 
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  COMMITTEE  ON DAM SAFETY  
11. Constitution of State Committee on Dam Safety . 
12. Functions of State Committee . 
13. Meetings of State Committee.  
CHAPTER V  
STATE  DAM SAFETY  ORGANISATION  
14. Establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation . 
15. Officers and employees of State Dam Safety Organisation . 
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONING IN RELATION TO DAM SAFETY  
16. Surveillance and inspection . 
17. Vulnerability and hazard classification of dams . 
18. Maintenance of log books . 
19. Records of dam failures and dam incidents . 
20. Instructions on safety of specified dams . 
21. Funds for maintenance and repairs . 
22. Technical documentation . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Qualifications and experience of individuals responsible for safety of specified dams.  
24. Jurisdiction of State Dam Safety Organisation and Authority . 
25.  Cost of investigation . 
26. Construction or alteration of dams . 
27. Initial filling of reservoirs . 
28. Operation and maintenance . 
29. Responsibility of owner of specified dam . 
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY, INSPECTION AND DATA COLLECTION  
30. Dam safety unit . 
31. Inspection . 
32. Instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam . 
33. Establishment of hydro -meteorological station . 
34. Installations of seismological station . 
CHAPTER VIII  
EMEGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
35. Obligation of owner of specified dam . 
36. Emergency action  plan. 
37. Assistance to other disaster management authorities . 
CHAPTER IX  
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUTION  
38. Comprehensive dam safety evaluation . 
39. Compulsory evaluation in certain cases . 
40. Reports of comprehensive evaluation . 
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
41. Punishment for obstruction, etc . 
42. Offences by Departments of Government . 
43. Offence by companies . 
44. Cognizance of offences . 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
45. Annual report of safety status of specified dam . 
46. Safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams . 
47. Safety measures in respect of dams located outside territory of India . 
48. Act to have overriding effect . 
49. Power to amend Schedules . 
50. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
51. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of National Committee on Dam Safety 
 Authority and State Committee on Dam Safety . 3 
 SECTIONS  
52. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
53. Power of State Government to make rules . 
54. Power to make regulations by Authority . 
55. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
56. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE DAM SAFETY ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 41 OF 2021  
 
[13th December , 2021 .] 
 
An Act to provide for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of the specified dam 
for prevention of dam failure related disasters and to provide for institutional mechanism to 
ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dam Safety Act, 
2021.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of Union control .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the 
public interest that the Union should t ake under its control the regulation of uniform dam safety 
procedure for specified dam to the extent hereinafter provided  
3. Application .—Save as provided under this Act, it applies to the owner of every specified                   
dam,  — 
(a) being a public  sector undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central 
Government or a State Government or jointly by one or more Governments, as the case may be; 
and 
(b) being an undertaking or company or institution or a body other than those ow ned or 
controlled by the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be.  
4. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  — 
(a) "alteration of dam" means alterations or repairs as may directly affect the safety of the dam  
or reservoir;  
(b) "annual report" means a report giving the activities of the Authority and the State Dam 
Safety Organisation and the safety status of the specified dams falling under their jurisdiction 
during each financial year;  
(c) "appurtenant structu re" means the structure being — 
(i) spillways, either in the dam or separate therefrom;  
(ii) low level outlet structure and water conduits such as tunnels, pipelines or penstocks, 
either through the dam or its abutments or reservoir rim;  
                                                           
1. 30th December, 2021, vide notification No. S.O.5422(E), dated 30th December, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 5 
 (iii) hydro -mechanical equipment including gate, valve, hoist, elevators;  
(iv) energy dissipation and river training structure; and  
(v) other associated structures acting integrally with the dam or its reservoir or reservoir rim;  
(d) "Authority" means the Nation al Dam Safety Authority established under  section 8;  
(e) "dam" means any artificial barrier and its appurtenant structure constructed across rivers or 
tributaries thereof with a view to impound or divert water which also include barrage, weir and 
similar w ater impounding structures but does not include — 
(a) canal, aquaduct, navigation channel and similar water conveyance structures;  
(b) flood embankment, dike, guide bund and similar flow regulation structures;  
(f) "dam failure" means any failure of the stru cture or operation of a dam which leads to 
uncontrolled flow of impounded water resulting in downstream flooding, affecting the life and 
property of the people and the environment including flora, fauna and riverine  ecology.  
Explanation .—For the purposes o f this clause, failure in the operation shall mean such faulty 
operations of the dam which are inconsistent with the operation and maintenance manual;  
(g) "dam incident" means all such problems occurring to a dam that have not degraded into a 
dam failure, and includes — 
(i) any structural damage to the dam and the appurtenant structure;  
(ii) any unusual reading of any instrument in the dam;  
(iii) any unusual seepage or leakage through the dam body;  
(iv) any unusual change in the seepage or leakage regime;  
(v) any boiling or artesian condition noticed below the dam;  
(vi) any sudden stoppage or unusual reduction in seepage or leakage from the foundation or  
body of the dam or any of its galleries;  
(vii) any malfunction or inappropriate operation of gates;  
(viii) occurrence of flood, the peak of which exceeds the available flood discharge capacity 
of the dam or seventy per cent. of the approved design flood;  
(ix) occurrence of flood, which resulted in encroachment on the available freeboard, or the  
approved design  freeboard;  
(x) any unusual erosion in the near vicinity up to five hundred metres downstream of the 
 spillway or waste -weir; and  
(xi) any other occurrence which a prudent dam engineer may relate to dam safety concerns;  
(h) "dam safety unit" means a dam sa fety unit of any specified dam referred to in  section 30;  
(i) "distress condition" means the occurrence or potential development of such conditions in the 
dam or appurtenance structure or its rese rvoir or reservoir rim, which if left unattended to, may 
impede the safe operation of dam for its intended benefits or may pose serious risks to the life and 
property of people and the environment including flora, fauna and riverine ecology;  6 
 (j) "documenta tion" means all permanent records including electronic records concerning 
investigation, design, construction, operation, performance, maintenance, major repair, alteration, 
enlargement and safety of dams and includes design memorandum, construction drawin gs, 
geological reports, reports of specialised studies simulating structural and hydraulic response of the 
dam, changes made in design and drawings, quality control records, emergency action plan, 
operation and maintenance manual, instrumentation readings,  inspection and testing reports, 
operational reports, and dam safety review reports and other similar reports;  
(k) "enlargement of dam" means any change in the scope of an existing dam or reservoir, which 
raises water storage elevation or increases the vol ume of water impounded by the dam;  
(l) "Government" means the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be;  
(m) "inspection" means on -site examination of any component of a dam and its appurtenant 
structure;  
(n) "investigation" means collec tion of evidence, detailed examination, analysis or scrutiny of a 
specific problem pertaining to the dam and its appurtenant or a part thereof and includes laboratory 
testing, in -situ testing, geological exploration, model testing and mathematical simulati on of the 
problem;  
(o) "National Committee" means the National Committee on Dam Safety constituted 
under  section 5;  
(p) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the term "notify" 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(q) "operation of dam" means elements of the use, control and functioning of the dam which 
may primarily affect the storage, release of water and the structural safety of the dam;  
(r) "operation and maintenance manual" means the written instructions that provi de operation 
procedures, maintenance procedures, emergency procedures and any other features necessary for 
the safe operation of dam;  
(s) "owner of specified dam" means the Central Government or a State Government or jointly 
by one or more Governments or p ublic sector undertaking or local authority or company and any or 
all of such persons or organisations, who own, control, operate, or maintain a specified dam;  
(t) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or, as the case may 
be, by the State Government;  
(u) "regulations" means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(v) "remedial measures" means such structural or non -structural measures, as may be required in 
relation to the specified dam or appurtenant structure or reservoir or reservoir rim or catchment 
area of reservoir for the purpose of removing or mitigating the distress condition of the specified 
dam;  
(w) "reservoir" in relation to a dam shall mean any spread of water impounded by a specified 
dam;  
(x) "speci fied dam" means a dam constructed before or after the commencement of this Act, 
which is,  — 7 
 (i) above fifteen metres in height, measured from the lowest portion of the general 
foundation area to the top of dam; or  
(ii) between ten metres to fifteen metres in height and satisfies at least one of the following, 
namely:  — 
(A) the length of crest is not less than five hundred metres; or  
(B) the capacity of the reservoir formed by the dam is not less than one million cubic 
metres; or  
(C) the maximum flood discharge dealt with by the dam is not less than two thousand 
cubic metres per second; or  
(D) the dam has specially difficult foundation problems; or  
(E) the dam is of unusual design;  
(y) "State Committee" means the State Committee on Dam Safety constitute d under sub -section 
(1) of section 11;  
(z) "State Dam Safety Organisation" means the State Dam Safety Organisation established 
under  section 14;  and 
(za) "vulnerability and hazard classification" means the system or systems of classifying dams 
on the basis  of their condition, location, damage or hazard potential.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMITTEE  ON DAM SAFETY  
5. Constitution of National Committee .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a 
National Committee to be known as the National Committee on Dam Safety consisting of the 
following members, namely:  — 
(a) the Chairman, Central Water Commission —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) not exceeding ten representatives of the Central Government not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to that Government or equivalent dealing with matters relating to dam engineering or 
dam safety, nominated by the Central Government —Members, ex officio ; 
(c) not exceeding seve n representatives of the State Governments of the level of Engineer -in-
Chief or equivalent by rotation, nominated by the Central Government —Members, ex officio ; and  
(d) not exceeding three specialists in the field of dam safety and allied fields nominated by the 
Central Government —Members.  
(2) The National Committee shall be constituted within a period of sixty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act, and shall be reconstituted for every three years thereafter.  
6. Functions of National Committee .—(1) The National Committee shall discharge such 
functions as specified in the First Schedule as may be necessary to prevent dam failure related 
disasters and to maintain standards of dam safety.  
(2) The National Committee may, in discharge of its functions, c onstitute such sub -committees as it 
may consider necessary to assist it and the secretarial assistance to the National Committee and the 
sub-committees shall be provided by the Authority.  8 
 (3) The knowledge and information collected or generated by the Nati onal Committee shall be 
disseminated to all stakeholders by the Authority.  
7. Meetings of National Committee .—(1) The National Committee shall meet at such times and 
places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the National Committee shall meet twice in a year and one meeting shall be held 
before the onset of the monsoon season.  
(2) The National Committee may invite the re presentative of the owner of any specified dam and 
such other experts in dam safety (including international experts) as it may consider appropriate for the 
discharge of its functions.  
(3) The expenditure incurred on the National Committee shall be in such  manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  DAM SAFETY  AUTHORITY  
8. Establishment of National Dam Safety Authority .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may by notification, appoint, there shall be estab lished for the purposes of this 
Act, a National Dam Safety Authority, within a period of sixty days from the date of commencement 
of this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the 
Government of I ndia or equivalent to be appointed by the Central Government who have knowledge 
of, and adequate qualification, experience and capacity in, dealing with problems relating to the dam 
engineering and dam safety management.  
(3) The headquarters of the Authori ty shall be at the National Capital territory of Delhi and the 
Authority may establish offices at other places in India.  
(4) The Authority shall comply with such directions as may, from time to time, be given to it by the 
Central Government.  
9. Functions of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall discharge such functions as specified in the 
Second Schedule as may be necessary to implement the policy, guidelines and standards evolved by 
the National Committee for proper surveillance, inspection and maintenance o f specified dams and for 
such purposes, it shall have the power to enforce the attendance of any person and call for any 
information as may be necessary.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall make all 
endeavours to resolve any issue between the State Dam Safety Organisations of States or between a 
State Dam Safety Organisation and any owner of a specified dam in that State.  
(3) Every decision of the Authority taken in respect of matters under this Act shal l be final and 
binding upon all the parties to the issue.  
10. Officers and Employees of Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of 
enabling the Authority to perform functions under this Act, provide such number of officers and other 
employees as it may consider necessary:  9 
 Provided that the officers and other employees shall have such qualifications and experience in the 
field of dam safety including dam -design, hydro -mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo -technical 
investigation, inst rumentation, dam -rehabilitation or such other fields as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The functions, powers, terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be pres cribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  COMMITTEE  ON DAM SAFETY  
11. Constitution of State Committee on Dam Safety .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
State Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes  of this Act, 
a State Committee on Dam Safety consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Engineer -in-Chief or equivalent officer of the Department of the State responsible for 
Dam Safety —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) technical and scientific offi cers of the rank of Chief Engineer, not exceeding six persons, 
from such Departments as may be decided by the State Government or from such other 
organisations owing specified dams —Members;  
(c) the Chief Engineer or equivalent level officer of each such up stream States in cases where 
reservoir area of any of the specified dam of the State extends to another State —Members;  
(d) the Chief Engineer or equivalent level officer of each such downstream State in cases where 
flood release of any of the specified dam  of the State flows to a neighbouring State —Members;  
(e) one representative of the Central Water Commission not below the rank of Director to be 
nominated by the Chairman, Central Water Commission —Member;  
(f) experts in the field of hydrology or dam designs, not exceeding three, from engineering 
institutes --Members; and  
(g) one representative of the Central Electricity Authority not below the rank of Director to be 
nominated by the Chairman, Central Electricity Authority —Member.  
(2) The State Committe e shall be constituted within a period of hundred and eighty days from the 
date of commencement of this Act, and reconstituted for every three years thereafter.  
 12. Functions of State Committee .—(1) The State Committee shall discharge such functions as 
specified in the Third Schedule as may be necessary to prevent dam failure related disasters under this 
Act as per guidelines, standards and other directions on dam safety issued by the Authority.  
(2) The State Committee, in discharge of its functions, shall  be assisted by such sub -committees as 
it may consider necessary, and the secretarial assistance to the State Committee as well as its sub -
committees shall be provided by the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation.  
13.  Meetings of State Committee .—(1) The State Committee shall meet at such times and places 
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as 
may be prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that the State Committee shall meet twice in a  year and one meeting shall be held before the 
onset of the monsoon season.  10 
 (2) The State Committee may invite the representative of the owner of any specified dam and such 
other experts in Dam Safety as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge of it s functions.  
(3) The expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee shall be in the manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) The specialist members and other expert invitees who attend the meetings of the State 
Committee or its  sub-committees shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
CHAPTER V  
STATE  DAM SAFETY  ORGANISATION  
14. Establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation .—(1) The State Government shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, by notification, establish in the Department dealing with dam safety, a separate 
organisation, to be known as the State Dam Safety Organisation, within a period of hundred and eighty 
days from the date of commencement of this Act:  
Provided that in States h aving more than thirty specified dams, the State Dam Safety Organisation 
shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent, and in all other 
cases, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be headed by an officer not below the  rank of 
Superintendent Engineer or equivalent.  
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation shall be responsible to, and report to, the technical head of 
the Department dealing with Dam Safety.  
(3) The organisational structure and work procedures of the State Da m Safety Organisation shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be borne by 
the respective State Government.  
15. Officers and employees of State Dam Safe ty Organisation .—(1) The State Government 
shall, having regard to the number of specified dams in that State, provide such number of officers and 
employees to the State Dam Safety Organisation as it may consider necessary for the efficient 
functioning of t he said Organisation:  
Provided that the officers and employees shall have such qualifications and experience in the field 
of dam safety including dam -design, hydro -mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo -technical 
investigation, instrumentation, dam -rehabil itation or such other field as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
(2) The functions and powers of the officers and employees appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONI NG IN RELATION TO DAM SAFETY  
16. Surveillance and inspection .—(1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall,  — 
(a) keep perpetual surveillance;  
(b) carry out inspections; and  
(c) monitor the operation and maintenance,   11 
 of all specified dams falling under their jurisdiction to ensure continued safety of such specified dams 
and take such measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns that are noticed with a view to 
achieve satisfactory level of dam safety assurance as per such guidelines, standards and other 
directions on dam safety as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation, for the purpose of enabling it to make decisions compatible 
with public safety, shall make or cause to be made such investigations and shall  gather or cause to be 
gathered such data as may be required for proper review and study of the various features of the 
design, construction, repair and enlargement of dams, reservoirs and appurtenant structures under their 
jurisdiction.  
17. Vulnerability an d hazard classification of dams .—The State Dam Safety Organisation shall 
classify each dam under their jurisdiction as per such vulnerability and hazard classification criteria as 
may be specified by the regulations.  
18.  Maintenance of log books .—(1) Ever y State Dam Safety Organisation shall maintain a log 
book or database for each specified dam under their jurisdiction recording therein all activities related 
to the surveillance and inspection and all important events related to dam safety and with such d etails 
and in such form as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall furnish all such information to the Authority as and 
when required by them.  
19. Records of dam failures and dam incidents .—(1) Every State Dam Saf ety Organisation shall 
report the event of any dam failure under their jurisdiction to the Authority, and furnish any 
information as and when required by them.  
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall maintain the records of major dam incidents of each 
specified dams under their jurisdiction, and furnish all such information to the Authority as and when 
required by them.  
20. Instructions on safety of specified dams .—(1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation shall 
render its instructions to the owner o f a specified dam on the safety or the remedial measures required 
to be taken with respect to it.  
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall comply with the instructions issued by the State Dam 
Safety Organisation with regard to safety or remedial measures  in relation to any specified dam owned 
by it.  
21. Funds for maintenance and repairs .—Every owner of the specified dam shall earmark 
sufficient and specific funds for maintenance and repairs of the specified dam and to implement the 
recommendations of the State Dam Safety Organisation.  
22. Technical documentation .—(1) Every owner of the specified dam shall compile all technical 
documentations concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural engineering of dam, watershed 
upstream of dam, and nature or use of  land downstream of dam along with information on all 
resources or facilities of economic, logistic or environmental importance which are likely to be 
affected due to dam failure.  
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall furnish all such information to t he State Dam Safety 
Organisation and the Authority as and when required by them.  12 
 (3) Every owner of the specified dam shall equip its organisation with the state -of-the-art 
information technology tools to store, retrieve, and distribute the data related to  the dam safety and 
dam performance.  
23. Qualifications and experience of individuals responsible for safety of specified dams .—
Every individual responsible for safety of specified dams and all activities related thereto shall possess 
such qualifications a nd experience and shall undergo such training as may be specified by the 
regulations . 
24. Jurisdiction of State Dam Safety Organisation and Authority .—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of this Act, all specified dams, shall fall under the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety 
Organisation of the State in which such dam is situated in matters relating to dam inspections, analysis 
of information, investigation reports or recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial 
measures to be unde rtaken  to improve dam safety; and in all such matters, full co -operation shall be 
extended by the owner of the specified dam:  
Provided that where a specified dam is owned by a Central Public Sector Undertaking or where a 
specified dam is extended over two or more States, or where the specified dam in one State is owned 
by another State, then the Authority shall be construed as the State Dam Safety Organisation for the 
purposes of this Act:  
Provided further that in all such dams where the Authority takes up the role of State Dam Safety 
Organisation, the Governments of the States within the jurisdiction of which such dams are located 
shall have access to all information relating to these specified dams as available with the Authority.  
(2) The authorised representative of the Authority or concerned State Dam Safety Organisation for 
the purposes of making any inspection or investigation necessary for the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act, may enter upon any part of the specified dam or its site a s and when required 
and apply such investigation methods, as may be considered necessary.  
(3) After making inspection or investigation under sub -section ( 2), the representative referred to in 
that sub -section is of the opinion that certain remedial measure s are required to be taken, he shall 
report such remedial measures to the officer -in-charge of such specified dam and to the concerned 
State Dam Safety Organisation.  
(4) The Authority and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation, in cases of specified dams being 
found to be distressed on account of their age, degeneration, degradation, structural or other 
impediments, shall suggest such remedial measures on such operational parameters (including 
maximum reservoir level, maximum spillway discharge and maximum  discharges through other 
outlets) as it may consider necessary.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4) shall absolve the owner of specified dam 
or any other authority or person from any of the responsibilities or obligations entrusted  upon it under 
the provisions of this Act and the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4) shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, any other provision of this Act.  
25. Cost of investigation .—All the costs to be incurred by the Authority or State Dam Safety 
Organisation on any form of investigation done including payment given to any consultant or expert, 
shall be borne by the owner of the specified dam.  13 
 26. Construction or alteration of dams .—(1) Any construction or alteration of a specif ied dam 
shall be undertaken subject to investigation, design and construction being done by such agencies as 
may be accredited by the Authority or the State Government, as the case may be:  
Provided that the Authority may disqualify any agency which violate s any of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) Every agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purpose of designing or evaluating the 
safety of the specified dam, make use of the relevant standard codes and guidelines of the Bureau of 
Indian Standards, and furnish the reasons, if any departure is made in the design or dam safety 
evaluation.  
(3) Every agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall for the purpose of investigation, design and 
construction employ such qualified, experienced and competent engineers, as may be specified by the 
regulations.  
(4) Every agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall for the purpose of approval of dam design 
demonstrate the safety of the design, operational parameters and po licies as per the provisions of 
relevant codes and guidelines to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.  
(5) Every agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purpose of dam construction, 
undertake such quality control measures, as may be specified by the regulations.  
(6) The construction of any specified dam or the alteration or enlargement of any existing specified 
dam shall be undertaken with the approval of such competent authority, as may be specified by 
notificatio n by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be.  
27. Initial filling of reservoirs .—(1) Before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified dam, the 
agency responsible for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare an  initial filling plan, with 
adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and its appurtenant 
structures.  
(2) Before initial filling of the reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall 
inspect or cause to be inspe cted the specified dam either through its own engineers or by an 
independent panel of experts, who shall also examine the initial filling programme and prepare a 
detailed report thereof duly certifying the fitness of dam for filling.  
28. Operation and main tenance .—(1) Every owner of the specified dam shall provide operation 
and maintenance establishment for the specified dam, and shall ensure that sufficient number of 
trained operation and maintenance engineers or technical persons are posted at each such d am. 
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall ensure that a well -documented operation and 
maintenance manual is kept at each of the specified dams and are followed at all times.  
29. Responsibility of owner of specified dam .—Nothing contained in this Act s hall be construed 
to absolve an owner of a specified dam of the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the 
construction, operation, maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir.  
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY, INSPECTION AND DATA COLLECTION  
30. Dam sa fety unit .—For each specified dam, the owner shall, within the operation and 
maintenance establishment, provide a dam safety unit consisting of such competent levels of engineers 
as may be specified by the regulations.  14 
 31. Inspection .—(1) Every owner of a specified dam shall undertake every year, through their dam 
safety unit, a pre -monsoon and post -monsoon inspections in respect of each such dam.  
(2) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), every owner of a specified dam shall inspect or cause to 
be inspected  every specified dam by the dam safety unit, during and after every flood, earthquake or 
any other natural or man -made calamities, or if any sign of distress or unusual behaviour is noticed in 
the dam.  
(3) Every owner of a specified dam shall,  — 
(a) carry out all inspections referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) in accordance with 
the guidelines and check -lists as may be specified by the regulations;  
(b) station, at each of the specified dam site throughout the monsoon period, such engineers an d 
other technical personnel, as may be decided, in consultation with the State Dam Safety 
Organisation:  
Provided that the engineers and other technical personnel shall be required to be stationed at their 
respective dam sites during entire period of emerge ncy following any other natural or man -made 
calamity that may create distress conditions in the dam; and  
(c) forward the inspection report by the dam safety unit to the State Dam Safety Organisation, 
which shall analyse the report and submit comments on th e deficiency and remedial measures, if any, 
to the owner of the specified dam.  
32. Instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam .—(1) Every owner of a specified dam 
shall have a minimum number of such instrumentations at each specified dam, and i nstalled in such 
manner as may be specified by the regulations for monitoring the performance of such dam.  
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall maintain a record of readings of the instrumentations 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) and forward the analysis of such readings to the State Dam Safety 
Organisation, in the form, manner and at such interval as may be specified by the regulations.  
33. Establishment of hydro -meteorological station .—(1) Every owner of a specified dam shall 
establish a hydro -meteorological station in the vicinity of each specified dam capable of recording such 
data as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) Every owner of the specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data referred to in sub -
section ( 1) at a suita ble location.  
34. Installations of seismological station .—(1) In the case of every specified dam, having a height 
of thirty metres or above or falling under such seismic zone, as may be specified by the regulations, the 
owner of the specified dam shall est ablish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam for 
recording micro and strong motion earthquakes and such other data as may be specified by the 
regulations.  
(2) Every owner of a specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data referred to in sub -
section ( 1) at such suitable location and in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
CHAPTER VIII  
EMEGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
35. Obligation of owner of specified dam .—(1) Every owner of a specified dam, in r espect of each 
specified dam, shall,  — 15 
 (a) establish well designed hydro -meteorological network and an inflow forecasting system;  
(b) establish an emergency flood warning system for the probable flood affected areas 
downstream of the dam;  
(c) test or cause  to be tested periodically the functioning of systems referred to in clauses ( a)                
and ( b); 
(d) install such scientific and technical instruments which are invented or adopted from time to 
time for the purpose of ensuring the dam safety and th e life and property of people downstream;  
(e) make available the information relating to maximum anticipated inflows and outflows 
including flood warning and an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons and property towards 
the upstream or downstream of the dam, to the concerned district authorities and also make available 
the information in public domain; and  
(f) render necessary assistance to the Authority in establishment and running of the early warning 
system for the exchange of real time hydrolog ical and meteorological data and information related to 
the operation of reservoirs.  
(2) Every owner of a specified dam, for each of its dam shall, carry out risk assessment studies at 
such interval as may be specified by the regulations and the first such  study shall be made within five 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
36. Emergency action plan .—(1) Every owner of a specified dam, in respect of each of specified 
dam, shall,  — 
(a) prepare emergency action plan before allowing the initial fil ling of the reservoir and thereafter 
update such plans at regular intervals;  
(b) in respect of the dam which is constructed and filled before the commencement of this Act, 
prepare emergency action plan within five years from the date of commencement of thi s Act and 
thereafter update such plans at regular intervals as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) The emergency action plan referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall,  — 
(a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection of persons and property u pstream or 
downstream of the specified dam in the event of an actual or imminent dam failure or to mitigate the 
effects of the disaster;  
(b) include therein,  — 
(i) the type of emergencies which are likely to occur in the operation of any reservoir;  
(ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in the event of any dam failure, along with 
probable areas, population, structures and installations likely to be adversely affected due to flood 
water released from the reservoir;  
(iii) warning procedures, i nundation maps and advance preparations for handling efficiently 
and in the best possible manner the likely adverse situations especially to avoid loss of human 
life; 
(iv) such other matters which may having regard to the geographical conditions, size of t he 
dam and other relevant factors as may be necessary.  
(3) The emergency action plan under this section shall be put into action as and when conditions 
arise which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to a specified dam or potentially hazardous to publi c 
safety, infrastructure, other property or to the environment.  16 
 (4) Every owner of the specified dam shall, while preparing and updating the emergency action plan, 
undertake a consultation process with all disaster management agencies and other Departments  of the 
State entrusted with disaster management and relief in the area likely to be affected and owners of other 
dams in the immediate vicinity likely to be affected, so as to bring coordination and transparency and 
allay any unwarranted fear on dam safet y issues.  
37. Assistance to other disaster management authorities .—Without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Act or liability of the owner of the specified dam and other organisations and authorities under this 
Act, every owner, organisation and authorit y shall render necessary assistance, if so required by any 
authority under any law for the time being in force to meet or mitigate any disaster or emergency arising 
out of the specified dams.  
CHAPTER IX  
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUTION  
38. Comprehensive dam safety evaluation .—(1) The owner of a specified dam shall make or cause 
to be made comprehensive dam safety evaluation of each specified dam through an independent panel 
of experts constituted as per regulations for the purpose of determining the condi tions of the specified 
dam and its reservoir:  
Provided that the first comprehensive dam safety evaluation for each existing specified dam shall be 
conducted within five years from the date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter the 
comprehensive dam s afety evaluation of each such dam shall be carried out at regular intervals as may 
be specified by the regulations.  
(2) The comprehensive dam safety evaluation shall consists of, but not be limited to,  — 
(a) review and analysis of available data on the design, construction, operation, maintenance and 
performance of the structure;  
(b) general assessment of hydrologic and hydraulic conditions with mandatory review of design 
floods as specified by the regulations;  
(c) general assessment of seismic safety of  specified dam with mandatory site specific seismic 
parameters study in certain cases as specified by the regulations;  
(d) evaluation of the operation, maintenance and inspection procedures; and  
(e) evaluation of any other conditions which constitute a hazard to the integrity of the structure.  
39. Compulsory evaluation in certain cases .—The comprehensive dam safety evaluation referred 
to in section 38 shall be compulsory in the case of,  — 
(a) major modification to the original structure or design criteri a; 
(b) discovery of an unusual condition at the dam or reservoir rim; and  
(c) an extreme hydrological or seismic event.  
40. Reports of comprehensive evaluation .—(1) The owner of a specified dam shall report the 
results of the dam safety evaluation undertak en under section 38 or section 39 to the State Dam Safety 
Organisation.  
(2) The reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall include, but not be limited to,  — 17 
 (a) assessment of the condition of the structure based on the visual observations and available 
data on the design, hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance and performance of the 
structure;  
(b) recommendations for any emergency measures or actions, if required, to assure the 
immediate safety of the structure;  
(c) recommendations for remedial m easures and actions related to design, construction, 
operation, maintenance and inspection of the structure, if required;  
(d) recommendations for additional detailed studies, investigations and analysis, if required; and  
(e) recommendations for improvement s in routine maintenance and inspection of dam, if 
required.  
(3) Where the safety evaluations undertaken under section 38 or section 39, results in 
recommendations for a remedial action, the State Dam Safety Organisation shall pursue with the owner 
of the specified dam to ensure that remedial measures are carried out in time, for which the owner shall 
provide adequate funds.  
(4) Where there is any unresolved matter emerging between an independent panel of experts referred 
to in sub section ( 1) of section 38 and the owner of the specified dam, the matter shall be referred to the 
State Dam Safety Organisation, and, in case no agreement is arrived at, the matter shall be referred to 
the Authority which shall render its advice and send recommendations to the Sta te Government 
concerned for implementation.  
CHAPTER X  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
41. Punishment for obstruction, etc .—Whoever, without reasonable cause,  — 
(a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central Government or the State Government, or a 
person authorised by the National Committee or the Authority or the State Committee or the State 
Dam Safety Organisation in the discharge of his functions under this Act; or  
(b) refuses to comply with any direction given by or on behalf of the Central Government or the 
State Government or the National Committee or the Authority or the State Committee or the State 
Dam Safety Organisation under this Act,  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year or with fine, or with both, and if such obstruction or refusal to comply with 
directions results in loss of lives or imminent danger thereof, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years.  
42. Offences by Departments of Government .—(1) Where an offence under  this Act has been 
committed by a Department of the Government, the head of the Department shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he 
proves that the offence was committed with out his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a Department of the Government and it is pr oved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
officer, other than the head of the Department, such officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  18 
 43.  Offence by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company or body corporate, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge 
of, and was responsibl e to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section sha ll render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or oth er 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also, be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation . — For the purpose of this section —  
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
44. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, except on a complaint made by the Central Government or the State Government or a person 
authorised in this behalf by the National Committee or the Authority or the State Committee or the 
State Dam Safety Organisation, as the case may be.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
45. Annual report of safety status of specified dam .—(1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation 
shall prepare annual report, within three months of the expiry of the preceding financial year, of its 
activities and safety status of specified dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded to the 
Authority and State Government and tha t Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where such Legislature consists of 
one House, before that House.  
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation and every owner of a specif ied dam shall provide to the 
Authority, documentation of the projects, report of enquiries into failure and any other data, as and 
when required in such format and in such manner as may be decided by the Authority.  
(3) The Authority, shall prepare a consol idated annual report of the dam safety activities in the 
country and submit the same to the Central Government within six months of the  expiry of the 
preceding financial year and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliame nt. 
(4) The Authority shall forward its annual report on the safety status of specified dams to the 
National Disaster Management Authority and also make available such report in public domain.  19 
 (5) The State Dam Safety Organisation of each State shall forwa rd their annual report to the 
concerned State Disaster Management Authority and also make available such report in public 
domain.  
46. Safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams .—Every owner of the dam 
other than specified dams shall under take such measures as may be necessary to ensure dam safety and 
shall comply with such measures as may be specified by the regulations.  
47. Safety measures in respect of dams located outside territory of India .—Where a dam, 
including a dam created due to landslides or glacial moraine, is located outside the territory of India 
and the Authority suo motu or on receipt of information from any person or organisation or authority 
or source prima facie is of the opinion that measures are required to be taken to ensure safety of such 
dams and failure of which may endanger the life and property of people located in India, it shall in 
writing submit an intimation thereof to the Central Government indicating therein the likely damages 
which may arise due to failure o f such dams and the safety measures required to be taken in respect of 
such dam and the Central Government shall take all suitable measures to mitigate any possible threat.  
48. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect not withstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
49. Power to amend Schedules —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend the Firs t Schedule, the Second Schedule or the Third 
Schedule and thereupon the Schedules, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as may be  after it is made.  
50. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions, as it may consider necessary, to the State Government where that Government is the owner 
of the specified dam and to the owner of a spec ified dam in any other case for the effective 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
51. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of National Committee on Dam Safety 
Authority and State Committee on Dam Safety .—No act or proceedings of the Nat ional 
Committee, the Authority and the State Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
52. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the National Committee and the procedure to be 
followed at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 and the expenditure incurred on the 
meetings of the National Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 7; 
(b) the qualifications and experience of the officers and other employee of the Authority in the 
field of dam safety or suc h other field under sub -section ( 1) of section 10; 20 
 (c) the functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of other officers and other 
employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, pr escribed or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by the Central Government by rules.  
53. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the State Committee and the procedure to be 
followed at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 13; 
(b) the expenditure incurred on the meetings of the State Committee under sub -section (3) of 
section 13; 
(c) the fee and allowances paid to the specialist members or expert invitees of the State 
Committee or its sub -committees under sub -section (4) of section 13; 
(d) the organisational structure and work procedure of State Dam Safety Organisation under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 14; 
(e) the qualifications and experience of the officers and other employees of the State Dam 
Safety Organisation in the field of dam safety or such other field under sub -section (1) of section 
15; 
(f) the functions, powers, and terms and conditions of service of the employees of the State Dam 
Safety Organisation under sub -section ( 2) of section 15; 
(g) the dam safety  measures in respect of dams other than specified dams under section 46;  
(h) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to 
be made by the State Government by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House.  
54. Power to make regulations by Authority .—(1) The Authori ty on the recommendations of the 
National Committee may make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the guidelines, standards and other directions for achieving the satisfactory level of dam 
safety assurance under sub -section ( 1) of section 16; 
(b) the vulnerability and hazar d classification criteria of specified dams under section 17; 
(c) the details and form pertaining to the maintenance of log books or database under sub -
section ( 1) of section 18; 
(d) the qualifications, experience and training of the individuals responsibl e for safety of 
specified dams under section 23; 21 
 (e) the employment of competent engineers and their qualifications and experience for the 
purpose of investigation, design and construction of specified dams under sub -section ( 3) of         
section 26; 
(f) the quality control measures for the purpose of dam construction under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 26; 
(g) the level of competent engineers for the dam safety units under section 30; 
(h) the guidelines and check -lists for inspection of specified dams under clause ( a) of sub -
section ( 3) of section 31; 
(i) the minimum number of set of instrumentations in the specified dams and the manner of their 
installation under sub -section ( 1) of section 32; 
(j) the form, manner and time interval for forwarding the analysi s of readings to the State Dam 
Safety Organisation under sub -section ( 2) of section 32;  
(k) the data requirements of hydro -meteorological stations in the vicinity of specified dams 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 33;  
(l) the data requirements of seismological stations in the vicinity of specified dams under sub -
section ( 1) of section 34;  
(m) the suitable location and manner of collection, compliance, process and storage of data 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 34;  
(n) the time interval of risk assessment studies to be carried out under sub -section ( 2) of section 
35; 
(o) time interval for updating the emergency action plan under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 36;  
(p) the time interval for the comprehensive safety evaluation of specified  dams under sub -
section ( 1) of section 38;  
(q) the mandatory review of design flood of existing specified dams under clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 2) of section 38;  
(r) the mandatory site specific seismic parameter studies of existing specified dams under cla use 
(c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 38;  
(s) the measures necessary to ensure dam safety by every owner of dam other than specified 
dams under section 46;  
(t) any other matter which is to be specified or in respect of which provision is to be made by 
the Authority.  
55. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for  a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 22 
 as the case may be; so, however, that any such modif ication or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
56. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government  may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section aft er the expiry of three years from the date 
of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 6( 1)] 
FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY  
1. For the purposes of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam failure related 
disasters, evolve dam safety policies and recommend necessary regulations as may be required;  
2. act as a forum for exchange of views on techniques to be adopted for remedial measures to relieve 
distress conditions in specified dams and appurtenant structures;  
3. analyse the causes of major dam incidents and dam failures and suggest changes in the planning, 
specifications, construction, operation and maintenance practices in order to avoid recurrence of such 
incidents and failures;  
4. evolve comprehensive dam safety management approach as an integration of dam safety 
evaluation, risk assessment and risk managem ent for the desired level of safety assurance; and also 
explore compensations, by means of insurance coverage for the people affected by dam failures;  
5. render advice on any specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the 
Central  Government or the State Government, as the case may be;  
6. make recommendations on a request by the Central Government on safety measures in respect of 
dams located outside the territory of India;  
7. make recommendations on the rehabilitation requirements  of ageing dams;  
8. provide strategic supervision for such dam rehabilitation programmes that are executed in States 
through central or externally aided funding;  
9. identify areas of research and development for dam safety and recommend for provision of fu nds; 
10. make recommendations on the coordinated reservoir operations of cascading dams; and  
11. any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the Central 
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 9( 1)] 
FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL DAM SAFETY AUTHORITY  
1. For the purpose of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam failure related 
disasters, discharge such functions as related to implementation of the policies made by the National 
Committee inclu ding making regulations on the recommendations of the National Committee;  
2. resolve any issue between the State Dam Safety Organisations of States or between a State Dam 
Safety Organisation and any owner of a specified dam in that State;  
3. provide the st ate-of-the-art technical and managerial assistance to the State Dam Safety 
Organisations;  
4. maintain a national level database of all specified dams in the country, including serious distress 
conditions, if any, noticed therein;  
5. maintain liaison with t he State Dam Safety Organisations and the owners of the specified dams for 
standardisation of dam safety related data and practices, and related technical or managerial assistance;  
6. lay down guidelines and check -lists for the routine inspection and detai led investigation of the 
specified dams and appurtenant structures;  
7. maintain the records of major dam failures in the country;  
8. examine, as and when necessary, either through its own engineers or through a panel of experts, 
the cause of any major dam failure, and submit its report to the National Committee;  
9. examine whenever required, either through its own engineers or through a panel of experts, the 
cause of any major public safety concern in respect of any specified dam, and issue appropriate 
instructions relating to further investigations, operational parameters or remedial measures;  
10. lay down the uniform criteria for vulnerability and hazard classification of the specified dams in 
the country, and review such criteria as and when necessary ; 
11. give directions regarding maintenance of log books or database;  
12. give directions regarding qualifications and experience requirements of individuals responsible 
for safety of the specified dams;  
13. accord accreditations to the agencies that may b e entrusted with the investigation, design, 
construction and alteration of the specified dams;  
14. disqualify any agency for taking up investigation, design, construction or alteration of the 
specified dams, if it violates any of the regulations made under  this Act;  
15. give directions regarding qualification and experience requirements of individuals responsible for 
investigation, design and construction of the specified dams;  
16. give directions regarding quality control measures to be undertaken during c onstruction of the 
specified dams;  
17. lay down guidelines for preventive measures in the areas vulnerable to landslides in the vicinity 
of a specified dam under construction;  25 
 18. give directions regarding competent levels of engineers in the dam safety un its of the specified 
dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;  
19. give directions regarding instrumentation requirements and manner of their installation for 
monitoring the performance of the specified dams;  
20. give direc tions regarding data requirements of hydro -meteorological stations in the vicinity of the 
specified dams;  
21. give directions regarding data requirements of seismological stations in the vicinity of the 
specified dams;  
22. give directions regarding time in terval for the risk assessment studies of the specified dams on 
the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;  
23. give directions regarding time interval for updating the emergency action plans of the specified 
dams on the basis of vul nerability and hazard classification of such dams;  
24. give directions regarding constitution of independent panel of experts for comprehensive dam 
safety evaluation of the specified dams;  
25. give directions regarding time interval for the comprehensive s afety evaluation of the specified 
dams on the basis of vulnerability and hazard classification of such dams;  
26. lay down guidelines for review of design floods of existing the specified dams;  
27. lay down guidelines for review of site specific seismic par ameter studies of the specified dams;  
28. establishment of an early warning system incorporating appropriate framework for the exchange 
of real time hydrological and meteorological data and information related to operation of reservoirs by 
the owner of a d am; 
29. promote general education and awareness in relation to dam safety;  
30. provide secretarial assistance to the National Committee and its sub -committees;  
31. provide coordination and overall supervision of dam rehabilitation programmes that are execu ted 
in States through central or externally aided funding; and  
32. any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the Central 
Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 12( 1)] 
FUNCTIONS OF STATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY  
1. For the purpose of maintaining standards of dam safety and prevention of dam failure related 
disasters, discharge such functions as may be necessary as per the guidelines, standards and other 
directions issued by the Authority;  
2. review the work  done by the State Dam Safety Organisation;  
3. establish priorities for investigations in case of specified dams under distress condition;  
4. in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any specified dam in the State had already 
been undertaken , to order further investigations in relation to safety of such specified dam and assign 
responsibilities for execution including the use of non -departmental resources, and association of 
independent experts where necessary;  
5. recommend the appropriate me asures to be taken in relation to the safety of the specified dam 
which is under distress condition;  
6. establish priorities among projects requiring remedial safety works;  
7. review the progress on measures recommended in relation to dam safety;  
8. assess  potential implication of reservoir filling of a specified dam in the State on any upstream 
State, and coordinate mitigation measures with such upstream States;  
9. assess potential implication of failure of a specified dam in the State on any downstream St ate, and 
coordinate mitigation measures with such downstream States;  
10. assess probability of cascading dam failure, and coordinate mitigation measures with all 
concerned, including bordering States;  
11. recommend provision of funds for the purpose of pla nned and appropriately phased rehabilitation 
of ageing dams in the State;  
12. provide strategic supervision for such dam improvement and rehabilitation programmes that are 
executed through State funding; and  
13. any other specific matter relating to dam safety which may be referred to it by the State 
Government.  
 
 
--------------------------The Direct Tax Vivad se Vishwas Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE DIRECT TAX VIVAD SE VISHWAS ACT, 2020  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
Last Updated: 2 9-6-2021  
___________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Amount payable by declarant . 
4. Filing of declaration and particulars to be furnished . 
5. Time and manner of payment . 
6. Immunity from initiation of proceedings in respect of offence and imposition of penalty in certain 
cases . 
7. No refund of amount paid . 
8. No benefit, concession or immunity to declarant . 
9. Act not to apply in certain cases . 
10.  Power of Board to issue direct ions, etc . 
11. Power to remove difficulties . 
12. Power to make rules . 
 
 
  2 
 THE DIRECT TAX VIVAD SE VISHWAS ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 3 OF 2020  
 [17th March , 2020.]  
An Act to provide for resolution of disputed tax and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Direct Tax Vivad se Vishwas Act, 2020.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
‘(a) “app ellant” means — 
(i) a person in whose case an appeal or a writ petition or special leave petition has been filed 
either by him or by the income -tax authority or by both, before an appellate forum and such 
appeal or petition is pe nding as on the specified date;  
(ii) a person in whose case an order has been passed by the Assessing Officer, or an order has 
been passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal in an appeal, 
or by the High Court in a writ petition, on or before the spec ified date, and the time for filing any 
appeal or special leave petition against such order by that person has not expired as on that date;  
(iii) a person who has filed his objections before the Dispute Resolution Panel under section 
144C of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) and the Dispute Resolution Panel has not issued 
any direction o n or before the specified date;  
(iv) a person in whose case the Dispute Resolution Panel has issued direction under  
sub-section ( 5) of section 144C of the Income -tax Ac t and the Assessing Officer has not passed 
any order under sub -section ( 13) of that section o n or before the specified date;  
(v) a person who has filed an application for revision under section 264 of the Income -tax Act 
and such application is pend ing as on the specified date;”;  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby  clarified that the expression 
“appellant” shall not include and shall be deemed never to have been included a person in whose 
case a writ petition or special leave petition or any other proceeding has been filed either by him 
or by the income -tax authority or by both before an appellate forum, arising out of an order of the 
Settlement Commission under Chapter XIX -A of the Income -tax Act, and such petition or appeal 
is either pen ding or is disposed o f.] 
(b) “appellate forum” means the Supreme Court or the High Court or the Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal  or the Commissioner (Appeals);  
(c) “declarant” means a person who fil es declaration under section 4;  
(d) “declaration” means the d eclaration filed under section 4;  
(e) “designated authority” means an officer not below the rank of a Commissioner of Income -tax 
notified by the Principal Chief Commissione r for the purposes of this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 172 (w.e.f. 17 -03-2020).  3 
 (f) “disputed fee” means the fee determined under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961   
(43 of 1961)  in respect of which appeal h as been filed by the appellant;  
(g) “disputed income”, in relation to an assessment year, means the whole or so much of the total 
income as is  relatable to the disputed ta x; 
(h) “disputed interest” means the interest determined in any case under the provisions of t he 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , where — 
(i) such interest is not charged  or chargeable on disputed tax;  
(ii) an appeal has been filed by the appella nt in res pect of such interest;  
(i) “disputed penalty” means the penalty determined in any case under the provisions of t he 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961),  where — 
(i) such penalty is not levied or leviable in respect of disputed income or di sputed tax, as the 
case may be;  
(ii) an appeal has been filed by the appell ant in respect of such penalty;  
(j) “disputed tax”, in relation to an assessment year or financial year, as the case may be, means 
the income -tax, including surcharge and cess (hereafter in this clause  referred to as the amount of tax) 
payable by the appellant under the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961),  as computed 
hereunder: — 
 (A) in a case where any appeal, writ petition or special leave petition is pending before the 
appellate for um as on the specified date, the amount of tax that is payable by the appellant if such 
appeal or writ petition or special leave petition  was to be decided against him;  
(B) in a case where an order in an appeal or in writ petition has been passed by the ap pellate 
forum on or before the specified date, and the time for filing appeal or special leave petition 
against such order has not expired as on that date, the amount of tax payable by the appellant after 
giving effect to the order so passed;  
(C) in a case  where the order has been passed by the Assessing Officer on or before the 
specified date, and the time for filing appeal against such order has not expired as on that date, the 
amount of tax payable by the appellant  in accordance with such order;  
(D) in a  case where objection filed by the appellant is pending before the Dispute Resolution 
Panel under section 144C of the Income -tax Act as on the specified date, the amount of tax 
payable by the appellant if the Dispute Resolution Panel was to confirm the var iation proposed in 
the draft order;  
(E) in a case where Dispute Resolution Panel has issued any direction under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 144C of the Income -tax Act and the Assessing Officer has not passed the order under 
sub-section ( 13) of that section on or before the specified date, the amount of tax payable by the 
appellant as per the assessment order to be passed by the Assessing Officer under sub -section 
(13) thereof;  
(F) in a case where an application for revision under section 264 of the Income -tax Act is 
pending as on the specified date, the amount of tax payable by the appellant if such application 
for revision wa s not to be accepted:  
Provided that in a case where Commissioner (Appeals) has issued notice of enhancement 
under section 251 of the In come -tax Act on or before the specified date, the disputed tax shall be 4 
 increased by the amount of tax pertaining to issues for which notice of enhancement has been 
issued:  
Provided further that in a case where the dispute in relation to an assessment year  relates to 
reduction of tax credit under section 115JAA or section 115D of the Income -tax Act or any loss 
or depreciation computed thereunder, the appellant shall have an option either to include the 
amount of tax related to such tax credit or loss or dep reciation in the amount of disputed tax, or to 
carry forward the reduced tax credit or loss or depreciation, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
 1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression 
“disputed tax”, in relat ion to an assessment year or financial year, as the case may be, shall not 
include and shall be deemed never to have been included any sum payable either by way of tax, 
penalty or interest pursuant to an order passed by the Settlement Commission under Chap ter XIX -
A of the Income -tax Act.]  
(k) “Income -tax Act” means the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) ; 
(l) “last date” means such date as may be notified by the Central Gove rnment in the Official 
Gazette;  
(m) “prescribed” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “specified date” means  the 31st day of January, 2020;  
(o) “tax arrear” means, — 
(i) the aggregate amount of disputed tax, interest chargeable or charged on such disputed tax, 
and penalty leviable or levied on such disputed tax; or  
(ii) dispute d interest; or  
(iii) disputed penalty; or  
(iv) disputed fee,  
as determined under the pr ovisions of the Income -tax Act.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the expression “tax 
arrear” shall not include and shall be deemed never to have been included any sum payable either 
by way of tax, penalty or interest pursuant to an order passed by the Settlement Commission 
under Chapter XIX -A of the Income -tax Act.]  
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined  in the Income -tax Act shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Amount payable by declarant .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, where a declarant files 
2[under the provisions of this Act on or before the  such date as may be  notified ], a declaration to the 
designated authority in accordance with the provisions of section 4 in respect of tax arrear, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act or any other law for the time being in force, the 
amount payable b y the declarant under this Act shall be as under, namely: — 
SI. NO  Nature of tax arrear.  Amount payable under 
this Act on or before the 
3[31st day of December , 
2020  or such later date 
as may be notified] . Amount payable under 
this Act on or after the 
4[1st day of January, 
2021 or such later date 
as may be notified]  but 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2021, s. 172 (w.e.f. 17 -03-2020).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2020, s. 5, for “under the provisions of this Act on or before the last date” (w.e.f. 31 -3-2020).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “31st day of March, 2020” (w.e.f. 31 -3-2020).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “1st day of April, 2020” (w.e.f. 31 -3-2020).  
 5 
 on or before the last 
date.  
(a) where the tax arrear is the aggregate 
amount of disputed tax, interest 
chargeable or charged on such 
disputed tax and penalty leviable or 
levied on such disputed tax. amount of the disputed 
tax. the aggregate of the 
amount of disputed 
tax and ten per cent. 
of disputed tax:  
provided  that where  
the ten per cent. of 
disputed tax exceeds 
the aggregate amount 
of interest chargeable 
or charged on such 
disputed tax and 
penalty leviable or 
levied on such 
disputed tax, the 
excess shall be 
ignored  for the 
purpose of 
computation of 
amount payable 
under this Act  . 
 
(b) where the tax arrear includes the 
tax, interest or penalty determined 
in any  assessment on the basis of 
search under section 132 or section 
132A of the Income -tax Act.  the aggregate of the 
amount of disputed 
tax and twenty -five 
per cent. of the 
disputed tax:  
provided that where the 
twenty -five per cent. of 
disputed tax exceeds the 
aggregate amount of 
interest chargeable or 
charged on such 
disputed tax and penalty 
leviable or levied on 
such disputed tax, the 
excess shall be ignored 
for the purpose of 
computation of amount 
payable under this  Act. the aggregate of the 
amount of disputed 
tax and thirty -five per 
cent. of disputed tax:  
 
provided  that where  
the thirty - five per 
cent. of disputed tax 
exceeds the aggregate 
amount of interest  
chargeable  or charged 
on such disputed 
tax and penalty 
leviable or levied on 
such disputed tax, the 
excess shall be 
ignored  for the 
purpose of 
computation of 
amount payable.  
(c) where the tax arrear relates to 
disputed interest or disputed 
penalty or disputed fee.  twenty -five per cent. 
of disputed interest 
or disputed penalty 
or disputed fee.  thirty per cent. of 
disputed interest or 
disputed penalty or 
disputed fee:  6 
 Provided that in a case where an appeal or writ petition or special leave petition is filed by the 
income -tax authority on any issue b efore the appellate forum, the amount payable shall be one -half of the 
amount in the Table above calculated on such issue, in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that in a case where an appeal is filed before the Commissioner (Appeals) or 
objections is filed before the Dispute Resolution Panel by the appellant on any issue on which he has 
already got a decision in his favour from the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (where the decision on such 
issue is not reversed by the High Court or the Supre me Court) or the High Court (where the decision on 
such issue is not reversed by the Supreme Court), the amount payable shall be one -half of the amount in 
the Table above calculated on such issue, in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that in a case where an appeal is filed by the appellant on any issue before the Income 
Tax Appellate Tribunal on which he has already got a decision in his favour from the High Court (where 
the decision on such issue is not reversed by the Supreme Court), the amo unt payable shall be one -half of 
the amount in the Table above calculated on such issue, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
4. Filing of declaration and particulars to be furnished .—(1) The declaration referred to in section 
3 shall be filed by the decla rant before the designated authority in such form and verified in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) Upon the filing the declaration, any appeal pending before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal or 
Commissioner (Appeals), in respect of the disputed income or disputed interest or disputed penalty or 
disputed fee and tax arrear shall be deemed to have been  withdrawn from the date on which certificate 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 is issued by the designated authority.  
(3) Where the declarant has filed any appeal before the appellate forum or any writ petition before the 
High Court or the Supreme Court against any order in respect of tax arrear, he shall withdraw such appeal 
or writ petition with the leave of the Court wherever required after issuance of certificate under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 and furnish proof of such withdrawal alongwith the in timation of payment to 
the designated authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(4) Where the declarant has initiated any proceeding for arbitration, conciliation or mediation, or has 
given any notice thereof under any law for the time being in force o r under any agreement entered into by 
India with any other country or territory outside India whether for protection of investment or otherwise, 
he shall withdraw the claim, if any, in such proceedings or notice after issuance of certificate under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 and furnish proof of such withdrawal alongwith the intimation of payment to 
the designated authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), the declarant shall furnish an 
undertaking waiving his right, whether direct or indirect, to seek or pursue any remedy or any claim in 
relation to the tax arrear which may otherwise be available to him under any law for the time being in 
force, in equit y, under statute or under any agreement entered into by India with any country or territory 
outside India whether for protection of investment or otherwise and the undertaking shall be made in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) The declaration under sub -section ( 1) shall be presumed never to have been made if, — 
(a) any material particular furnished in the declaration is found to be false at any stage;  
(b) the declarant violates any of the cond itions referred to in this Act;  
(c) the declarant act s in any manner which is not in accordance with the undertaking given by him 
under sub -section ( 5),  7 
 and in such cases, all the proceedings and claims which were withdrawn under section 4 and all the 
consequences under the Income -tax Act against the declar ant shall be deemed to have been revived.  
(7) No appellate forum or arbitrator, conciliator or mediator shall proceed to decide any issue relating 
to the tax arrear mentioned in the declaration in respect of which an order has been made under  
sub-section (1) of section 5 by the designated authority or the payment of sum determined under that 
section.  
5. Time and manner of payment .—(1) The designated authority shall, within a period of fifteen 
days from the date of receipt of the declaration, by order, dete rmine the amount payable by the declarant 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and grant a certificate to the declarant containing particulars 
of the tax arrear and the amount payable after such determination, in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The declarant shall pay the amount determined under sub -section ( 1) within fifteen days of the 
date of receipt of the certificate and intimate the details of such payment to the designated authority in the 
prescribed form and thereupon the designated aut hority shall pass an order stating that the declarant has 
paid the amount.  
(3) Every order passed under sub -section ( 1), determining the amount payable under this Act, shall be 
conclusive as to the matters stated therein and no matter covered by such order  shall be reopened in any 
other proceeding under the Income -tax Act or under any other law for the time being in force or under 
any agreement, whether for protection of investment or otherwise, entered into by India with any other 
country or territory outs ide India.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that making a declaration under this 
Act shall not amount to conceding the tax position and it shall not be lawful for the income -tax authority 
or the declarant being a party in appe al or writ petition or special leave petition to contend that the 
declarant or the income -tax authority, as the case may be, has acquiesced in the decision on the disputed 
issue by settling the dispute.  
6. Immunity from initiation of proceedings in respect  of offence and imposition of penalty in 
certain cases .—Subject to the provisions of section 5, the designated authority shall not institute any 
proceeding in respect of an offence; or impose or levy any penalty; or charge any interest under the 
Income -tax Act in respect of tax arrear.  
7. No refund of amount paid .—Any amount paid in pursuance of a declaration made under section 4 
shall not be refundable under any circumstances.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that where the de clarant had, before 
filing the declaration under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, paid any amount under the Income -tax Act in 
respect of his tax arrear which exceeds the amount payable under section 3, he shall be entitled to a refund 
of such excess amount, b ut shall not be entitled to interest on such excess amount under section 244A of 
the Income -tax Act.  
8. No benefit, concession or immunity to declarant. —Save as otherwise expressly provided in  
sub-section ( 3) of section 5 or section 6, nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as conferring 
any benefit, concession or immunity on the declarant in any proceedings other than those in relation to 
which the declaration has been made.  
9. Act not to apply in certain cases .—The provisions of this Act shall  not apply — 
(a) in respect of tax arrear, — 
(i) relating to an assessment year in respect of which an assessment has been made under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 143 or section 144 or section 153A or section 153C of the Income -tax 8 
 Act on the basis of search initiated under section 132 or section 132A of the Income -tax Act, if 
the amount of disputed tax exceeds five crore rupees;  
(ii) relating to an assessment year in respect of which prosecution has been instituted on or 
before the date of filing of declarati on; 
(iii) relating to any undisclosed income from a source located outside India or undisclosed 
asset located outside India;  
(iv) relating to an assessment or reassessment made on the basis of information received 
under an agreement referred to in section 90 or section 90A of the Income -tax Act, if it relates to 
any tax arrear;  
(b) to any person in respect of whom an order of detention has been made under the provisions of 
the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974  (52 of 
1974)  on or before the filing of declaration:  
Provided that — 
(i) such order of detention, being an order to which the provisions of section 9 or section 12A 
of the said Act do not apply, has not been revoked on the report of the Advisory Board unde r 
section 8 of the said Act or before the receipt of the report of the Advisory Board; or  
(ii) such order of detention, being an order to which the provisions of section 9 of the said Act 
apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of the time for, or on  the basis of, the review under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 9, or on the report of the Advisory Board under section 8, read with 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9, of the said Act; or  
(iii) such order of detention, being an order to which the provisions of secti on 12A of the said 
Act apply, has not been revoked before the expiry of the time for, or on the basis of, the first 
review under sub -section ( 3) of that section, or on the basis of the report of the Advisory Board 
under section 8, read with sub -section ( 6) of section 12A, of the said Act; or  
(iv) such order of detention has not been set aside by a court of competent jurisdiction;  
(c) to any person in respect of whom prosecution for any offence punishable under the provisions 
of the Unlawful Activities (Prev ention) Act, 1967  (37 of 1967) , the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985  (61 of 1985) , the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) , the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002  (15 of 2003) , the Prohibition of Benami Property 
Transa ctions Act, 1988  (45 of 1988)  has been instituted on or before the filing of the declaration or 
such person has been convicted of any such offence punishable under any of those Acts;  
(d) to any person in respect of whom prosecution has been initiated by an  Income -tax authority 
for any offence punishable under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  or for the 
purpose of enforcement of any civil liability under any law for the time being in force, on or before 
the filing of the declaration or such person has been convicted of any such offence consequent to the 
prosecution initiated by an Income  tax a uthority;  
(e) to any person notified under section 3 of the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to 
Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992  (27 of 1992)  on or before the filing of declaration.  
10. Power of Board to issue directions, etc .—(1) The Central  Board of Direct Taxes may, from time 
to time, issue such directions or orders to the income -tax authorities, as it may deem fit:  
Provided that no direction or order shall be issued so as to require any designated authority to dispose 
of a particular case in a particular manner.  9 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the said Board may, if it considers 
necessary or expedient so to do, for the purpose of this Act, including collection of revenue, issue from 
time to time, general or s pecial orders in respect of any class of cases, setting forth directions or 
instructions as to the guidelines, principles or procedures to be followed by the authorities in any work 
relating to this Act, including collection of revenue and issue such order , if the Board is of the opinion 
that it is necessary in the public interest so to do.  
11. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent wit h the provisions of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which the provisions of this Act come into force.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, as  soon as may be after it is made, be laid before 
each House of Parliament.  
12. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to th e generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which a declaration may be made, and the manner of its verification under  
section 4;  
(b) the form and manner in which declarant s hall furnish undertaking under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 4;  
(c) the form in which certificate shall be granted under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(d) the form in which payment shall be intimated under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(e) determination of di sputed tax including the manner of set -off in respect of brought forward or 
carry forward of tax credit under section 115JAA or section 115JD of the Income -tax Act or set -off in 
respect of brought forward or carry forward of loss or allowance of depreciati on under the provisions 
of the Income -tax Act;  
(f) the manner of calculating the amount payable under this Act;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by the  Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, a nd if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have e ffect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Essential Defence Services Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE ESSENTIAL DEFENCE SERVICES ACT, 2021  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to prohibit strikes in essential defence services.  
4. Removal of persons.  
5. Dismissal of employees participating in illegal strikes.  
6. Penalty for illegal strikes.  
7. Penalty for instigation, etc.  
8. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strikes.  
9. Power to prohibit lockouts in any industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence 
services.  
10. Powe r to prohibit layoff in any industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence 
services.  
11. Power to arrest without warrant.  
12. Offences to be tried summarily.  
13. Cognizance of offences.  
14. Reference of other laws in certain areas.  
15. Protection of action take n in good faith.  
16. Act to override other laws.  
17. Amendment of Act 14 of 1947.  
18. Laying of notifications before Parliament.  
19. Repeal and savings.  
  2 
 THE ESSENTIAL DEFENCE SERVICES ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 25 OF 2021  
[11th August , 2021.]  
An Act to provide for the maintenance of essential defence services so as to secure the security of 
nation and the life and property of public at large and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows:  — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Essential Defence Services 
Act, 2021.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of June, 2021.  
(4) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry of one year from the date on which this Act receives the 
assent of the President except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser of operation 
of this Act, and sectio n 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply upon such cesser of 
operation of this Act as if it had then been repealed by a Central Act.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “essential defence  services” means — 
(i) any service in any establishment or undertaking dealing with production of goods or 
equipment required for any purpose connected with defence;  
(ii) any service in any establishment of, or connected with, the armed forces of the Union or in 
any other establishment or installation connected with defence;  
(iii) any service in any section of any establishment connected with defence, on the working of 
which the safety of such establishment or employee employed therein depends;  
(iv) any othe r service, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be essential defence services, the cessation of work of which would prejudicially affect 
the— 
(I) production of defence equipment or goods; or  
(II) operation or maintenance of any industrial establishment or unit engaged in production 
of goods or equipment required for any purpose connected with defence; or  
(III) repair or maintenance of products connected with defence;  
(b) “strike” means the ces sation of work, go -slow, sit down, stay -in, token strike, sympathetic strike 
or mass casual leave, by a body of persons engaged in the essential defence services, acting in 
combination or a concerted refusal or a refusal under a common understanding of any  number of 
persons who are or have been so engaged to continue to work or to accept employment, and includes -- 
(i) refusal to work overtime, where such work is necessary for the maintenance of the essential 
defence services;  
(ii) any other conduct which is  likely to result in, or results in, cessation or retardation or 
disruption of work in the essential defence services.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(14 of 1947), shall have the meani ngs respectively assigned to them in that Act.  3 
 3. Power to prohibit strikes in essential defence services .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied 
that in the — 
(a) public interest; or  
(b) interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(c) security of any State; or  
(d) public order; or  
(e) decency; or  
(f) morality,  it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or special order, prohibit strikes 
in the essential defence services.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be pu blished in such manner as the Central Government 
may deem fit to bring it to the notice of the persons affected by such order.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in force for six months, but the Central Government 
may, by a like order, extend  it for any period not exceeding six months, if it is satisfied that in the public 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do.  
(4) Upon the issue of an order made under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) no person engaged in the essential defence services shall go o r remain on strike;  
(b) any strike declared or commenced, whether before or after the issue of such order, by persons 
engaged or employed in such services shall be illegal.  
4. Removal of persons .—Where any order has been issued under sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 3, any 
police officer may take all such measures as such officer may deem fit including the use of police force, if 
he considers necessary, to remove any person, whose presence in any area connected with the — 
(a) defence equipment production services;  or 
(b) operation or maintenance of any industrial establishment or unit engaged in production or 
manufacturing of goods or equipment required for any purpose connected with defence; or  
(c) repair or maintenance of products connected with defence,  would be  prejudicial to the 
functioning, safety or maintenance of the essential defence services.  
5. Dismissal of employees participating in illegal strikes. —(1) Any person — 
(a) who commences a strike which is illegal under this Act or goes or remains on, otherwise takes 
part in, any such strike; or  
(b) who instigates or incites other persons to commence, or go or remain on, or otherwise take part 
in, any such strike,  shall be liable to disciplinary action (including dismissal) in accordance with the 
same provisions as are applicable for the purpose of taking such disciplinary action (including 
dismissal) on any other ground under the terms and conditions of service applicable to him in relation 
to his employment.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in a ny other law for the time being in force or under the terms 
and conditions of service applicable to any person employed in the essential defence services, before 
dismissing any person under sub -section ( 1), no inquiry shall be necessary if the authority em powered to 
dismiss or remove such person is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, 
it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry.  4 
 6. Penalty for illegal strikes. —Any person, who commences a strike which is ille gal under this Act or 
goes or remains on, or otherwise takes part in, any such strike, shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
7. Penalty for instigat ion, etc.—Any person, who instigates or incites other persons to take part in, or 
otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike which is illegal under this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which  may extend to fifteen thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
8. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strikes .—Any person, who knowingly expends or 
supplies any money in furtherance or support of a strike which is illegal under this Act, shall be punishable  
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to fifteen 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
9. Power to prohibit lockouts in any industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence 
services .—(1) If the Cen tral Government is satisfied that in the — 
(a) public interest; or  
(b) interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(c) security of any State; or  
(d) public order; or  
(e) decency; or  
(f) morality,   
it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by general or special order, prohibit lock -outs in the industrial 
establishments or units engaged in the essential defence services.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in such manner as the Central Government 
may deem fit to bring it to the notice of the persons affected by such order.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in force for six months, but the Central Government 
may, by a like order extend it for any period not exceeding six months, if it is satisfied that in the  public 
interest it is necessary so to do.  
(4) Upon the issue of an order under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) no employer engaged in the essential defence services shall commence any lock -out; and  
(b) any lock -out declared or commenced, whether before or after the  issue of such order, by any 
employer engaged in the essential defence services shall be illegal.  
(5) Any employer of an industrial establishment or unit engaged in the essential defence services, who 
commences, continues, or otherwise acts in furtherance of a lock -out which is illegal under this section, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
10. Power to prohibit layoff in any industrial establishmen t or unit engaged in essential defence 
services.—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that in the — 
(a) public interest; or  
(b) interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India; or  
(c) security of any State; or  
(d) public order; or  5 
 (e) decency; or  
(f) morality,  
it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or special order, prohibit lay -off, on any ground 
other than shortage of power or natural calamity, of any workman (other than a badli workman or a casual 
workman) whose name is borne o n the muster rolls of any industrial establishment or unit engaged in the 
essential defence services.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in such manner as the Central Government 
may deem fit to bring it to the notice of the persons affected by the order.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in force for six months, but the Central Government 
may, by a like order, extend it for any period not exceeding six months, if it is satisfied that in the public 
interest it is necess ary or expedient so to do.  
(4) Upon the issue of an order under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) no employer in relation to an establishment to which such order applies shall lay -off or continue 
the lay -off any workman (other than a badli  workman or a casual workman)  whose name is borne on 
the muster rolls of any industrial establishment or unit engaged in the essential defence services, unless 
such lay -off is  due to shortage of power or natural calamity, and any laying -off or continuation of 
laying -off shall, unless such laying -off or continuation of laying -off is due to shortage of power or 
natural calamity, be illegal;  
(b) a workman whose laying -off is illegal under clause ( a) shall be entitled to all the benefits under 
any law for the time being in force as if he h ad not been laid -off. 
(5) Any employer of an industrial establishment or unit engaged in the essential defence services, who 
lays-off or continues the laying -off of any workman shall, if such laying -off or continuation of laying -off 
is illegal under this s ection, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
11. Power to arrest without warrant. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1 973 (2 of 1974), any police officer may arrest without warrant any person who is reasonably 
suspected to have committed any offence under this Act.  
12. Offences to be tried summarily. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 19 73 (2 of 1974), all offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class, specially empowered in this behalf by 
the State Government and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 ( inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as 
may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that in a case of conviction for any offence in a summary trial under this section, it shall be 
lawful for such Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for any term fo r which such offence is 
punishable under this Act.  
13. Cognizance of offences. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), all offences punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
14. Referenc e of other laws in certain areas .—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in 
force in any area and to any authority under such law shall, in relation to that area, be construed as a 
reference to the corresponding law in force in that area and to the corresponding authority under such 
corresponding law.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer for anything which is in good faith done or inte nded to 
be done under this Act.  6 
 16. Act to override other laws .—The provisions of this Act and of any order issued thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(14 of 1947), or in any other law for the time being in force.  
17. Amendment of Act 14 of 1947 .—In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in section 2, in clause ( n), 
in sub -clause ( ia), for the words “or dock”, the words “or dock or any industrial establishment or unit 
engage d in essential defence services” shall be substituted.  
18. Laying of notifications before Parliament. —Every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament while it is in sessi on for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making a ny modification in such notification or both Houses agree that the 
notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification o r annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.  
19. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Essential Defence Services Ordinance, 2021 is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any  action taken under the provisions of the said 
Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
--------------------------The Farm Laws Repeal Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Repeal of Acts 20 of 2020, 21 of 2020 and 22 of 2020.  
3. Amendment of Act 10 of 1955.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 40 OF 2021  
[30th November , 2021.]  
 
An Act to repeal the Farmers (Empowerment and Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance 
and Farm Services Act, 2020, the Farmers' Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion and 
Facilitation) Act, 2020, the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2020 and to amend the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title .— This Act may be called the Farm Laws Repeal Act, 2021 . 
2. Repeal of Acts 20 of 2020, 21 of 2020 and 22 of 2020. — The Farmers (Empowerment and 
Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm Services Act, 2020, the Farmers' Produce Trade and 
Commerce (Promotion and Facilitation) Act, 2020 and the Essential Commo dities (Amendment) Act, 2020 
are hereby repealed.  
3. Amendment of Act 10 of 1955.  —In section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955,                         
sub-section (1A) shall be omitted . 
--------------------------The Indian Antarctic Act 2022.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN ANTARCTIC ACT, 2022  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Application.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REQUIREMENT AS TO PERMIT  
4. Permit for Indian expedition to Antarctica.  
5. Permit for Indian station in Antarctica.  
6. Permit for vessel and aircraft entering Antarctica.  
7. Permit for mineral resource activities.  
8. Permit for certain activities in Antarctica.  
9. Permit for introducing non -native animals and plants into Antarctica.  
10. Permit fo r introducing microscopic organisms.  
11. Permit to enter protected areas.  
12. Permit for waste disposal.  
13. Permit for discharge into sea.  
14. Permit for removal of biological specimen or any other sample from Antarctica.  
15. Certain provisions not to apply during emergencie s. 
16. Special permit for commercial fishing in Antarctica.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITIONS  
17. Prohibition of nuclear explosion or disposal of radioactive waste material in Antarctica.  
18. Prohibition of introducing non -sterile soil in Antarctica.  
19. Prohibition o f introducing specified substances and products.  
20. Prohibition relating to historic sites and monuments.  
21. Prohibition of possessing, selling, etc.  
22. Prohibition of discharge of certain products or substances.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC GOVERN ANCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
23. Constitution of Committee.  
24. Meetings of Committee.  
25. Functions of Committee.  
26. Power of Central Government to give directions.  2 
 CHAPTER V  
GRANT, SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION OF PERMIT  
SECTIONS . 
27. Application for permit.  
28. Liability of owner or Operator in certain cases.  
29. Suspension or cancellation of permit.  
CHAPTER VI  
 INSPECTIONS  
30. Inspection in India.  
31. Inspection of international facilities.  
32. Obstruction and false information.  
CHAPTER VII  
WASTE DIS POSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT  
33. Waste disposal.  
34. Establishment of waste classification system and waste management plans.  
35. Removal of waste from Antarctica.  
36. Disposal of combustive wastes.  
37. Storage of wastes.  
CHAPTER VIII  
 PREVENTION OF MARINE P OLLUTION AND LIABILITY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL 
EMERGENCY  
38. Committee to ensure compliance of international obligations.  
39. Duties and liabilities of Operator in case of environmental emergency.  
40. Exemption of Operator from liability in certain cases.  
CHAPTE R IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
41. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act by person.  
42. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act involving vessel.  
43. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act involving aircraft.  
44. Penalty where no provision made in Act.  
45. Offences by companies . 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Constitution of fund.  3 
 SECTIONS . 
47. Security for permit by certain persons.  
48. Designated Court and jurisdiction.  
49. Report to Committee of offences.  
50. Con ferment of powers of investigation, etc.  
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Designated Court.  
52. Accounts and audit of fund.  
53. Returns and reports.  
54. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
55. Power to make ru les. 
56. Power to remove difficulties.  
57. Rules, notifications or orders made or issued to be laid before Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 THE INDIAN ANTARCTIC ACT, 2022  
ACT NO. 13 OF 202 2 
 
[6th August , 202 2.] 
 
An Act to provide for the national measure s for protecting the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associated ecosystems and to give effect to the Antarctic Treaty, the Convention on the 
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and to the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection to the An tarctic Treaty and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS , the Antarctic Treaty was signed at Washington D.C. on the 1st day of December, 1959;  
AND WHEREAS , the Antarctic Treaty was initially signed by twelve countries and since the n                   
forty -two other countries have acceded to the Treaty;  
AND WHEREAS , of the total of fifty -four State Parties to the Treaty, twenty -nine countries have the 
status of Consultative Party with a right to vote in the Antarctic Consultative Me etings and twenty -five 
countries are Non -Consultative Parties having no right to vote therein;  
AND WHEREAS , India signed the Antarctic Treaty on the 19th day of August, 1983 and received 
the consultative status on the 12th day of September, 1983;  
AND WHERE AS, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources was 
signed at Canberra on the 20th day of May, 1980, inter alia , for the protection and preservation of the 
Antarctic environment and, in particular, for the preservation and conse rvation of marine living 
resources in Antarctica;  
AND WHEREAS , India ratified the said Convention on the 17th day of June, 1985 and is a member 
of the Commission for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources under that Convention;  
AND WHEREAS , the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was signed at 
Madrid on the 4th day of October, 1991, inter alia , to strengthen the Antarctic Treaty system and for the 
development of a comprehensive regime for the protection of the Antarctic e nvironment and dependent 
and associated ecosystems;  
AND WHEREAS , India signed the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty on 
the 14th day of January, 1998;  
AND WHEREAS , the Antarctica lies south of 60 ° South Latitude and which is a nat ural reserve, 
devoted to peace and science and should not become the scene or object of any international discord;  
AND WHEREAS , it is considered necessary to give effect to the said Treaty, the Convention and the 
Protocol and to make provisions for the pro tection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associated ecosystems and for the regulation of various activities envisaged in Antarctica and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -third Ye ar of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indian Antarctic Act, 2022.  
 5 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date* as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act . 
2. Application. —This Act shall apply to, —  
(a) a citizen of India; or  
(b) a citizen of any other country; or  
(c) a company, body corporate, corporation, pa rtnership firm, joint venture, an association of 
persons or any other entity incorporated, established or registered as such under any law in force 
in India; or  
(d) any vessel or aircraft registered in India or outside India,  
if such person, vessel or airc raft is part of an Indian expedition to Antarctica under a permit issued 
under this Act and shall include any such vessel or aircraft which is registered in India but 
chartered by any other Party for entering into Antarctica;  
(e) Antarctica, comprising of the following areas, namely: — 
(i) the continent of Antarctica, including its ice -shelves;  
(ii) all islands south of 60° South Latitude, including their ice -shelves;  
(iii) all areas of the continental shelf that are adjacent to that continent or to those is lands 
that are south of 60° South Latitude;  
(iv) all sea and air space south of 60 ° South Latitude; and  
(v) the area specified in Article I of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic 
Marine Living Resources.  
3. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “activity” means any kind of operation in Antarctica, including tourism, research, 
conservation, fishing and commercial fishing;  
(b) “aircraft” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 1) of section 2 of  the 
Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934);  
(c) “Analyst” means a person designated as such by the Committee to collect and analyse any 
sample or matter under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(d) “another Party to the Treaty ” or “another Party to the Protocol ” means any Party other than 
India;  
(e) “Antarctica ” means the Antarctic area referred to in clause ( e) of section 2;  
(f) “Antarctic environment ” means the ecosystems dependent on and associated with the 
Antarctic environment, the intrinsic value of its wildern ess and aesthetics, its value as an area for 
the conduct of scientific research or research that is essential to understand the global 
environment, the climate and the composition of the atmosphere;  
                                                           
1. 7th August , 202 3, vide notification No. S.O. 3509 (E), dated 7th August , 202 3, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
 6 
 (g) “Committee ” means the Committee on Antarctic Governan ce and Environmental 
Protection established under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(h) “Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation ” means a comprehensive evaluation of 
environmental impact assessment referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 27;  
(i) “Convention ” means the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
Resources signed on the 20th day of May, 1980 in Canberra, Australia;  
(j) “Consultative Parties ” means any State Party signatory to the Antarctic Treaty and the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty having voting rights in any decision, 
measures and resolutions adopted by the Antarctica Treaty Consultative Meeting;  
(k) “Indian expedition ” means a journey undertaken by any person or persons to the Antarctica 
organised  by India;  
(l) “Initial Environmental Evaluation ” means a preliminary evaluation of environmental 
impact assessment referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 27;  
(m) “land” includes all islands, continental shelf and any ice -shelf, without prejudice to 
scientific definition of ice -shelf;  
(n) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expressions 
“notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(o) “Operator”, in relation to a vessel or aircraft, means the owner or th e person for the time 
being having the management of that vessel or aircraft;  
(p) “Party” means a State Party signatory to the Antarctic Treaty or a member State of the 
United Nations;  
(q) “permit” means a permit issued by the Committee under section 27;  
(r) “person” means a person or entity referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of section 2;  
(s) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “Protocol” means the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty signed 
at Madri d on the 4th day of October, 1991, which came into force on the 14th day of                   
January, 1998;  
(u) “station” includes any worksites, building or group of buildings or any temporary facility 
in Antarctica;  
(v) “Treaty” means the Antarctic Trea ty signed at Washington D.C. on the 1st day of 
December, 1959 which came into force on the 23rd day of June, 1961;  
(w) “vessel” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 55) of section 3 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958);  
(x) “waste” means unusable unserviceable movable property, including solid, liquid  and 
gaseous matter, which the possessor or generator wants to discharge, or the controlled disposal of 
which is called for in order to preserve public welfare and in particular, the protection of the 
environment; or residual radioactive matter or radioactive components of disassembled or 
dismantled facilities, the controlled disposal of which shall be made in accordance with the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).  7 
 (2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Treaty or the 
Convention or the Protocol shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in the Treaty 
or the Convention or the Protocol.  
CHAPTER II  
REQUIREMENT AS TO PERMIT  
4. Per mit for Indian expedition to Antarctica. — No person in an Indian expedition shall enter 
or remain in Antarctica without a permit or the written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol:  
Provided that no permit shall be required in the case of a perso n who is travelling through, on or 
above the high seas, to an immediate destination outside Antarctica.  
5. Permit for Indian station in Antarctica .— No person shall enter or remain in an Indian 
station in Antarctica without a permit or the written authoris ation of another Party to the Protocol.  
6. Permit for vessel and aircraft entering Antarctica. — No vessel or aircraft registered in India 
shall enter or remain in Antarctica without a permit or the written authorisation of another Party to the 
Protocol:  
Provided that no permit shall be required in the case of a vessel travelling through, on or above the 
high seas, to an immediate destination outside Antarctica:  
Provided further that no permit shall be required in respect of an aircraft travelling to an 
imme diate destination outside Antarctica.  
7. Permit for mineral resource activities. — No person or vessel in Antarctica shall — 
(a) drill, dredge or excavate for mineral resources;  
(b) collect any samples of mineral resources; or  
(c) do anything for the purpose  of identifying specific mineral resource occurrences or 
deposits, or areas where such occurrences or deposits may be found,  
except in accordance with a permit issued under this Act:  
Provided that no permit shall be issued for the purposes of this section unless the Committee is 
satisfied that the activities shall be carried on only for the purposes — 
(a) of scientific research; or  
(b) connected with the construction, maintenance or repair in Antarctica of an Indian station or 
any other structure, road, runw ay or jetty maintained by or on behalf of India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “mineral resource ” means any natural resource 
that is neither living nor renewable.  
8. Permit for certain activities in Antarctica. —No person in Antarctica shal l, without a permit 
or written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol — 
(a) remove or damage native plants intentionally in a manner that significantly affects their 
local distribution or abundance;  
(b) fly or land a helicopter or other aircraft int entionally in a manner that disturbs any 
concentration of native birds or seals;  8 
 (c) use a vehicle or vessel, including a hovercraft and a small boat, intentionally in a manner 
that disturbs any concentration of native birds or seals;  
(d) use an explosive or firearm intentionally in a manner that disturbs any concentration of 
native birds or seals;  
(e) while on foot, wilfully disturb a breeding or moulting native bird or concentration of seals;  
(f) significantly damage any concentration of terrestrial nativ e plants by landing an aircraft, 
driving a vehicle or walking on it;  
(g) engage in any activity that results in the significant adverse change of the habitat of any 
specially protected species or population of native mammals, native birds, native plants or  native 
invertebrates;  
(h) remove soil or any biological material native to Antarctica intentionally; or  
(i) kill, injure, capture, handle or molest a native mammal or native bird unless such act was 
done to protect the life of a person.  
Explanation. —For t he purposes of this section, — 
(i) “native bird ” means a member, at any stage of its life cycle including eggs, of any species 
of the class Aves that is indigenous to Antarctica or that occurs there seasonally through natural 
migrations including any part, product, egg, or offspring or the dead body or parts thereof and 
fossils;  
(ii) “native invertebrate ” means any terrestrial or aquatic invertebrate, at any stage of its life 
cycle that is indigenous to Antarctica, including any part thereof and fossils;  
(iii) “native mammal ” means a member of any species of the class mammalia that is 
indigenous to Antarctica or that occurs there seasonally through natural migrations including any 
part, product, egg, or offspring of or the dead body or parts thereof and fossi ls; 
(iv) “native plant ” means any terrestrial or aquatic vegetation, including bryophytes, lichens, 
fungi and algae, at any stage of its life cycle, including seeds and other propagules, that is 
indigenous to Antarctica or parts of such vegetation, other t han fossils;  
(v) “specially protected species ” means any native species designated as a specially protected 
species in the Protocol and the Convention.  
9. Permit for introducing non -native animals and plants into Antarctica. —No person, vessel 
or aircraft s hall introduce in any part of Antarctica any animal of a species that is  not indigenous to 
Antarctica, or any plant that is not a native plant, except in accordance with a permit or the written 
authorisation of another Party to the Protocol:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to food other than poultry or live 
animals.  
10. Permit for introducing microscopic organisms. — No person shall introduce into any part of 
Antarctica any microscopic organism of a species which is not indigenou s to Antarctica, except in 
accordance with a permit or the written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol.  
11. Permit to enter protected areas. — No person or vessel or aircraft shall enter into an 
Antarctic Specially Protected Area or Marine Protec ted Area as may be prescribed except in 
accordance with a permit or the written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol.  9 
 12. Permit for waste disposal. —No person, vessel or aircraft shall dispose of waste in Antarctica 
except in accordance with a pe rmit or the written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol.  
13. Permit for discharge into sea. —No vessel shall, while in Antarctica, discharge into the sea 
any oil or oily mixture, effluent, bilge water or any food waste except in accordance with a  permit or 
the written authorisation of another Party to the Protocol.  
14. Permit for removal of biological specimen or any other sample from Antarctica. —(1) The 
Committee may, in individual cases, for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant permit for th e 
following purposes, namely: — 
(i) to obtain specimens or any other sample for study or scientific information;  
(ii) to obtain specimens for museums, herbariums, zoological and botanical gardens, or other 
educational or cultural institutions or uses:  
Provi ded that such permission shall be limited so as to ensure that — 
(a) only such number of native mammals, birds, invertebrates, plants or any other sample are 
taken that are strictly necessary to meet the purposes of this section;  
(b) only such number of nat ive mammals or birds are killed, such that it can normally be 
replaced by natural reproduction in the following season;  
(c) the diversity of species, as well as the habitats essential to their existence and the balance 
of the ecological systems existing in  the Antarctica are maintained;  
(d) Ommatophocarossii (Ross Seal) or any other species as may be prescribed shall be 
accorded special protection and permit for killing, injuring, capturing or handling of these species 
may be issued only for scientific purp ose, if the survival or recovery of that species or local 
population is not jeopardised, and non -lethal techniques are used as far as possible; and  
(e) the killing, injuring, capturing or handling of mammals or birds is done in a manner that 
involves least  degree of pain and suffering.  
(2) The permit issued for the purposes of this section shall specifically mention the name of the 
issuing authority and the receiver of the permission, the duration and place of the activity permitted 
including the size, weig ht and volume of the sample intended to be collected.  
15. Certain provisions not to apply during emergencies. — The provisions of sections 4, 5, 6, 
11, 12 and 13 shall not apply in respect of emergencies involving the safety of a person, the protection 
of the environment or the safety of any vessel, aircraft, equipment or facility that has a significant 
value.  
16. Special permit for commercial fishing in Antarctica. —Any person who intends to go to 
Antarctica for the purpose of commercial fishing shall apply for a permit to the Secretariat of the 
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources through the Committee.  
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITIONS  
17. Prohibition of nuclear explosion or disposal of radioactive waste material in 
Antarctica. —No per son shall carry out any nuclear explosion or dispose of any radioactive waste 
material in Antarctica.  10 
 18. Prohibition of introducing non -sterile soil in Antarctica. —No person or vessel shall 
introduce non -sterile soil into any part of Antarctica.  
19. Prohi bition of introducing specified substances and products. —No person, vessel or 
aircraft shall introduce into Antarctica any substance or product as may be prescribed.  
20. Prohibition relating to historic sites and monuments. — No person shall damage, destroy  or 
remove any historic site or monument or any of its part in Antarctica as may be prescribed.  
21. Prohibition of possessing, selling, etc. — No person or vessel or aircraft while in Antarctica, 
shall possess, sell, offer for sale, trade, give, transport, transfer or send anything that has been obtained 
in contravention of the provisions of this Act.  
22. Prohibition of discharge of certain products or substances. —No vessel shall, while in 
Antarctica, discharge into the sea any garbage, plastic or other prod uct or substance that is harmful to 
the marine environment.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, garbage, in respect of a vessel, means all kinds of 
victual, domestic and operational waste, excluding fresh fish and parts thereof, generated during  the 
normal operation of the ship and liable to be disposed of continuously or periodically.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMMITTEE ON ANTARCTIC  GOVERNANCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
23. Constitution of Committee. — (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establ ish a 
Committee to be called the Committee on Antarctic Governance and Environmental Protection 
consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences, Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) ten members not below the rank of Joint Se cretary, ex officio , to be nominated by the 
Central Government, from any of the Ministries or Departments or organisations of the Central 
Government dealing with, — 
(i) Defence;  
(ii) External Affairs;  
(iii) Finance;  
(iv) Fisheries;  
(v) Legal Affairs;  
(vi) Science and Technology;  
(vii) Shipping;  
(viii) Tourism;  
 (ix) Environment;  
 (x) Communication;  
 (xi) Space;  
 (xii) National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research; and  
 (xiii) National Security Council Secretariat;  11 
 (c) two experts to be nominated by th e Central Government, from the fields of, —  
(i) Antarctic environment; and  
(ii) Geo -politics;  
(d) such other experts in the relevant field, to be nominated by the Central Government.  
(2) An officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary in the Ministry o f Earth Sciences, shall be the 
Member -Secretary, ex officio .  
(3) The members nominated under clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall hold office for such 
period and subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in the notification referred  to in 
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The members nominated under clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to receive 
such allowances or fees as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of the Committee.  
(5) In the discharge of their functions,  the members shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed.  
24. Meetings of Committee. —The Committee shall meet at such intervals and observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum thereat)  as 
may be prescribed.  
25. Functions of Committee. —The Committee shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) monitor, implement and ensure compliance of the relevant international laws, emission 
standards and rules for the protection of Antarctic e nvironment by the Operators or by any other 
persons engaged in programmes and activities in Antarctica;  
(b) undertake any advisory, supervisory or enforcement activities in relation to programmes 
and activities in Antarctica;  
(c) obtain and review relevant  information and reports provided by Parties to the Treaty, the 
Convention, the Protocol and other Parties engaged in programmes and activities in Antarctica;  
(d) maintain records pertaining to the programmes and activities conducted by Parties in 
Antarcti ca;  
(e) ensure that the programmes and activities are consistent with India's obligations under the 
Treaty, the Convention, the Protocol and with such other relevant law for the time being in force 
in India;  
(f) determine the terms and conditions of the p ermit issued under this Act;  
(g) negotiate fees or charges with other Parties to the Treaty, the Convention and the Protocol 
on a case to case basis in respect of the programmes and activities in Antarctica;  
(h) collaborate with other Parties to attain t he above goals; and  
(i) such other functions as may be delegated to it by the Central Government.  
26. Power of Central Government to give directions. —(1) The Central Government may give 
such directions, as it may deem necessary, to the Committee for the e ffective administration of this 
Act and the Committee shall comply with such directions.  12 
 (2) In case of a dispute between the Committee and the Central Government, the decision of the 
Central Government shall be final.  
CHAPTER V  
GRANT, SUSPENSION OR CANCEL LATION OF PERMIT  
27. Application for permit. —(1) Every application for grant of permit under this Act shall be 
made to the Committee in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form, conta in such particulars and be 
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Committee may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit and having regard to the 
particulars referred to in sub -section ( 4) and subject to such terms and conditions as may b e 
prescribed, grant permit for the purposes of this Act.  
(4) While granting permit under sub -section ( 3), the Committee shall have regard to the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) adverse effect on climate or weather patterns;  
(b) adverse effect on air, snow,  soil, land or water quality;  
(c) significant changes in the atmospheric, terrestrial, aquatic, glacial, noise or marine 
environment;  
(d) harmful changes in the distribution, abundance or productivity of native microbes, animal 
or plant species or their po pulation;  
(e) harm or jeopardise endangered species or population;  
(f) harm or significantly jeopardise the areas of environmental, biological, geological, 
scientific, historic, wilderness or aesthetic significance or of a primeval nature; and  
(g) such oth er significant detrimental effects on the Antarctic environment and its dependent 
and associated ecosystems as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Committee shall, before issuing a permit, require the applicant to carry out the 
environmental impact assessment of th e proposed activities in such manner as may be prescribed and 
shall issue a permit if the conditions specified therein has been complied with:  
Provided that any application for a permit relating to activities in Antarctica which has reasonable 
apprehension  of causing less than a minor or transitory impact on the environment shall be made to the 
Committee six months prior to the commencement of the proposed activity:  
Provided further that while examining an activity, the Committee shall take into account the  
opinion of the independent experts:  
Provided also that if after examination, the Committee is satisfied that such activity has reasonable 
apprehension of causing minor or transitory impact on the environment, then it shall require the 
applicant to conduct  an Initial Environmental Evaluation and to submit a report thereon to it, three 
months prior to the commencement of the proposed activity:  
Provided also that if after conducting the Initial Environmental Evaluation, the Committee is of 
the opinion that th e activities will have more than a minor or transitory impact on the environment, it 13 
 shall require the applicant to conduct a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation and to submit a 
report thereon.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Com mittee shall not grant a permit under 
this section authorising any person or a vessel or an aircraft on an Indian expedition, unless it is 
satisfied that a waste management plan and an emergency plan for the expedition have been prepared 
in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the waste management plan shall include details of such wastes which are intended 
to be shipped from Antarctica into the Indian territory or territory of any other Party for disposal.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this s ub-section,— 
(i) “waste management plan ” means the waste management plan referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
of section 34;  
(ii) “emergency plan ” means a plan to meet the environmental emergency referred to in 
section 39.  
(7) The permit granted under this sect ion, unless sooner revoked, shall remain in force for such 
period as specified in the permit and may be renewed, on an application made in this behalf sixty days 
before the date of its expiration, for such period and on payment of such fees as may be presc ribed:  
 Provided that a permit may be renewed on an application made within sixty days before the date 
of its expiration, if the Committee is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making the 
application on time.  
28. Liability of owner or Operat or in certain cases. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, where a vessel or aircraft is part of an Indian expedition or 
fishing in Antarctica but whose owner or Operator is not part of such expedition or fishing,  then such 
owner or Operator who is sufficiently identified in the permit, either by class or other description shall 
also be bound by the conditions of the permit.  
29. Suspension or cancellation of permit. —(1) If the Committee has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the holder of any permit has made any incorrect or false statement or concealed any 
material fact in the  application or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or the rules or 
orders made or notifications issued thereunder or contraven ed any conditions of permit, it may, by 
order, suspend the permit pending the completion of any inquiry against such permit holder.  
(2) After making an inquiry under sub -section ( 1), the Committee may, without prejudice to any 
other penalty to which such p ermit holder may be liable under the provisions of this Act, cancel the 
permit:  
Provided that no permit shall be suspended under sub -section ( 1) or cancelled under this           
sub-section, unless the holder of the permit has been given a reasonable oppo rtunity of being heard:  
Provided further that the Committee may suspend or cancel a permit without giving the permit 
holder an opportunity of being heard, if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
not reasonably practicable to d o so.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Central 
Government or the Committee may, in the interest of national security, maintenance of law and order 
or any other matter of public interest and without prejudice  to any additional penalty to which such 14 
 permit holder may be liable under the provisions of this Act, order the suspension or cancellation of 
such permit.  
(4) Any person whose permit has been suspended under sub -section ( 1) shall, immediately after 
such s uspension, stop all activities in respect of which the permit has been granted, until the order of 
suspension has been revoked.  
(5) Every holder of a permit which is suspended or cancelled shall, immediately after such 
suspension or cancellation, surrender  the permit to the Committee.  
(6) Every order of suspension or cancellation of a permit under this section shall be in writing.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTIONS  
30. Inspection in India. —(1) The Central Government may designate any officer as an Inspector, 
having suc h qualifications and experience as may be prescribed, for performing the duties and 
exercising the powers of inspections in India under this Act.  
(2) The Inspector may, for the purposes of this Act — 
(a) enter and search any place including vessel, containe r, platform anchored at sea, shipping 
container or conveyance;  
(b) examine any substance, product or thing;  
(c) open and examine any receptacle or package, if it contains any doubtful substance, product 
or thing;  
(d) examine any book, record, data or other  documents and make copies or take extracts of the 
same;  
(e) take samples of things, if relevant;  
(f) conduct any test or take any measurement; and  
(g) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Inspector may confiscate a sample taken in violation of the permit issued under this Act.  
(4) The owner or person -in-charge of a place being inspected and every person found in the place 
of inspection shall — 
(a) extend all reasonable assistance to enable the Inspector to carry out his duties under this 
Act; and 
(b) provide any information which the Inspector may require.  
31. Inspection of international facilities. —(1) The Committee shall constitute an inspection team 
consisting of such number of observers as it may deem necessary and shall designate one of th em as 
the head of the team, for the purposes of carrying out inspections in Antarctica in such manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(2) The Committee may designate any of its officer having such qualifications and experience as 
may be prescribed, to be an Analyst who shall be a part of the inspection team.  
(3) The Analyst shall collect and examine any sample or matter and perform such other duties as 
may be delegated to him by the head of the inspection team.  15 
 (4) The inspections in Antarctica may be carried out joi ntly with one or more Parties, if deemed 
necessary.  
(5) The inspection team may inspect any station after giving prior notice to the Party or Parties 
whose station it proposes to inspect.  
(6) The inspection team may, at any reasonable time, enter any place  including vessel, aircraft, 
container, platform anchored at sea, shipping container or conveyance, managed by India in Antarctica 
to which it has reasonable grounds to believe that the provisions of this Act apply:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -sectio n shall apply to such vessel or aircraft which is not part of 
an Indian expedition.  
(7) The inspection team may, at any reasonable time, board or travel in a vessel or an aircraft in 
Antarctica and may carry out inspection of such vessel or aircraft or its  communication system after 
giving prior notice to the Party concerned.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the inspection team shall not inspect any 
station, installation, equipment, platform anchored at sea, shipping container or conv eyance that is 
owned by a person who is neither a citizen of India nor a part of Indian expedition unless due notice 
for inspection of the property or installation has been served to the Party who is the owner of such 
property or installation.  
(9) The owne r of a place or a person -in-charge of a place being inspected under this Act and every 
person found in the place shall give all reasonable assistance to enable the inspection team to carry out 
its functions under this Act and provide with any information a s may be required by it.  
32. Obstruction and false information. — (1) No person shall obstruct an Inspector or inspection 
team or hinder any of them in performing their functions in India or in Antarctica.  
(2) No person shall knowingly or negligently provid e any person false or misleading information, 
results or samples or file a document containing false or misleading information.  
CHAPTER VII  
WASTE DISPOSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT  
33. Waste disposal. —The waste disposal sites on land and abandoned worksites sha ll be cleaned 
up by the generators of such waste and the users of such sites:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply if the removal of any structure or waste 
material may result in any adverse environmental impact referred to in  sub-section ( 5) of section 27 
than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.  
34. Establishment of waste classification system and waste management plans. — (1) The 
Committee shall establish a waste classification system — 
(a) for recording  waste in Antarctica from activities by the persons authorised under                           
this Act; and  
(b) to facilitate studies on the environmental impacts of scientific activities and associated 
activities.  
 (2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the waste shall be segregated into the following 
categories, namely: —  16 
 (a) sewage and domestic liquid waste;  
(b) other liquid waste such as medical and chemical waste including fuels and lubricants;  
(c) solids, including organic waste, to be incinerat ed; 
(d) other solid waste;  
(e) radioactive material; and  
(f) any other waste as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Committee shall prepare, review annually and update its waste management plans, 
including plans on waste reduction, storage and disposal, specifyi ng for each station, facility, field site, 
field camps, vessel and aircraft —  
(a) programmes for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned worksites;  
(b) current and planned waste management arrangements;  
(c) current and planned arrangement s for analysing the environmental effects of waste and 
waste management;  
(d) other measures aimed at minimising the environmental effects of waste and waste 
management.  
(4) No separate information shall be required for small boats which are part of the op erations of 
fixed sites or of vessels.  
(5) The existing management plans for vessels and aircraft shall be taken into account in preparing 
the waste management plans under this section.  
(6) The Committee shall, as far as practicable, prepare an inventory  of locations of past activities, 
including traverses, fuel depots, field bases, crashed aircraft or any other accidents and such other 
areas as may be prescribed.  
(7) The waste management plans and reports on their implementation shall be included in the  
annual exchange of information with other Parties to the Treaty.  
(8) The Committee shall appoint or designate a waste management officer for each station, facility 
and worksite who shall monitor the implementation of the waste reduction and disposal plan s and 
make proposals for their continued development.  
35. Removal of waste from Antarctica. — (1) The following waste produced in Antarctica by 
generators of such waste shall be removed from there, namely: — 
(a) radioactive substances within the meaning of t he Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962);  
(b) all kinds of batteries or components thereof;  
(c) fuel, both liquid and solid;  
(d) waste containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely toxic or harmful persistent 
compounds;  
(e) Polyvinyl chloride, polyur ethane, polystyrene foam, rubber, lubricating oils, treated 
timbers and other products which contain additives that may produce harmful emissions, if 
incinerated;  17 
 (f) all other plastic waste;  
(g) fuel drums other than those required for logistics purposes;   
(h) other solid, non -combustible waste including but not restricted to glass and metal scraps;  
(i) residues of carcasses of imported animals;  
(j) laboratory culture of microorganisms and plant pathogens;  
(k) introduced avian products;  
(l) ash and pro ducts of incineration;  
(m) unserviceable machineries and equipment including electronics; and  
(n) such other waste as may be prescribed.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to waste, —  
(a) if they are incinerated, autoclaved or otherwis e treated to be made sterile; or  
(b) if the removal of such waste shall result in greater adverse environmental impact referred 
to in sub -section ( 5) of section 27, than leaving them in their existing locations.   
(3) The domestic waste and other liquid wa ste shall be treated before removing from Antarctica 
and shall be disposed of on ice -free land areas, sea ice, ice shelves or the grounded ice -sheet and shall 
not be discharged into the lake either directly or indirectly:    
Provided that the standards for  effluent discharge shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall not apply to substances generated by station located on 
ice shelves or the grounded ice -sheet, provided that such waste are disposed of after treatment in deep 
ice pits which is the only practicable option and such pits are not located on known ice -flow lines 
which terminate at ice -free areas or in areas of high ablation.  
 (5) The waste under this section shall be disposed of into the sea subject to a permit  issued in that 
regard under section 12.  
(6) The waste generated at field camps shall be removed to supporting stations or vessels for 
disposal.  
36. Disposal of combustive wastes. —(1) The combustible waste which are not removed by 
generators of such waste shall be burnt in incinerators to a maximum extent practicable to avoid 
harmful emissions and shall not be burned openly.  
(2) The standards for emission from incineration of waste under sub -section ( 1) and from other 
equipment and vehicles shall be such a s may be prescribed.  
37. Storage of wastes. —(1) All waste to be removed from Antarctica, or otherwise disposed of by 
the generators of such waste, shall be segregated, contained, confined and stored in such a way so as to 
prevent their dispersal into the e nvironment.  
(2) The containers and tank -systems holding or used for storing hazardous waste shall be — 
(a) in good and non -leaking condition;  18 
 (b) made of or lined with materials which will not react with, and are otherwise compatible 
with, the waste to be s tored, so that the ability of the containers to contain such waste is not 
impaired;  
(c) stored in a manner that allows access for inspection and response to emergencies; and  
(d) inspected at least once in a week for identifying any leakage and deteriorati on thereof and 
shall be documented.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PREVENTION OF MARINE POLLUTION AND LIABILITY FOR ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCY  
38. Committee to ensure compliance of international obligations. —(1) The Committee shall 
ensure compliance of any activity undertaken in the Antarctic environment and dependent and 
associated ecosystems by the permit holder, including compliance of such International Conventions 
or Treaty or Protocol or such other international obligations, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The permit holder sha ll maintain records of all waste and sewages, including all introductions 
and discharges into the marine environment caused by operation of vessels as part of the activity and 
the said records shall be submitted to the Director General appointed under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) and the Committee, whenever required.  
39. Duties and liabilities of Operator in case of environmental emergency. —(1) If an 
environmental emergency occurs from any activity in Antarctica and dependent and associated 
ecosystems, the Operator shall, without delay, take effective response action and inform the 
Committee and the Director General appointed under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) 
of such environmental emergency and thereafter, the Committee shall  transmit it to the Parties to the 
Treaty . 
(2) If no response action is taken by the Operator under sub -section ( 1) and the nature of the 
environmental emergency requires immediate response action, the Party, where the vessel or aircraft is 
registered, may  undertake such action on behalf of the Operator, and the Operator shall be liable to pay 
the cost of such response action taken by the Party or Parties, as may be prescribed in accordance with 
Annex VI to the Protocol.  
(3) If no response action is taken by the Operator or by any Party or Parties, the Operator shall be 
liable to such penalty as may be prescribed in accordance with Annex VI to the Protocol.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “environmental emergency ” means 
any un foreseen or accidental event that results in, or imminently threatens to result in, significant and 
harmful impact on the Antarctic environment.  
40. Exemption of Operator from liability in certain cases. —An Operator shall not be liable for 
an environmental  emergency under section 39, if it is proved that such emergency is caused by — 
(a) an act or omission that was necessary to protect human life;  
(b) a natural disaster of an extraordinary nature which could not reasonably be foreseen and 
the Operator had t aken all reasonable measures to reduce the risk and potentially harmful effects 
of the environmental emergency;  
(c) an act of terrorism; and  
(d) an act of war aimed at the Operator's activity:  19 
 Provided that the Operator shall submit an explanation to th e Committee of his act or omission 
within a period of sixty days from the date of such emergency, stating the reasons therefor.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
41. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act by person. — Any person who 
contrave nes the provisions of, — 
(a) section 4 or section 5 or section 8 or section 12 or section 18 or section 19 or section 20 or 
section 21 or sub -section ( 4) of section 29 or section 36 or section 37, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may e xtend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than 
ten lakh rupees but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees, or with both;  
(b) section 7 or section 9 or section 10, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven year s and with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but 
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees;  
(c) section 17, shall be punishable, with —  
(i) an imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years but which may 
extend to imprisonmen t for life and with fine which shall not be less than fifty crore rupees for 
any nuclear explosion in Antarctica; and  
(ii) an imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and with fine w hich shall not be less than twenty -five crore 
rupees for disposal of any radioactive waste material in Antarctica.  
(d) section 11 or section 16 or section 33 or section 35, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less than fifteen lakh 
rupees but which may extend to seventy -five lakh rupees, or with both;  
(e) section 14 or section 32, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which s hall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend 
to twenty lakh rupees, or with both.  
42. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act involving vessel. —Where the 
contravention involves a vessel under this Act, the Operator of such ves sel shall be punishable, — 
(a) for contravention of section 6 or section 11 or section 12 or section 13 or section 18 or 
section 19 or section 21 or section 22, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years, or with fine which shall not be le ss than one crore rupees but which may extend to five 
crore rupees , or with both ;  
(b) for contravention of section 7 or section 9 or section 39, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than two cr ore rupees but 
which may extend to ten crore  *rupees . 
43. Penalty for contravention of certain provisions of Act involving aircraft. —Where the 
contravention involves an aircraft under this Act, the Operator of such aircraft shall be punishable, — 
                                                           
* By corrigendum.  20 
 (a) for co ntravention of section 6 or section 11 or section 12 or section 19 or section 21, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less than 
one crore rupees but which may extend to five crore rupees, or with bo th; 
(b) for contravention of section 9, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years and with fine which shall not be less than two crore rupees but which may extend to ten 
crore *rupees .  
44. Penalty where no provision made in Act. —Any per son who contravenes the provisions of 
this Act or fails to comply with any provision thereof which it was his duty to comply with, and in 
respect of which no penalty is specifically provided in this Act, shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to te n lakh rupees.  
45. Offences by companies. —(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in -charge of, or was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has 
been co mmitted by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secreta ry or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other asso ciation of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner of the firm.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Constitution of fund. —(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Antarctic Fund 
and there shall be credited thereto, — 
(a) all fees received for grant of permit and charges collected for Antarctic related activities 
under this Act;  
(b) any grant or loans that may be made by the Central Government for the purposes of this 
Act; and  
(c) any grant or loans that may be made by any institution for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The fund shall be applied towards the welfare of Antarctic research work and protection of 
Antarctic environment.  
                                                           
* By corrigendum.  21 
 (3) The Committee shall maintain and administer the fund in such manner as may be prescribed . 
47. Security for permit by certain persons. —(1) The Committee may require such applicants to 
deposit such amount as security in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The security amount may be applied by the Committee to reimburse the Government, either 
fully or partially, for reasonable costs incurred by the Government in preventing, mitigating or 
remedying any adverse environmental impact caused by the permit holder or persons or vessels bound 
by conditions of the permit.  
48. Designated Court and jurisd iction.—(1) For the purposes of providing speedy trial of 
offences under this Act, the Central Government, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned 
High Court or High Courts as it may consider necessary, shall specify by notification, one or mor e 
Court of Sessions, to be the Designated Court and may specify the territorial jurisdiction of such 
Court.  
(2) The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(3) No Designated Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act except 
upon a complaint in writing made by an officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by 
notification.  
(4) The Designated Court may, upon perusal of a complaint made under this Act, take cognizance 
of that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , for 
the purposes of conferring jurisdiction, an offence under this Act, committed by any person or  
Operator in Antarctica shall be deemed to have been committed in India.  
(6) While trying an offence under this Act, the Designated Court may also try an offence under 
any other law, other than an offence under this Act with which the accused may be charge d at the 
same trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
49. Report to Committee of offences. —Where an offence under this Act has been committed, the 
officer designated by the Committee or the head of a station in Antarctica or an Operat or shall 
immediately report to the Committee of such offence and thereafter, the Committee shall transmit it to 
the Central Government for necessary action.  
50. Conferment of powers of investigation, etc. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government 
may, by notification, confer on any officer of the Central Government or State Government or 
Committee, the power of arrest, investigation, search and seizure an d prosecution exercisable by a 
police officer under the said Code.  
(2) The officers of police shall assist the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), in the execution of 
the provisions of this Act.  
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to pr oceedings before Designated 
Court.— Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to the proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a 
prosecution before a Designa ted Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.  
52. Accounts and audit of fund. —(1) The Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records in relation to the fund and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the 22 
 profit and l oss account and the balance -sheet, in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India . 
(2) The accounts of the fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him.  
53. Returns and reports. —(1) The Committee shall furnish to the Central Government, at such 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central Government may direct, 
such returns and statements with such particula rs with regard to any proposed or existing programme 
for the promotion and development of the environmental protection in Antarctica, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the  Committee shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policies and programmes 
undertaken during the previous financial year.  
54. Protection of action taken in good faith. — No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government, State Government or the Committee or its members, officers 
and other employees or any offic er authorised by the Central Government or the Committee for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
55. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the 
provisi ons of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the Antarctic Specially Protected Area and Marine Protected Area under section 11;  
(b) any other s pecies under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(c) substance or product which shall not be introduced into Antarctica under section 19;  
(d) historic site or monument or its part under section 20;  
(e) the allowances or fees for nominated members  under sub -section ( 4) and the procedure to 
be followed by members under sub -section ( 5) of section 23;  
(f) the intervals at which the Committee shall meet, the rules of procedure in regard to 
transaction of business at its meetings and its quorum under s ection 24;  
(g) the form of application for permit, particulars and fees under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(h) the terms and conditions of the permit under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(i) other significant detrimental effects on the Antarctic enviro nment and its dependent and 
associated ecosystems under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 4) of section 27;  
(j) the manner of carrying out environmental impact assessment to be conducted by the 
applicant under sub -section ( 5) of section 27;  
(k) the manner of pre paring waste management plan and emergency plan under sub -section ( 6) 
of section 27;  
(l) the period for which permit may be granted and fee to be paid for its renewal under                     
sub-section ( 7) of section 27;  23 
 (m) the qualification and expe rience of an officer to be designated as Inspector under                     
sub-section ( 1) and other functions of the Inspector under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of                 
section 30;  
(n) the manner of carrying out inspections under sub -section (1), the qualifications and 
experience of an Analyst under sub -section ( 2) and other powers and functions of the inspection 
team under sub -section ( 10), of section 31;  
(o) any other waste under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) and other areas in respect o f which an 
inventory of locations may be prepared under sub -section ( 6), of section 34;   
(p) such other waste under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) and the standards for effluent 
discharge under the proviso to sub -section ( 3), of section 35;  
(q) the standard s for emission of combustible waste, equipment and vehicles under                   
sub-section (2) of section 36;  
(r) other International Conventions or Treaty or Protocol or other international obligations 
which the permit holder shall comply under sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 38;  
(s) the cost of response action under sub -section ( 2) and the amount of penalty to be paid by 
the Operator under sub -section ( 3), of section 39;  
(t) the manner in which the Committee shall maintain and administer the fund under                
sub-section (3) of section 46;  
(u) the category of applicants who may deposit security with the Committee, the form of such 
deposit and the security amount under sub -section ( 1) of section 47;   
(v) the form in which the Committee shall prepare an annual st atement of accounts under                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 52;  
(w) the time within which and the form and manner in which the Committee shall furnish to 
the Central Government, the returns and statements under sub -section ( 1) and the form and  
manner of report under sub -section ( 2), of section 53; and  
(x) any other matter which is to be,  or may be prescribed.  
56. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by  order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
57. Rules, notifications or orders made or issued to be laid before Parliament. —*Every rule  
made and every notification or order issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be af ter it is 
made or issued, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or order or both Houses agree that 
the rule or notification or order should not be made or issued, the rule, notification or order sh all 
                                                           
* By corrigendum.  24 
 thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule, notification or order . 
--------------------------The Inland Vessels Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE INLAND VESSELS ACT, 2021  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Application and scope.  
3. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
DECLARATION  OF INLAND WATER AREA INTO  ZONES  
4. Declaration of inland water area into Zones.   
CHAPTER III  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
5. Administrative role of Central Government and State Governments.   
6. Competent authority . 
CHAPTER IV  
SURVEY OF INLAND VESSELS  
7. Power to classify and categorise for purpose of survey.  
8. Construction, alteration or modification of mechanically propelled inland vessel.  
9. Survey of vessels . 
10. Appointment and qualifications of surveyors.  
11. Powers of surveyors.   
12. Grant of certificate of survey and procedures.  
13. Provisional certificate of survey and its  effect . 
14. Mechanically propelled inland vessels not to proceed without certificate of survey, and 
requirement of Zone to be specified in such certificate . 
15. Suspension and cancellation of certificate of survey.  
16. Delivery of expired, suspended or cancelled cert ificate of survey.  
CHAPTER V  
REGIS TRATION  
17. Registration  
18. Requirement of certificate of registration . 
19. Owner or master to carry certificate of registration.  
20. Appointment of ports or places of registry and Registrars of Inland Vessels.  
21. Book of registry.  
22. Central database of inland vessels . 
23. Application and processes of registration of vessels.  
24. Grant of certificate of registration and marking of vessel.  
25. Effect of certificate of registration.  
26. Duplicate certificate.  
27. Provisional certificate of registration . 2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Registration of modifications or alterations .  
29. Change of residence or place of business.  
30. Prohibition against transfer of ownership of registered vessel.  
31. Suspension of certificate of registration.  
32. Cancellation of registration.  
33. Mortgage of mechanically prope lled inland vessel or share therein.   
CHAPTER VI  
MANNING, QUALIFICATION, TRAINING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION  
34. Training and minimum age for employment.  
35. Minimum manning scale and manning requirements.   
36. Appointment and duties of examiners.  
37. Grant of certificate of competency.  
38. Certificate of service.  
39. Effect of certificate of competency or certificate of service.  
40. Suspension and cancellation of certificate . 
41. Registry of certificate holders and central registry.  
CHAPTER VII  
SPECIAL CATEGORY VESSELS  
42. Special  category vessels . 
43. Appointment or authorisation of officers to implement provisions, grant certificate of fitness, etc . 
44. Safety of passengers or service users . 
45. Inspection of vessel . 
46. Suspension or cancellation of certificate of fitness.  
CHAPTER VIII  
NAVIGATION SAFETY AND SIGNALS  
 
47. Navigation safety, lights and signals.  
48. Obligation to ensure safe navigation.  
49. Distress signal.   
50. Assistance to vessels in distress and persons in distress . 
51. Life saving, fire safety and communication appliances.  
CHAPTER IX  
PREVENTION OF POLLUTION CAUSED BY INLAND VESSEL  
52. Chemicals, etc., to be designated as pollutants.   
53. Certificate of prevention of pollution.   
54. Reception facilities and containment of pollution.   
55. Appointment of surveyor or officer to inspect.   
56. Investigation into  incidents of pollution.  
CHAPTER X  
WRECK AND SALVAGE  
57. Prohibition against intentionally causing wreck.  
58. Receivers of wreck.  3 
 SECTIONS  
59. Powers of Central Government to make rules for Chapter X.  
CHAPTER XI  
LIABILITY AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY  
60. Liability under Act. 
61. Apportionment of loss.  
62. Liability for personal injury, loss of life or pollution to environment.  
63. Detention of mechanically propelled inland vessel.  
64. Limitation of liability.  
65. Non-applicability of limitation.  
CHAPTER XII  
INSURANCE OF MECHANICALLY PROPELLED  VESSELS PLYING IN INLAND WATERS  
 
66. Insurance to cover.   
67. Contractual liability not to cover.  
68. Issuance and terms of insurance policy.  
69. Duty to indemnify and direct action against insurer.  
70. Effect of death on certain causes of action.  
71. Effect of certific ate of insurance.  
72. Transfer of certificate of insurance.  
73. Powers of Central Government to make rules for Chapter XII.  
CHAPTER XIII  
INQUIRY INTO CASUALITY, ACCIDENT OR WRECK  
74. Reporting of casualty, accident, wreck, etc.  
75. Preliminary enquiry by designated authority and inquiry by District Magistrate.  
76. Assessors.  
77. Report of District Magistrate to be notified by State Government.  
78. Powers of District Magistrate subsequent to inquiry.  
79. Power of State Government to suspend, cancel and confiscate certificate.  
CHAPTER  XIV 
REGULATION OF TRADE PRACTICES  
80. Powers of Central Government to protect interests of service providers and service users.  
81. Prohibited goods and dangerous goods.  
82. Trade permission and endorsement of certificates of foreign vessels.  
 
CHAPTER XV  
PILOTAGE, VE SSEL DETENTION AND DEVELOPMENT FUND  
83. Pilotage . 
84. Certified master to be deemed pilot under Act 15 of 1908.   
85. Vessel detention and forfeiture.   
86. Constitution of Development Fund.  
 4 
 CHAPTER XVI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
87. Offences and penalties.  
88. Offences by company, limited liability partnership firm or any such arrangement.  
89. Fees, additional fee, payment and collection.   
90. Cognizance of offence.  
CHAPTER XVII  
NON-MECHANICALLY PROPELLED INLAND VESSEL  
91. Local self -governance.  
92. Obligation to enroll.   
93. Certificate of enrolment and marking of vessel.   
94. Standards of construction and safety.   
95. Power of State Government to make rules to regulate non -mechanically propelled inland                   
vessels.  
96. Constitution of welfare fund.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
97. Desertion and absence without leave.  
98. General powers of Central Government to make rules.  
99. Emergency preparedness.  
100. Removal of lawful obstruction.  
101. Validity of certificates issued under laws other than this Act.  
102. Obstruction to officer appointed or authorised.  
103. Place of t rial. 
104. Composition of offences.   
105. Appeal.  
106. Power of Central Government to make rules.   
107. Power of State Government to make rules.  
108. Power of Central Government to give directions.   
109. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
110. Power to remove difficulties.   
111. Consistency with other laws.  
112. Suspension or alteration of application and operation of Act.  
113. Laying of rules and notifications.   
114. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 THE INLAND VESSELS ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 24 OF 2021 
[11th August , 2021 .] 
An Act to promote economical and safe transportation and trade through inland waters, to bring 
uniformity in application of law relating to inland waterways and navigation within the 
country, to provide for safety of navigation, protection of life and cargo, and prevention of 
pollution th at may be caused by the use or navigation of inland vessels, to ensure 
transparency and accountability of administration of inland water transportation, to 
strengthen procedures governing the inland vessels, their construction, survey, registration, 
mannin g, navigation and such other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Inland Vessels Act, 
2021.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for bringi ng into force different provisions of this Act 
in different States or Union territories, as it may deem fit by the Central Government.  
2. Application and scope .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of 
Chapters I, III, X, XVI  and XVIII shall apply to all inland vessels plying within inland waters of India, 
and— 
(a) Chapters IV, V, VI, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV shall apply to all mechanically 
propelled vessels registered under this Act;  
(b) Chapters VIII, IX, X, XI, XII and XIII shall apply to vessels registered under such laws in 
force in India other than this Act, or registered in such laws in force in any country other than India; 
but endorsed or recognised under this Act for the purpose  of plying within inland waterways;  
(c) Chapters IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII and XIV shall apply to all vessels 
identified as special category vessels plying or using inland waterways;  
(d) Chapter XVII shall apply to all non -mechanically pro pelled inland vessels.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may extend the application of any Chapter or provision of this Act to 
any class or category of inland vess els, or to any region of inland waters, by notification in the Official 
Gazette.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “authorised insurer ” means any insurance company carrying on any class of marine insurance 
business, w hich is registered or recognised by the Central Government under any law for the time 
being in force in India;  
                                                           
1. 16th February, 2022 ,--Section 1 and 106, vide Notification S.O. 743(E), dated 16th February, 2022, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II,    sec. 3(ii). 
2. 7th of Ju ne, 2022, --Section 2 to 105 and 107 to 1 14, vide Notification S.O. 2604 (E), dated 7th June, 2022, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II,    sec. 3(ii). 
 6 
 (b) “bareboat charter ” means an arrangement for the hiring of a vessel without crew, where the 
charterer is responsible for appointing the crew a nd making other arrangements;  
(c) “bareboat charter -cum-demise” is a bareboat charter where the ownership of the vessel is 
intended to be transferred after a specified period to the company to which it has been chartered;  
(d) “cargo terminal ” means a place designated for the loading, or unloading, or any other allied 
processes of such loading or unloading of cargo in a port, jetty, wharf or such other places developed 
within inland waters for the purpose of loading and unloading of cargo;  
(e) “casualty” includes any vessel which — 
(i) is lost, abandoned, materially damaged;  
(ii) causes loss of material or damage to any other vessel;  
(iii) causes any loss of life or personal injury;  
(iv) causes pollution as a result of  or in connection with its operation;  
(f) “central database ” means the centralised record maintained for recording the data and details 
of— 
(i) vessels;  
(ii) registration of vessels;  
(iii) crew and manning in the vessels;  
(iv) certificates issued in respec t of vessels;  
(v) reception facilities; and  
(vi) such other data,  
to be recorded and maintained in the form of an electronic portal or in such other form and manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(g) “certificate of insurance ” means a certificate issued by an authorised insurer in pursuance of 
the insurance premium paid by the insured, and includes a cover note complying with such 
requirements as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(h) “competent authority ” means the a uthority referred to in  section 6 ; 
(i) “court” means any civil court, revenue court or High Court having jurisdiction over the matters 
of liabilities and offences as provided in this Act including investigation and inquiry into claims 
arising out of causal ities and accidents within its jurisdiction;  
(j) “cover note ” includes any note of undertaking issued by the insurer who promises to cover the 
liability and to indemnify the losses incurred by the insured as provided in the contract of insurance;  
(k) “crew” means personnel employed for operation or serving on an inland vessel other than 
master or passengers as a part of performing the functions of manning;  
(l) “dangerous cargo ” means any cargo, which, due to its nature, form or content as a whole or in 
part, are declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous while carried in on any class or category of 
inland vessels in inland waters under this Act or any other law for the time being in force;  
(m) “dangerous goods ” means any goods, which, due to its nature, form or content as a whole or 
in part, are declared as dangerous or potentially dangerous while carried in on any class or category of 
inland vessels in inland waters under this Act or any other law for the time being in force;  
(n) “designated authority ” means the authorities appointed by State Government under sub -
section ( 3) of section 5 ; 
(o) “fishing vessel ” means a vessel fitted with mechanical mode of propulsion, which is 
exclusively engaged in fishing for profit, within inland waters;  7 
 (p) “hazardous  chemical” means any chemical, which has been designated as pollutants under this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force in India;  
(q) “inland vessel ” includes any mechanically propelled inland vessel or non -mechanically 
propelled inland vessel w hich is registered and plying in inland waters, but does not include — 
(i) a fishing vessel registered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) or the 
Marine Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972 (13 of 1972); and  
(ii) any vessel that ar e specified as not to be inland vessels by notification by the Central 
Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, it is clarified that a vessel registered under the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) and plying within the inland waters  shall be deemed to be 
an inland vessel registered under this Act;  
(r) “inland waters ”, for the purpose of inland navigation, includes any — 
(i) canal, river, lake or other navigable water inward of baseline or as may be declared by 
notification in the Offi cial Gazette by the Central Government;  
(ii) tidal water limit, as may be declared by notification in the Official Gazette by the Central 
Government;  
(iii) national waterways declared by the Central Government; and  
(iv) other waters as may be declared by n otification in the Official Gazette by the Central 
Government;  
(s) “lien” is a legal right or interest that a creditor has in the inland vessel or any property thereof, 
retained until a debt or duty is secured, or the performance of some other obligation i s satisfied;  
(t) “limitation of liability ” means the rate or extent of liability within which the owner or such 
other persons entitled under this Act, may limit the liability or be permitted to limit or cap the liability 
arising out of claims, in accordance with the procedure laid down and the rat es, as may be specified in 
this Act or as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(u) “load line” means a water line which is marked on an inland vessel to denote the safe carrying 
or loading capacity of such vessel;  
(v) “master” includes any person i ncluding serang or such other person, who is in command or in 
charge of any inland vessel, and does not include a pilot or harbour master;  
(w) “material fact ” means a fact of such a nature, which determines the judgment of a prudent 
insurer, in assessing t he extent of his liability, premium to be charged, conditions to be specified and 
such other terms to be entered and incorporated in a policy of insurance governing the relationship 
with the insured;  
(x) “material particular ” means any particular of such a  nature, which determines the judgment of 
a prudent insurer, in assessing the extent of his liability, premium to be charged, conditions to be 
specified and such other terms to be entered and incorporated in a policy of insurance governing the 
relationship  with the insured;  
(y) “mechanically propelled inland vessel ” means— 
(i) any inland vessel in the inland waters which is propelled by mechanical means of 
propulsion; or  
(ii) floating units, floating surfaces, dumb vessels, barges, rigs, jetties or such other non -
mechanically propelled inland vessel, which are towed or pushed with the assistance of another 
mechanically propelled vessel and used for carriage, storage, transportation and accommodation 
of passengers and cargo in or through inland waters;  
(z) “minimum manning requirement ” means the standard and number of persons required for safe 
manning and navigation of vessels, as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  8 
 (za) “non-mechanically propelled inland vessel ” means any vessel which is not a mec hanically 
propelled inland vessel;  
(zb) “notification ” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the Official Gazette 
of a State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(zc) “obnoxious substance ” means any substance, which has been designated as pollutants under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force in India;  
(zd) “official number ” means the number assigned to any vessel by the Registrar of Inland 
Vessels or such other person appointed under this Act, to be affixed or displayed on a conspicuous 
part of such vessel to refer, distinguish and identify one vessel from anothe r; 
(ze) “oil” means any edible oil carried on vessel as cargo or persistent oil such as crude oil, heavy 
diesel oil, lubricating oil and white oil, carried on board of a vessel as cargo or fuel;  
(zf) “oily mixture ” means a mixture with any oil content;  
(zg) “owner” means operator, charterer, beneficial owner or registered owner, who is responsible 
for the activities of the vessel and shall be under obligation to comply with the provisions of this Act 
in relation to, or in possessing express or implied title  under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force;  
(zh) “passenger ” means any person carried on board of a vessel, except persons employed or 
engaged in any capacity on board of the vessel in connection with the business of the vessel;  
(zi) “passenger terminal ” means the terminal designated for the embarking or dis -embarking of 
passengers and the permitted cargo, in a port, jetty, wharf or like places;  
(zj) “passenger vessel ” means any vessel permitted to carry more than twelve passengers;  
(zk) “pilot” means a person appointed by the owner of the vessel to assist the master or to steer 
the vessel in such area of inland water in accordance with the mandatory requirements, as specified 
in section 83 ; 
(zl) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules by  the Central Government or a State Government, as 
the case may be;  
(zm) “priority of lien ” means the ranking of liens in the order in which they are perfected or 
recorded in the book of registry maintained at every port or place of registry;  
(zn) “reciproc ating country ” means any country, as may on the basis of reciprocity, specified by 
notification by the Central Government to be a reciprocating country for the purposes of this Act;  
(zo) “recognised organisation ” means any organisation recognised and autho rised by the Central 
Government to perform and execute the functions involved in survey, classification or certification of 
vessels;  
(zp) “salvage” means an act of the salvor in retrieving or saving any property or life in danger due 
to wreck or accident a nd includes all expenses incurred by the salvor in the performance of salvage 
services;  
(zq) “salvor” means any person who conducts salvage operations;  
(zr) “service provider ” includes any person, who in the capacity of owner or operator of an inland 
vesse l used or plying in inland waters, providing services to any service user for the purposes of 
transportation, storage or accommodation;  
(zs) “service user ” includes any person who as a passenger or owner of cargo or freight 
forwarder, uses the services of any inland vessel in the inland waters for transportation, storage or 
accommodation purposes;  
(zt) “special category vessel ” means a mechanically propelled  inland vessel that is identified 
under this Act as special by considering its use, purpose, function or utility or the means of 9 
 propulsion including the fuelling system or source of power for propulsion, such as liquefied natural 
gas, electrical propulsio n, the design, dimensions of construction or areas of operation or such other 
criteria or standards;  
(zu) “vessel” includes every description of water craft used or capable of being used in inland 
waters, including any ship, boat, sailing vessel, tug, barg e or other description of vessel including 
non-displacement craft, amphibious craft, wing -in-ground craft, ferry, roll on -roll-off vessel, 
container vessel, tanker vessel, gas carrier or floating unit or dumb vessel used for transportation, 
storage or acco mmodation within or through inland waters;  
(zv) “wreck” means a state of any vessel, or goods or a part or property of such vessel or carried 
on the vessel, — 
(i) which have been cast into or have fallen into the inland waters and then sunk and remain 
under  water or remains floating on the surface; or  
(ii) which have sunk in the inland waters, but are attached to a floating object in order that 
they may be found again; or  
(iii) which are intentionally thrown away or abandoned without hope or intention of rec overy; 
or 
(iv) which by its presence in inland waters, is a hazard or causes impediment to navigation, or 
adversely affects safety of life or causes pollution.  
CHAPTER II  
DECLARATION  OF INLAND WATER AREA INTO  ZONES  
4. Declaration of inland water area into Zones .—(1) The State Government may, for the purposes 
of this Act, declare by notification any inland water area to be a “Zone” depending on the maximum 
significant wave height criteria specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the State Government may classify the maximum significant 
wave height criteria into the following Zones, namely: — 
(i) Zone 1 refers to the area (other than Zone 2 or Zone 3) where the maximum significant wave 
height does not exceed 2.0 metres;  
(ii) Zone 2  refers to the area (other than Zone 3) where the maximum significant wave height 
does not exceed 1.2 metres; and  
(iii) Zone 3 refers to the area where the maximum significant wave height does not exceed 0.6 
metres.  
CHAPTER III  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
5. Administrative role of Central Government and State Governments .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by general or special order, direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable 
by it under, or in relation to any such provision of this Act, or t he rules made thereunder, or as may be 
specified in the order allocating the duties, shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be so 
specified, also be exercisable by the competent authority or by such other officer as may be specified in 
that order.  
(2) On and from the date of issue of notifications or rules made by the Central Government under the 
provisions of this Act, the provisions shall, — 
(a) uniformly apply in whole or in any part of India, as may be specified therein; and  
(b) prevai l over such notifications or rules, as the case may be, issued or made by the State 
Governments.  10 
 (3) The State Governments may, by notification, appoint one or more designated authorities within 
their respective jurisdiction for the purposes of exercising or discharging the powers, authority or duties 
conferred, by or under this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) and section 6, the existing administrative 
authorities constituted under State Governmen ts or Union territory Administrations may continue to be 
the designated authorities for the purposes of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The State Government may, for the purposes of implementing the various provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, by gen eral or special order, direct that any power or authority conferred 
under this Act, subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may think fit, be exercised or discharged 
by the respective designated authorities or any officer or any other organisatio n or body.  
(6) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the State Government shall have the power to make rules 
and shall exercise the powers conferred on it, as provided by or under this Act.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, for the purposes of administration of the 
non-mechanically propelled inland vessels, as specified in Chapter XVII, the Central Government shall 
have no powers of administration and shall only provide assistance to the respective State Government, 
on receipt of official request from such State Government.  
6. Competent authority .—The Inland Waterways Authority of India, constituted under section 3 of 
the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985) shall be the competent authority for the 
purpose of exercising or discharging the powers, authority or duties conferred, by or under this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
SURVEY OF INLAND VESSELS  
7.  Power to classify and categorise for purpose of survey .—(1) For the purposes of this               
Chapter,  — 
(a) the classification of mechanically propelled vessels;  
(b) the criteria for such classification; and  
(c) the standards of design, construction, fitness and crew accommodation of such vessels,   
shall be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The State Government shall classify and categorise mechanically propelled inland vessels on the 
basis of criteria and standards referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
8. Construction, alteration or modi fication of mechanically propelled inland vessel .—(1) No 
person shall construct any mechanically propelled inland vessel, or alter or modify any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel so as to affect its strength, stability or safety, except with prior approval of the 
designated authority, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The list of alterations or modifications referred to in sub -section ( 1), which would affect the 
strength, stability or safety of any mechanically prope lled inland vessel, and the criteria therefor, shall be 
such as may be specified by the Central Government, by notification.  
9. Survey of vessels .—(1) The standard for type and periodicity of surveys for every mechanically 
propelled inland vessel shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The owner, operator, master or construction yard or any other applicant, as the case may be, shall 
submit a request for survey in such form and content as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
10. Appointment and qualifications of surveyors .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, the State Government 
may, by notification, appoint officers or persons as surveyors of inland vessels and such surveyors shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of  section 21  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) The minimum criteria and qualifications for the appointment of surveyors, which the State 
Governments shall adopt in the appointment of surveyors, shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  11 
 11. Powers of surveyors .—(1) On receipt of the application from the owner or master or construction 
yard for conducting survey, in such form and within such time as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, the surveyor may board or enter and inspect a mechanically propelled inland vessel:  
Provided that the surveyor shall not unnecessarily hinder the loading or unloading of cargo or; 
embarking or dis -embarking of passengers of the mechanically propelled inland vessel, or unnecessarily  
detain or delay her from proceeding on any voyage.  
(2) The owner, operator, master and crew of the mechanically propelled inland vessel shall render the 
surveyor, all reasonable facilities for conducting survey, and all information with respect to such 
mechanically propelled inland vessel, and her machinery or any part thereof, and all equipment and 
articles on board, as he may require for the purposes of a survey.  
12. Grant of certificate of survey and procedures .—(1) On completion of survey of a mechanic ally 
propelled inland vessel, the surveyor shall forthwith issue the applicant, a declaration of survey, valid for 
such period and in such form, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The State Government shall, if satisfied that all the provi sions of this Act have been complied 
with in respect of a declaration submitted under sub -section (1), and on receipt of payment of fee, as may 
be prescribed by the State Government, issue a certificate of survey to the applicant.  
(3) A certificate of surv ey granted under this section shall be in such form as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, and shall contain a statement to the effect that all the provisions of this Act with 
respect to the survey of the mechanically propelled inland vessel and t he declaration of surveyor have 
been complied with, and shall set forth such particulars or such other terms and conditions, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate all  or any of the 
functions assigned to it by the Central Government under this section:  
Provided that no delegation shall be made to authorise the grant of a certificate of survey by the 
surveyor, who made the declaration of survey under sub -section ( 1). 
13. Provisional certificate of survey and its effect .—(1) On receipt of application and the fee from 
the owner or operator of any mechanically propelled inland vessel, the surveyor who conducted the 
survey, may grant a provisional certificate of survey exten ding the validity of the prevailing certificate of survey 
by endorsement, in such form and for such period, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Any mechanically propelled inland vessel, which has been issued with a provisional certificate o f 
survey or endorsement under sub -section ( 1), may proceed on voyage or use in service, temporarily, 
pending the issue of the certificate of survey, in such manner and subject to the conditions as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
14. Mechanically propelled inland vessels not to proceed without certificate of survey, and 
requirement of Zone to be specified in such certificate .—(1) No mechanically propelled inland vessel 
shall be used nor proceed on voyage, without a valid certificate of  survey that shall provide or indicate 
among others, the Zone intended for operation or applicable voyage or service of such vessel.  
(2) The certificate of survey shall have effect throughout India, unless otherwise specified therein and 
subject to such other conditions as may be specified by the competent authority.  
(3) The certificate of survey shall be valid for such period as may be specified by notification by the 
Central Government and shall not be in force — 
(a) after the expiration of the period sp ecified in the certificate of survey; or  
(b) after notice has been issued to cancel or suspend such certificate.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the State Government from excluding a mechanically 
propelled inland vessel from the requirement under  sub-section ( 1), on an application made by the owner 
or master of the vessel for permission to proceed on a voyage; during the interval between the date on 
which the certificate of survey expires and the earliest possible date of renewal.  12 
 (5) After cessat ion of a certificate of survey, a valid certificate of survey shall be obtained only after a 
fresh survey of the mechanically propelled inland vessel has been conducted by any surveyor appointed 
under this Act.  
15. Suspension and cancellation of certificat e of survey .—(1) The State Government may suspend 
or cancel a certificate of survey, if it has reason to believe that — 
(a) the declaration of the surveyor of the sufficiency and good condition of the hull, engines or 
other machinery or of any of the equipm ent of the mechanically propelled vessel has been 
fraudulently or erroneously made; or  
(b) the certificate has otherwise been granted upon false or erroneous information; or  
(c) since the making of the declaration, the hull, engine or other machinery, or a ny of the 
equipment of the mechanically propelled vessel have sustained any material damage, or have 
otherwise become insufficient.  
(2) The State Government shall issue the notice of suspension of certificate of survey to the owner, 
operator, master or con struction yard by stating the errors to be rectified and conditions that have to be 
complied with by the owner, operator, master or construction yard within three months from the date of 
issuance of such notice, in such manner as may be prescribed by that Government.  
(3) In the event of non -compliance of the notice of suspension by the owner, operator, master or 
construction yard within the period specified therein, the State Government shall record such non -
compliance and shall issue the notice of cancella tion of certificate of survey, which shall come into force 
with immediate effect.  
16.  Delivery of expired, suspended or cancelled certificate of survey .—(1) The owner or master 
shall deliver the certificate of survey, which has expired or has been suspended or cancelled, to such 
officer as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
(2) The State Government shall record the details of the cancelled certificate in the book of registry 
maintained by the R egistrar of Inland Vessels.  
CHAPTER V 
REGIS TRATION  
17. Registration .—(1) Any mechanically propelled inland vessel, which is wholly owned by — 
(a) a citizen of India; or  
(b) a co -operative society registered or deemed to be registered under the Co -operative Societies 
Act, 1912 (2 of 1912); or  
(c) a body established under any Act relating to co -operative societies for the time being in force 
in any State; or  
(d) a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013); or  
(e) a partnership firm registered under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009); or  
(f) any other body including a partnership firm, trust or societies established by or under any 
Central or State enactment and which has its principal place of business in India;  
(g) any legal business combination, otherwise allowed under the existing commercial law for the 
time being in force in India, within the permissible foreign direct investment limits in the sector and 
having its principal place of business in India,   
shall be registered under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A foreign vessel, other than vessels registered or obligated to register under the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), chartered on bareboat charter -cum-demise by an Indian charterer, for 
the purpos es of plying exclusively within inland waters, shall be registered under the provisions of this 
Chapter.  13 
 (3) The inland vessels registered under this Act may also be registered under the Merchant Shipping 
Act, 1958 (44 of 1958).  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), “Indian charterer ” shall mean a person referred to 
in clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1), who has chartered a vessel on bareboat charter -cum-demise 
contract.  
18. Requirement of certificate of registration .—(1) A mechanically  propelled inland vessel required to be 
registered under this Chapter, shall not proceed on any voyage or be used for any service, unless it has a valid 
certificate of registration granted under this Act in respect thereof.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the authority appointed or authorised under this 
Chapter may — 
(a) permit any mechanically propelled inland vessel, built at any place other than a port or place 
of registry, to make her first voyage through the inland waters t o any such port or place for the 
purpose of registration; or  
(b) permit the vessel registered under any law for the time being in force in India for which 
provisions have been made under this Act to conduct voyage within the inland waters; or  
(c) permit an y mechanically propelled vessel registered under such laws of countries other than 
India, which shall only be permitted to ply within the inland waters subject to compliance of such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
19. Owner or master to carry certificate of registration .—(1) The owner or master of an inland 
vessel shall carry a valid certificate of registration issued under this Chapter and shall make available for 
inspection, when demanded by the officers appointed by the State Government.  
(2) The State Government or such other officer appointed or authorised under this Chapter may detain 
any mechanically propelled inland vessel required to be registered under this Act, until the respective 
owner, operator or master of such vessel furnishes a valid certificate of registration.  
20. Appointment of ports or places of registry and Registrars of Inland Vessels .—(1) For the 
purposes of this Chapter, the State Government may, by notification,  — 
(a) appoint ports or places of re gistry; and  
(b) appoint Registrar of Inland Vessels at the said ports or places of registry, who shall be deemed 
to be a public servant within the meaning of  section 21  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) A Registrar of Inland Vessels shall, in resp ect to the port or place of registry for which he is 
appointed, perform his functions as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
21. Book of registry .—(1) The Registrar of Inland Vessels shall maintain and keep a book of 
registry, which shall have recor d of all particulars contained in the form of certificate of registration as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Registrar of Inland Vessels shall report the details of the book of registry or entries made 
therein, to the State Government at regular intervals, in such manner and period as may be prescribed by 
the State Government.  
(3) The State Government shall report and update the Central Government in respect of — 
(a) the designated ports and places of registry;  
(b) the details of officers appointed or authorised under this Chapter; and  
(c) the details of registrations as entered in the book of registry,  
to facilitate and administer the registration processes under this Chapter.  
22. Central database of inland vessel s.—The Central Government shall appoint officers to maintain 
a central data base for inland vessels, in such form and manner, and the functions of the officers so 
appointed shall be such, as may be prescribed by that Government.  14 
 23. Application and process es of registration of vessels .—(1) The owner or master, may make an 
application for registration of a mechanically propelled inland vessel, which has a valid certificate of 
survey issued under this Act, in such form, manner and along with such particulars,  as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The list of documents to be submitted or adduced by the applicants for registration, in addition to 
the particulars referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Gover nment.  
(3) Every application for registration shall be made to the Registrar of Inland Vessels, within the 
jurisdiction of the respective State in which the owner of the mechanically propelled inland vessel — 
(a) ordinarily resides; or  
(b) has the principal  place of business or the officially registered office.  
(4) If the Registrar of Inland Vessels is satisfied that the vessel or the application submitted for 
registration is not in compliance with the provisions of this Act, he may refuse to register a mechanically 
propelled inland vessel for reasons to be recorded in writing and shall provide the applicant a note 
containing the reasons for such refusal.  
24. Grant of certificate of registration and marking of vessel .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
section 23, the Registrar of Inland Vessels shall, grant the certificate of registration to the applicant, who 
has paid such fee, as may be prescribed by the State Government, and assign the official number to such 
registered vessel.  
(2) The certificate of reg istration shall be in such form and content, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government, and shall contain the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) registered address of the owner and other ownership details;  
(b) details of mortgage, if any;  
(c) official number;  
(d) classification and category of vessel;  
(e) any other particular, as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The owner shall display the official number on a conspicuous part of the vessel, as may be 
prescribed by the State Gover nment.  
25.  Effect of certificate of registration .—(1) The certificate of registration granted under section 24 
shall be deemed to be valid in all States and Union territories, unless otherwise specified therein.  
(2) The certificate of registration issued under this Chapter shall be conclusive proof of ownership 
and title, as declared by the applicant and as entered in the book of registry by the Registrar of Inland 
Vessels.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person who has beneficial interest of 
ownership in the mechanically propelled inland vessel or shares therein, shall have the same rights as that 
of the registered owner and shall be deemed as owner of such vessel for the purposes of this Act.  
26. Duplicate certificate .—(1) If the certificate of registration issued under this Chapter is lost or 
destroyed, the registered owner shall apply for a duplicate certificate to the Registrar of Inland Vessels, 
who has issued such certificate of registration, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
(2) The Registrar of Inland Vessels shall, on receipt of application under sub -section ( 1) and such fees 
or additional fees, as may be prescribed by the State Government, issue the duplicate certificate of 
registration.  
27. Provisional certificate of registration .—(1) The Registrar of Inland Vessels may, pending 
issuance of the certificate of registration, upon an application and on payment of fee, by the applicant, 15 
 issue a provisional certificate of registration valid fo r such period as may be prescribed under sub -section 
(2). 
(2) The application, fee and the issuance of provisional certificate of registration referred to in sub -
section ( 1) shall be in such form, rate and manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Govern ment.  
(3) During the period of validity of the provisional certificate of registration, the owner, operator, 
master or construction yard shall implement and comply with all necessary steps to be taken to have the 
vessel registered under this Chapter.  
28, Registration of modifications or alterations .—(1) The owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel, shall make an application, in such form, manner and within such 
period as may be prescribed by the State Government, to effect any a lteration or modification affecting 
the strength, stability or safety of such mechanically propelled inland vessel along with the respective 
certificate of survey, in which such alteration or modification have been approved, to the respective 
Registrar of Inland Vessels, who has issued the certificate of registration.  
(2) The Registrar of Inland Vessels shall, on receipt of application and the certificate of survey and on 
receipt of such fee, as may be prescribed by the State Government, either cause the alteration or 
modification to be registered and entered in the certificate of registration, or direct that the vessel be 
registered anew:  
Provided that, where the Registrar of Inland Vessels, directs that the vessel be registered anew, he 
shall grant a pro visional certificate for a specific period describing the vessel as altered or endorse on the 
existing certificate about the particulars of the alteration.  
(3) Any mechanically propelled inland vessel found plying without complying with sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) shall be detained by such authority or officer as the State Government may, by general or 
special order, appoint in this behalf.  
29. Change of residence or place of business .—(1) If the owner of a mechanically propelled inland 
vessel ceases  to reside or carry on business at the registered address recorded in the certificate of 
registration of the vessel, such person shall comply with the procedures prescribed under sub -section ( 2) 
by the Central Government.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -sectio n (1), the procedures to be complied with by the owner of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel, who ceases to be the owner or applies for the requirement of 
transfer of registry or any such circumstances leading to change of the registered address, sha ll be such as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
30. Prohibition against transfer of ownership of registered vessel .—No mechanically propelled 
inland vessel registered with the registering authority of a State Government under this Chapter, shall  be 
transferred to a person residing in any country other than India, without the prior approval of the Registrar 
of Inland Vessels, who has originally granted the certificate of registration and such a transfer shall be 
validated only if made in complianc e with such procedures as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
31.Suspension of certificate of registration .—(1) The Registrar of Inland Vessels may at any time, 
require any mechanically propelled inland vessel within the local limits of his jurisdiction to be inspected 
by such authority as the State Government may, by general or special order, appoint in this behalf.  
(2) As a result of such inspection, if the Registrar of Inland Vessels has reason to believe that after the 
granting of the certificate of registration, the mechanically propelled inland vessel became unfit to ply in 
inland waters, order suspension of the certificate of registration of the said vessel for such period as he 
may deem fit.  
(3) The Registrar of Inland Vessels shall , before suspending a certificate of registration, provide to the 
owner, operator or master an opportunity of being heard, and record the reasons for such suspension.  
(4) The Registrar of Inland Vessels who suspends the certificate of registration under su b-section ( 2), 
shall issue a notice of suspension to the registered owner stating the reasons for suspension and the 16 
 conditions to be complied within such period, as may be prescribed by the State Government, for 
withdrawal of such order of suspension . 
(5) Where the registration of a mechanically propelled inland vessel is suspended under sub -section 
(2) by any Registrar of Inland Vessels, other than the Registrar of Inland Vessels who has originally 
issued the certificate of registration, the former shall intimate the latter, regarding such order of 
suspension or withdrawal of such order of suspension; and the latter shall enter such order in the book of 
registry in which the registration of the vessel is originally recorded.  
(6) The Registrar of Inland Ves sels suspending the certificate of registration, shall confiscate such 
certificate and return the certificate to the owner or master only upon withdrawal of the order of 
suspension.  
32.Cancellation of registration .—(1) If any mechanically propelled inland vessel registered under 
this Act is declared missing, destroyed, lost, abandoned or has been rendered permanently unfit for 
service or destined for scrapping or dismantling or sold abroad; the owner of the vessel shall, within such 
time as may be prescribe d by the Central Government, report the fact to the Registrar of Inland Vessels of 
the place where the vessel is registered and shall also forward to that authority, along with the report, the 
certificate of registration of the vessel and thereupon such Re gistrar of Inland Vessels shall have the 
certificate of registration cancelled.  
(2) Any Registrar of Inland Vessels may at any time require that any mechanically propelled inland 
vessel within the local limits of his jurisdiction may be inspected by such d esignated authority as the State 
Government may, by general or special order, appoint in this behalf and, if as a result of such inspection, 
such Registrar of Inland Vessels is satisfied that the vessel is in such a condition that it is not fit to ply in 
any inland water, the Registrar of Inland Vessels may, after giving the owner of the vessel an opportunity 
of being heard, cancel the registration of the vessel and require the owner thereof to surrender forthwith to 
him, the certificate of registration in respect of that vessel, if it has not already been so surrendered.  
33. Mortgage of mechanically propelled inland vessel or share therein .—(1) A registered 
mechanically propelled inland vessel or a share therein may be mortgaged as a security for a loan or other 
valuable consideration, and the instrument creating the security shall be in such form, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, and on the production of such instrument, the Registrar of Inland 
Vessels who granted the certificate of registrat ion shall record it in the book of registry.  
(2) The manner and the conditions, subject to which a mechanically propelled inland vessel or a share 
therein may be mortgaged, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER VI  
MANNING, Q UALIFICATION, TRAINING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION  
34. Training and minimum age for employment .—(1) The standards for qualification, training, 
training institutes, examination and grant of certificate of competency for the purposes of this Chapter 
shall  be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) No person under the age of eighteen years shall be employed on a mechanically propelled inland 
vessel registered under this Act.  
35. Minimum manning scale and manning requirements .—The minimum manning scale 
applicable to different class or category of mechanically propelled inland vessels, categorised under this 
Act or such other laws for the time being in force in India, shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
36. Appointment and duties of examiners .—(1) The State Government may appoint examiners, in 
accordance with the criteria and qualifications, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, for the 
purpose of examining the qualifications of persons desirous  of obtaining certificates under this Chapter to 
the effect that they are competent to undertake the responsibilities of and act as, masters, or as engineers 
or engine -drivers, or as such other persons, as the case may be, on the mechanically propelled inl and 
vessels.  17 
 (2) The examiners shall evaluate the persons who have undergone the training required for qualifying 
as masters, or as engineers or engine -drivers, or as such other persons, as the case may be, and shall report 
the list of successful candidate s who possess the required qualifications to the Central Government or 
such other officer appointed or authorised by notification by the State Government.  
37. Grant of certificate of competency .—(1) The State Government may evaluate the report 
provided by the examiners, and upon confirmation as to the correctness of such report; shall grant to 
every candidate; who is reported by the examiners to possess the required qualifications, with the 
certificate of competency, certifying that  the candidate specified in the report is competent to serve, in such 
capacity as may be specified therein, on any class or category or whole of the mechanically propelled inland vessel 
as specified in the certificate.  
(2) The State Government shall require for further examination  or a re -examination of all or any of 
the candidates, if it is found that the report submitted by examiners is defective, or there exists reason to 
believe that such a report has been unduly made.  
(3) The certificate of competency shall be in such form and  manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
38. Certificate of service .—(1) The State Government may, on an application, without examination, 
grant a certificate of service to any person who has served as a master, or as an engineer, of a vesse l of the 
Coast Guard, Indian Navy or regular Army for such period as may be prescribed in this behalf by the 
Central Government, to the effect that he is competent to act, as a first -class master, second -class master 
or serang, or as an engineer, first -class engine -driver or second -class engine -driver or in such capacity as 
may be specified therein, as the case may be, on board the mechanically propelled inland vessel.  
(2) For the purposes of granting of certificate of service under sub -section ( 1), the Sta te Government 
shall verify the certificate, certifying the competence of the applicant as issued by the Coast Guard, Indian 
Navy or regular Army, as submitted to it by such applicant along with his application.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained herein , the State Government may by recording reasons 
thereof, refuse granting of certificate of service under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) A certificate of service so granted under sub -section ( 1), shall be in such form and manner; and 
shall be subject to such conditio ns, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, and shall have the 
same effect as a certificate of competency granted under section 37.  
39. Effect of certificate of competency or certificate of service .—Subject to the provisions of this 
Act and such co nditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, a certificate of competency or 
certificate of service shall be valid throughout India.  
40. Suspension and cancellation of certificate .—(1) If the holder of any certificate issued under this 
Chapter i s found to have acted in contravention to the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
the said certificate shall be liable to be suspended or cancelled.  
(2) The State Government or any officer appointed or authorised  under this Chapter shall issue notice 
to the holder of certificate and shall provide him an opportunity of being heard before suspension or 
cancellation of certificates issued under this Chapter.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the State Government or any officer 
appointed or authorised under this Chapter, may suspend or cancel the certificate of competency or the 
certificate of service granted under this Chapter by recording reasons thereof.  
(4) If a certificate issued under the  provisions of this Chapter is suspended or cancelled, the holder of 
such certificate shall deliver it to the State Government or such officer, appointed or authorised by that 
Government by notification in Official Gazette under this Chapter.  
41. Registry of certificate holders and central registry .—(1) The State Government shall maintain 
registers in electronic format to record, the details and data of the certificate, and the respective 
certificates, issued under this Chapter in such form and man ner as may be prescribed by it.  18 
 (2) The State Government shall report and update the Central Government with the information on 
data and details of certificates issued, granted, cancelled or suspended or such other remarks, made by the 
respective authority  in regular intervals, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government shall update the central data base with the reports and information 
received from all the State Governments under this Chapter in electronic format.  
CHAPTER V II 
SPECIAL CATEGORY VESSELS  
42. Special category vessels .—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Central Government may, by 
rules to be made in this behalf, specify the criteria and standards to identify any class or category of 
mechanically propelled i nland vessels as special category vessels based on their design, construction, use, 
purpose, area of plying, source of energy or fuelling, or any other criteria or standards.  
(2) The requirements of construction, design, survey, registration, manning, qual ification, 
competency, or the requirements in addition to those contained elsewhere in this Act shall be such, as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The State Governments shall identify the mechanically propelled inland vessels as special 
category vessels based on the criteria and standards prescribed by the Central Government under sub -
section ( 1). 
43. Appointment or authorisation of officers to implement provisions, grant certificate of 
fitness,  etc.—(1) The State Government shall appoint or authorise such number of officers for the 
purpose of performing duties and implementing the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) On an application made by owner, operator or master of any mechanically propelled inland ves sel 
in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, any officer appointed or authorised under 
sub-section ( 1), on being satisfied that such vessel complies with the provisions of this Act and falls under 
the special category vessels as identifie d in this Chapter, and subject to such other conditions including 
validity as may be prescribed by the State Government, may grant a certificate of fitness, in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by that Government.  
(3) The officer appointed or autho rised under sub -section ( 1) may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, refuse to grant the certificate of fitness in respect of an application made under sub -section ( 2). 
44. Safety of passengers or service users .—(1) The safety features, gears and such o ther measures 
by which any mechanically propelled inland vessel, identified as special category vessel under this 
Chapter, shall comply with and be equipped in accordance with the categorisation of such vessel, shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Sta te Government.  
(2) The maximum carrying capacity of the vessel identified as special category vessel by specifying 
the safety loadline or the limits of loadline to keep them afloat, or such other criteria and conditions, other 
than those mentioned elsewher e in this Act for the safe voyage of such inland vessel, shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
45. Inspection of vessel .—(1) The surveyor may, other than for the purpose of survey, at any 
reasonable time, go on board any special categ ory vessel, and inspect the respective vessel including the 
hull, equipment and machinery or any part or properties of such vessel.  
(2) The owner, operator, agent, master and any such person in -charge of the special category vessel, 
shall make available al l necessary facilities to the surveyor for inspection and survey, and all such 
information regarding the vessel and her machinery and equipment, or any part thereof, respectively, as 
the surveyor or such other officer may reasonably require.  
46. Suspension  or cancellation of certificate of fitness .—(1) If any special category vessel does not 
comply with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the State Government may issue 
notice to the owner or operator or master or any person in -charge of  such vessel, for rectifying the non -
compliance within such time as may be specified therein.  19 
 (2) In case of continuance of non -compliance by the owner or operator or master or any person in -
charge of the special category vessel even after receipt of the notice issued under sub -section ( 1), the State 
Government may, after providing an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
suspend or cancel the certificate of fitness issued to such vessel under this Chapter.  
(3) If the certif icate of fitness of a special category vessel has been suspended or cancelled under sub -
section ( 2), then such vessel shall cease to operate till the suspension is revoked, or in the event of 
cancellation, shall cease to operate till a new certificate of f itness is granted.  
CHAPTER VIII  
NAVIGATION SAFETY AND SIGNALS  
47. Navigation safety, lights and signals .—(1) The specifications and requirements of signals and 
equipment based on classification and categorisation of mechanically propelled vessels, to be co mplied 
with by such vessels shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The fog and distress signals to be carried and used, the steering and sailing rules to be complied 
with and the different protocols for exhibition and display of different standards of lights, shapes and 
signals, by any mechanically propelled vessel plying in inland waters shall be such, as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(3) The owner or master of every mechanically propelled vessel, while in the inla nd water limit, shall 
comply with the rules made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), and shall not carry or exhibit any lights or 
shapes or use any fog or distress signals, other than that required to be exhibited under this Chapter or the 
rules made thereunde r. 
48. Obligation to ensure safe navigation .—(1) Every mechanically propelled vessel shall adopt 
necessary measures to prevent collision and to ensure safe navigation through inland waters.  
(2) If any damage to person or property arises in the inland water  limit due to non -observance of any 
of the rules made under this Chapter by any mechanically propelled vessel, the damage shall be deemed 
to have been occasioned by the wilful default of the person in -charge of such vessel at that time, unless it 
is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the circumstances of the case demanded deviance from the 
applicable rules.  
49. Distress signal .—The master of a mechanically propelled vessel, while in the inland water limit, 
on finding or encountering a dangerous der elict or any other hazard to navigation in the inland waterways, 
shall immediately send a signal to indicate the danger or distress, or any such information to other 
mechanically propelled vessels in the vicinity and to the concerned State Government:  
Prov ided that no fees or charges shall be levied on any mechanically propelled vessel, in using any 
device for communicating any information under this section.  
50. Assistance to vessels in distress and persons in distress .—(1) The master of any mechanically 
propelled vessel, while in the inland water limit, who has received any signal of distress from any vessel 
or aircraft within the inland water limit, shall proceed immediately to the assistance of the persons in 
distress by acknowledging the receipt of suc h signal to the vessel in distress.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the master of a mechanically propelled 
vessel shall be released from the obligation to render assistance as provided in the said sub -section, if he 
is unable to do so, or in the special circumstances of the case, considers it unreasonable to act as provided 
in the said sub -section, or if the requirement for assistance is being complied with by other vessels, or the 
assistance is no longer required.  
(3) The master of any mechanically propelled vessel, while in the inland water limit, shall render 
assistance to every person found in danger of being lost in the inland waters.  
(4) The master of any mechanically propelled inland vessel may abstain from complying with su b-
section ( 3), if in his judgment, he is unable to or, in the special circumstances of the case, such assistance 
may not be rendered without serious danger to his vessel, or to the persons on board and, in such event 
shall inform the respective authorities  regarding his inability of such non -compliance.  20 
 51. Life saving, fire safety and communication appliances .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
rules made in this behalf, specify the class or category of mechanically propelled inland vessels to be 
equippe d with navigation aids, life saving appliances, fire detection and extinguishing appliances and 
communication appliances.  
(2) The owner, operator or master of all mechanically propelled inland vessels shall comply with the 
requirements of navigation aids, life saving appliances, fire detection and extinguishing appliances and 
communication appliances as specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The State Government may appoint or authorise such officers as surveyors to inspect and ensure 
that the mechanically prope lled inland vessels comply with the applicable requirements specified in sub -
section ( 1). 
(4) If the surveyor, on inspection, finds that the mechanically propelled inland vessel is not so 
provided with life saving and fire appliances in conformity with the  provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder, he shall issue a notice to the master or owner or operator in writing pointing out the 
deficiency, and unless the master or owner or operator complies with the said notice and report such 
compliance to  the surveyor, the said vessel shall not proceed to conduct any voyage.  
CHAPTER IX  
PREVENTION OF POLLUTION CAUSED BY INLAND VESSEL  
52. Chemicals, etc., to be designated as pollutants .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, designate the list of  chemicals, any ingredients or substance carried as bunker or as cargo, or 
any substance in any form discharged from any mechanically propelled inland vessel, as pollutants.  
(2) The owner or master of any mechanically propelled inland vessel shall discharg e or dispose of the 
sewage and garbage in accordance with such standards and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) No mechanically propelled inland vessel shall cause pollution by discharging or dumping of 
pollutants designated under s ub-section ( 1): 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the discharge dump or emission of such oil or 
oily mixture, hazardous chemical or obnoxious substance or any other pollutant, as the case may be, from 
a mechanically propelled inland vessel for the purpose of securing the safety of any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel, preventing damage to another mechanically propelled inland vessel, cargo or 
saving of life at inland waters.  
53. Certificate of prevention of pollution .—(1) The Cent ral Government shall, by rules made in this 
behalf, specify the standards of construction and equipment of the mechanically propelled inland vessels 
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.  
(2) The State Government shall appoint or autho rise such officers to ensure construction, installation 
and maintenance of equipment of all mechanically propelled inland vessels and issue certificate of 
prevention of pollution, in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
(3) Every mechanically pr opelled inland vessel, which has been constructed and equipped in 
compliance with this Chapter shall be issued with a certificate of prevention of pollution in such form, 
validity and content as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Every mechanically propelled inland vessel shall carry on board a valid certificate of prevention 
of pollution and shall furnish the same on demand by concerned officers appointed or authorised under 
this Chapter.  
54. Reception facilities and containment  of pollution .—(1) The Central Government shall, by rules 
made in this behalf, specify the conditions for construction, use and maintenance of reception facilities for 
the containment of pollution and removal of pollutants arising from spillage or discharg e arising from 
mechanically propelled inland vessels at all cargo terminals or passenger terminals.  21 
 (2) The owner or operator of all cargo terminals or passenger terminals shall provide reception 
facilities to discharge oil, oily mixture, hazardous chemica ls, sewage or obnoxious substances at such 
cargo or passenger terminal, as the case may be, in compliance of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The owner or operator of all cargo terminals or passenger terminals, providing reception facilities 
shall receive charges, at such rates as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) For the purposes of minimising the pollution already caused, or for preventing the imminent threat 
of pollution, the Central Government or such other officer appointed by the State Government may , by 
order in writing, direct the owner or operator of cargo or passenger terminal to provide or arrange for the 
provision of such pollution containment equipment and pollutant removing materials, at such cargo and 
passenger terminal, as may be specified i n such order.  
(5) The owner or operator of the passenger or cargo terminal shall submit a report of compliance to 
the Central Government or such other officer appointed under sub -section ( 4), in such form as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(6) The owner, operator or master of any mechanically propelled vessel used or plying within inland 
waters, shall discharge the pollutants at the port reception facilities in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
55. Appointment of surveyor or officer to inspect .—(1) The State Government may appoint or 
authorise such officers as surveyors to inspect any cargo or passenger terminal lying within its respective 
jurisdiction.  
(2) The surveyor authorised under sub -section ( 1) may, at any reasonabl e time, enter and inspect any 
cargo or passenger terminal to — 
(a) ensure that the provisions of this Chapter are complied with;  
(b) verify whether such cargo or passenger terminal is equipped for pollution containment and 
removal, in conformity with the or der of the State Government or any of the rules made under this 
Chapter; and  
(c) satisfy himself of the adequacy of the measures taken to prevent pollution.  
(3) If the surveyor, on inspection, finds that the cargo or passenger terminal is not provided with  the 
required pollution containment equipment and pollutant removing materials, he shall give a notice in 
writing pointing out the deficiencies and the recommended remedial measures to rectify such deficiency, 
that is identified during the inspection, to t he owner or operator of such cargo or passenger terminal, as 
the case may be.  
(4) No owner or operator of such cargo or passenger terminal, as the case may be, served with the 
notice under sub -section ( 3), shall proceed with any work at such cargo or passenger terminal, until he 
obtains a certificate signed by the surveyor to the effect that the cargo or passenger terminal, is properly 
provided with the required pollution containment equipment and pollutant removing materials in 
conformity with the rul es made under this Chapter.  
56. Investigation into incidents of pollution .—(1) The State Government shall direct any designated 
authority or such other authorised officer appointed under Chapter XIII to conduct investigation into 
incidents of pollution.  
(2) The State Government shall update the Central Government with such information or report of the 
court, if so directed by such court concerned, on incidents of pollution that occurs within its jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER X  
WRECK AND SALVAGE  
57. Prohibition agai nst intentionally causing wreck .—The owner, operator, master or person in -
charge of a vessel plying in inland waters shall not intentionally abandon, desert, dump, throw overboard 
or jettison the vessel or property or parts or cargo, so as to cause wreck.  22 
 58. Receivers of wreck .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint or authorise any 
officer to act as receiver of wreck within the respective jurisdiction.  
(2) The owner, operator, master or person in -charge of vessel, property or cargo, which is wrecked, 
stranded or in distress or who has found any vessel, property or cargo wrecked, stranded or in distress in 
the inland waters, shall immediately inform, by all means of communication to the receiver of wreck in 
whose jurisdiction the vessel, pro perty or cargo is found to be wrecked, stranded or in distress.  
(3) The owner of the wreck, whose property or cargo, is wrecked or stranded or is in distress in the 
inland waters shall inform the receiver of wreck in writing of the finding thereof and of t he marks by 
which such wreck can be distinguished, and in cases, where the wreck is in possession of any person other 
than the owner, operator, master or person in -charge of vessel, property or cargo, such person shall 
deliver such wreck to the receiver of  wreck.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Chapter, the word “person” shall have the meaning assigned to 
it in clause (42) of  section 3  of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897).  
59. Powers of Central Government to make rules for Chapter X .—For the purposes of this 
Chapter, the — 
(a) powers and functions of the receiver of wreck;  
(b) responsibilities and obligations of the owner, operator, master or person in -charge of vessel, 
property or cargo with respect to the wreck;  
(c) measures adopted for the r emoval of obstruction to navigation;  
(d) disposal of wreck, including its sale and proceeds of unsold property;  
(e) measures to be adopted for protection of wreck, fouling of government moorings;  
(f) rights and duties of salvors and performance of salvage operations or resolution of disputes 
pertaining to amount payable to salvors; and  
(g) such other matter, which the Central Government may deem necessary for the efficient 
administration and removal of wrecks,  shall be such as may be prescribed by the Centr al Government.  
CHAPTER XI  
LIABILITY AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY  
60. Liability under Act .—(1) The owner, operator, master, a member of crew or an insurer shall be 
liable for the offences and contraventions of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) Where any person is beneficially interested otherwise than by way of mortgage or in the share in 
any mechanically propelled inland vessel registered in the name of some other person as owner, the 
person so interested, and the registered own er, shall be liable to all the pecuniary penalties imposed by 
this or any other Act on the owners of mechanically propelled inland vessels or shares therein.  
61. Apportionment of loss .—(1) Whenever by the fault of two or more mechanically propelled 
inland vessels, damage or loss is caused to one or more of them or to the cargo of one or more of them or 
to any property on board one or more of them, the liability to make good the damage or loss shall be in 
proportion to the degree in which each of such vessel  was at fault:  
Provided that — 
(a) if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it is not possible to establish different 
degrees of fault, the liability shall be apportioned equally;  
(b) nothing in this section shall operate so as to  render any vessel liable for any loss or damage to 
which such vessel has not contributed;  
(c) nothing in this section shall affect the liability of any person under any contract, or shall be 
construed as imposing any liability upon any person from which h e is exempted by any contract or by 23 
 the provisions of any law for the time being in force, or as affecting the right of any person to limit 
his liability in the manner provided by such law.  
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, reference to damage or loss caused by the fault of a mechanically 
propelled inland vessel shall be construed as including reference to any salvage or other expenses, 
consequent upon that fault, recoverable under the provisions of any law for the time being in force by way 
of damages.  
(3) The person who has suffered damage or injured or his representative may apply to any court 
having appropriate jurisdiction on the claim, for the detention or attachment of the vessel.  
62. Liability for personal injury, loss of life or pollution to env ironment .—(1) Where, loss of life 
or personal injuries is suffered, damage to property or pollution is caused by any person on any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel or any other vessel, owing to the fault of that vessel and of any other 
vessel or vessel s, the liability of the owners of such vessels concerned shall be joint and several.  
(2) No liability for any claim other than loss of life, personal injury or pollution, shall attach to the 
owner, operator, master, or a member of crew or insurer under thi s Chapter, if he proves that the cause for 
claim— 
(a) was a result of an act of war, hostility, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an 
exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or  
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission with in tent to cause such damage by any other 
person; or  
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of a State Government or other 
authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in exercise of its 
functions in th at behalf.  
63. Detention of mechanically propelled inland vessel .—The State Government may appoint or 
authorise any officer under this Chapter, for the purpose of detaining any mechanically propelled inland 
vessel in connection with a claim, or an offence under this Chapter, and the procedure thereof shall be 
such as may be prescribed by that Government.  
 64. Limitation of liability .— (1) The owner, operator, master or any person in -charge of a vessel or 
member of crew of any mechanically propelled vessel may limit the extent of his liability for — 
(a) claims in respect of loss of life or personal injury, or loss of, or damage to, property including 
damage to jetties, wharfs, harbour basins and waterways and aids to navigation, occurring on board or 
in direc t connection with the operation of such vessels or with salvage operations, and consequential 
loss resulting therefrom;  
(b) claims arising out of loss resulting from delay in the carriage of cargo and passengers or their 
luggage by inland waters;  
(c) claim s arising out of other loss resulting from infringement of rights other than contractual 
rights, occurring in direct connection with the operation of such vessel or salvage operations;  
(d) claims in respect of the raising, removal, destruction or rendering  harmless of a vessel or the 
cargo which is sunk, wrecked, stranded or abandoned;  
(e) claims of a person, other than the person liable, in respect of measures taken by such person in 
order to avert or minimise loss and for further loss caused by such measu re; 
(f) claims for the loss of life or personal injury to passengers of such vessel brought by or on 
behalf of any person — 
(i) under the contract of passenger carriage; or  
(ii) who, with the consent of the carrier, is accompanying a vessel for live animals  which 
are covered by a contract for the carriage of goods, carried in such vessel.  24 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no person shall be entitled to limit his liability 
for— 
(a) claims for salvage; or  
(b) claims stipulated as exempted  from the application of limitation of liability under any other 
law for the time being in force in India.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the act of invoking limitation of liability shall 
not be construed as constituting an admissi on of liability by any person who takes the defence.  
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, the liability of the owner or operator of a mechanically propelled 
inland vessel shall include the liability in an action brought against such vessels.  
(5) The limit s of liability and the criteria in determining compensation for any claim as provided 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The person entitled to limit liability under sub -section ( 1) may apply to the High  Court of 
respective jurisdiction for constituting a limitation fund for the consolidated rate as provided for under 
this Chapter.  
(7) Where a vessel or other property is detained in connection with a claim, covered under this 
Chapter, the High Court may o rder release of such vessel or other property, upon an application made by 
the person, who is entitled to limit their liability and by — 
(a) ensuring that such person, who is entitled to constitute the limitation fund has submitted his 
availability in perso n to the jurisdiction of the High Court; or  
(b) depositing sufficient fund or financial guarantee as determined by the High Court as security; 
or 
(c) constituting the limitation fund,  as the case may be.  
65. Non-applicability of limitation .— No person shall be entitled to limit the liability against any 
claim, if such claim has arisen due to intentional act or negligence of the person or his employee, who 
otherwise would have been entitled to limit his liability under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER XII  
INSURANCE  OF MECHANICALLY PROPELLED  VESSELS  PLYING IN INLAND WATERS  
66. Insurance to cover .— No mechanically propelled vessel shall be used for voyage in inland 
waters, unless there is in force — 
(a) a policy of insurance which shall cover liability that may be incu rred by the insured — 
(i) in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property caused 
by or arising out of the use of the mechanically propelled vessel;  
(ii) in respect of liability of operational pollution and accidental pollution of inland waters;  
(b) a policy of insurance in compliance of the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 (6 of 1991), if 
the mechanically propelled inland vessel is carrying or meant to carry, dangerous or hazardous goods;  
(c) a policy of insurance covering the mechanically propelled vessel to — 
(i) a value not less than the liability incurred; or  
(ii) entitle it to be covered under limitation of liability as provided under this Act, a value not 
less than the specified and applicable limitation amount : 
Provided that any policy of insurance issued with a value not less than the limitation of liability in 
force, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be effective for a period 
of twelve months after such commencement or till th e date of expiry of such policy, whichever is 
earlier.  25 
 67. Contractual liability not to cover .— Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, a 
policy shall not be required to cover any contractual liability of the insured that arises due to any 
performance or non -performance of a contract or of agreement in the capacity of a service provider.  
68. Issuance and terms of insurance policy .— (1) For the purposes of section 66, the policy of 
insurance issued shall be a policy, which — 
(a) is issued by an au thorised insurer;  
(b) insures the mechanically propelled inland vessel, any person or any classes of persons 
specified in the policy to the extent specified in section 66; and  
(c) is a certificate of insurance issued by the insurer to the insured in such form and content, and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The terms and conditions to be incorporated in the contract of insurance entered between insurer 
and insured to cover the risks as provided in section 66 s hall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
69. Duty to indemnify and direct action against insurer .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any law for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a policy of insurance under this sectio n shall be 
liable to indemnify the insured or any person, as specified in the policy in respect of any liability which 
the policy purports to cover in the case of the insured or that person.  
(2) Any claim for compensation against the loss or damage under t his Act and covered by the 
insurance may be brought directly against the insurer in respect of the liability incurred by the registered 
owner.  
70. Effect of death on certain causes of action .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  section 
306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), the death of a person in whose favour a certificate of 
insurance had been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise to a claim 
under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to th e survival of any cause of action arising out of 
the said event against his estate or against the insurer.  
71. Effect of certificate of insurance .—When an insurer has issued a certificate of insurance in 
respect of a contract of insurance between the insur er and the insured person, then, — 
(a) if and so long as the policy described in the certificate has not been issued by the insurer to the 
insured, the insurer shall, as between himself and any other person except the insured, be deemed to 
have issued to the insured person a policy of insuran ce conforming in all respects with the description 
and particulars stated in such certificate; and  
(b) if the insurer has issued to the insured the policy described in the certificate, but the actual 
terms of the policy are less favourable to the person cl aiming under or by virtue of the policy against 
the insurer either directly or through the insured than the particulars of the policy as stated in the 
certificate, the policy shall, as between the insurer and any other person except the insured, be 
deemed to be in terms conforming in all respects with the particulars stated in the said certificate.  
72. Transfer of certificate of insurance .—Where a person in whose favour the certificate of 
insurance has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this C hapter transfers to another person, 
the ownership of the mechanically propelled vessel covered under this Chapter, in respect of which such 
insurance was taken together with the policy of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and 
the pol icy described in the certificate shall be deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to 
whom the mechanically propelled inland vessel is transferred with effect from the date of its transfer.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereb y clarified that such deemed transfer shall include 
transfer of rights and liabilities covered under the said certificate of insurance and the policy of insurance.  
73. Powers of Central Government to make rules for Chapter XII .—The Central Government 
shall, by rules made in this behalf, specify the terms, conditions and procedures to be complied with by 
the insurers and insured including — 
(a) cover note of insurance and its validity;  26 
 (b) rights and duties of the insured;  
(c) procedures and processes in volved in processing of claims;  
(d) duties and obligations of the insurers to satisfy the judgments and awards;  
(e) rights of claimants, liability of the insured and the insurers in special circumstances such as 
the insured becomes insolvent and the proced ures to be followed;  
(f) procedures, processes and minimum terms of conditions for the settlement between the 
insurers and insured persons;  
(g) procedures to be followed in the transfer of certificate of insurance; and  
(h) such other matters directly or in directly related to insurance of mechanically propelled 
vessels, for the purposes of effective implementation and administration of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER XIII  
INQUIRY INTO CASUALITY, ACCIDENT OR WRECK  
74. Reporting of casualty, accident, wreck, etc .— (1) The State Government, may by notification, 
appoint any designated authority for the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) The owner, operator or master of a mechanically propelled inland vessel, shall give information of 
any wreck, abandonment, damage, casualty, a ccident, explosion or loss occurred to or on board such a 
vessel while in the inland waters, to the officer in -charge of the nearest police station and to the 
designated authority appointed under sub -section ( 1), in such form and manner as may be prescribe d by 
the State Government.  
(3) The designated authority shall at once report the contents of the information referred to in sub -
section ( 2) to the District Magistrate.  
(4) The officer in -charge of the police station shall, on receipt of information referred to in sub -
section ( 2), investigate into the matter and submit a report to the jurisdictional Judicial Magistrate in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(5) The Judicial Magistrate may,  on receiving the report referred to in sub -section ( 4), take action as 
he may deem fit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVI.  
75. Preliminary enquiry by designated authority and inquiry by District Magistrate .— (1) The 
designated authority may,  in pursuance of the information referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 74, 
conduct a preliminary enquiry and submit a report thereof to the District Magistrate, who shall transmit 
the same to the concerned State Government.  
(2) The State Government may , on receipt of the report referred to in sub -section ( 1), if deemed 
necessary, direct the District Magistrate to submit an additional report to it and send a copy thereof to the 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class referred to in sub -section ( 4) of sect ion 74 through the jurisdictional 
police.  
(3) The powers of the District Magistrate referred to in sub -section ( 2) and the procedures to be 
followed by him in holding the inquiry for submission of additional report shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the  State Government.  
76. Assessors .—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the State Government may appoint and 
maintain a list of assessors, which may be revised from time to time.  
(2) The State Government shall, by rules made in this behalf, specify the qua lifications, criteria and 
consideration, fees or charges for the assessors, who are conversant with the maritime affairs and have 27 
 experience in the merchant service or in the navigation of the mechanically propelled inland vessels and 
willing to act as an assessor.  
(3) The District Magistrate may, for the purposes of assisting in the inquiry under this Chapter, 
appoint any number of assessors, from the list of assessors provided to him by the State Government.  
(4) In every inquiry, other than the one specified in sub -section ( 3), the District Magistrate may, if he 
thinks fit, appoint an assessor, for the purposes of such inquiry, any person.  
(5) Every person appointed as an assessor under this section shall assist the District Magistrate in the 
inquiry  and deliver his opinion as may be sought for, which shall be recorded in the proceedings.  
77. Report of District Magistrate to be notified by State Government .—(1) The District 
Magistrate shall, in the case of every inquiry under this Chapter, make a full  report of the conclusions at 
which he has arrived, together with the evidence recorded and the written opinion of any assessor.  
(2) The State Government shall, on receipt of the report referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the District 
Magistrate, cause it to be published by notification in its Official Gazette.  
78. Powers of District Magistrate subsequent to inquiry .— (1) The District Magistrate may, after 
inquiry, recommend in his report for cancellation or suspension or confiscation of a certificate of 
competency or a certificate of service granted to a master, crew or engineer by the State Government 
under Chapter VI, if such District Magistrate finds that — 
(a) the accident or casualty, including loss, stranding or abandonment of, or damage to, any 
mechan ically propelled inland vessel, or loss of life, has been caused by the wrongful act or default of 
such master or engineer;  
(b) such master or engineer is incompetent or has been guilty of any gross act of drunkenness, 
tyranny or other misconduct, or in a case of collision, has failed to render such assistance or give such 
information or notice as may be required under this Act.  
(2) At the conclusion of the inquiry, or as soon thereafter as possible, the District Magistrate shall 
state in open sitting, the decision arrived at by him with respect to the cancellation or suspension or 
confiscation of any certificate of competency or a certificate of service and, if suspension is ordered, the 
period for which the certificate is suspended.  
(3) Without prejudice t o the provisions of this section, the District Magistrate may also make such 
order and require such security in respect of the costs of the matter as he may deem fit and necessary in 
the circumstances of the case.  
79. Power of State Government to suspend, cancel and confiscate certificate .—(1) The State 
Government, in whose jurisdiction the certificate of competency or a certificate of service was granted 
under Chapter VI, may cancel or suspend any such certificate or, in the event of the vessel being found  in 
the jurisdiction of another State Government, such State Government may confiscate the certificate, if, — 
(a) on any inquiry made under this Chapter, the District Magistrate reports for cancellation or 
suspension or confiscation of that certificate unde r section 78; or  
(b) the holder of such certificate is proved to have been convicted of any non -bailable offence; or  
(c) the holder of such certificate is proved to have deserted his vessel or has absented himself 
without leave and without sufficient reaso n, from his vessel or from his duty; or  
(d) in the case of a person holding any designation as provided by the certificate of competency 
or certificate of service, is or has become, in the opinion of the State Government, unfit to act in such 
designation, as the case may be.  28 
 (2) Every person whose certificate of competency or a certificate of service is suspended or cancelled 
under this Chapter shall deliver it to such person as the State Government, which suspended or cancelled 
it, may direct.  
(3) If any State Government cancels, suspends or confiscates the certificate of competency or a 
certificate of service granted under Chapter VI, the proceedings and the fact of confiscation and 
recommendation for suspension or cancellation, shall be reported to the S tate Government which has 
originally issued, granted or endorsed such certificates.  
(4) The State Government may, at any time, revoke any order of suspension or cancellation or 
confiscation which it may have made under this Chapter, or grant a certificate anew, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, to any person whose certificate it has so cancelled and such certificate granted anew, 
shall have the same effect as a certificate of competency granted under this Act after examination.  
CHAPTER XIV  
REGULATION O F TRADE PRACTICES  
80. Powers of Central Government to protect interests of service providers and service users .— 
The Central Government may, prescribe the minimum standards, terms and conditions to protect the 
interests of service providers and service use rs and to ensure safety of such persons.  
81. Prohibited goods and dangerous goods .—The Central Government shall, by notification, 
declare the list of dangerous goods that may be carried subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed 
by it, and prohibited  goods that are prohibited from being carried on any class or category of 
mechanically propelled inland vessels, while plying in the inland waters.  
82. Trade permission and endorsement of certificates of foreign vessels .—(1) No vessel registered 
in any cou ntry other than India shall be permitted to be used or employed for the purposes of, carriage of 
goods, transportation of passengers, storage units, accommodation, floating units or for such other 
purposes within the inland waters, unless such vessel has s ecured prior permission from the Central 
Government for its use or employment for such purposes and subject to such terms and conditions as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that, where the Central Government has entered or in the event  of that Government entering 
into bilateral or multilateral treaties pertaining to the inland navigation, whereby the permission is 
provided to the vessels belonging to foreign countries to ply within inland waters of India, the Central 
Government or the S tate Government, as the case may be, shall impose or apply such vessels belonging to 
the foreign countries, with the same conditions to the service providers in India.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), any certificate granted by any other foreign co untry in 
accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force in that country corresponding to the 
provisions as provided in Chapters IV, V and VI under this Act may, on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, for the grant of a similar certificate or licence under this Act, be 
endorsed by — 
(a) any State Government in India; or  
(b) with the general or special sanction and subject to such other terms and conditions of such 
State Government, by any authority compe tent to grant a similar certificate under this Act.  
(3) Upon endorsement of any such certificate as provided in sub -section ( 2), it shall have effect for 
such period and to such extent as may be prescribed by the Central Government and shall be treated as if 
it had been granted under this Act.  
 
 29 
 CHAPTER XV  
PILOTAGE, VESSEL DETENTION AND DEVELOPMENT FUND  
83. Pilotage .— (1) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the requirement of pilotage 
in whole or part of inland waterways declared as national waterways.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, specify the requirement of pilotage in whole or part 
or any stretch of designated inland waterways or such passages that lie within the respective territory of 
such State Governments and in  respect of which the Central Government has not specified under                  
sub-section ( 1). 
84. Certified master to be deemed pilot under Act 15 of 1908 .— Subject to the provisions of 
section 83, every master of any mechanically propelled inland ves sel, who possesses a master's certificate 
granted under this Act and in force, shall, in ports to which  section 31 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 has 
been extended, be deemed, for the purposes of that section, to be the pilot of the mechanically propelled 
inland vessel of which he is in -charge.  
85. Vessel detention and forfeiture .— (1)The State Government or any officer authorised under this 
Act may, detain, forfeit or remove from the inland waters, any mechanically propelled inland vessel, 
which is required  to be registered under the provisions of this Act, if found — 
(a) plying or being used in inland waters without a valid certificate of registration;  
(b) plying without a valid certificate of survey;  
(c) plying with passengers beyond the permitted carrying capacity;  
(d) to have not affixed the registration number assigned to such vessels as provided under this 
Act; 
(e) not complying with the manning requirements under Chapter VI;  
(f) not complying with the provisions of Chapter VIII;  
(g) to act in contravent ion to the provisions of Chapter X;  
(h) not in compliance with the provisions of Chapter XII;  
(i) to carry dangerous goods or prohibited goods in contravention to the provisions of section 81 
or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The owner, operator or any suc h person recognised as responsible for the vessel under detention, 
shall pay the respective and applicable fees and charges for the safe custody and maintenance of the 
detained or forfeited vessel, which shall be pre -condition for release of the vessel and  which if unpaid, 
shall create a lien over such vessel to comply with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Upon compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, and after 
rectifying the mistakes that lead to detention, the State Governm ent shall, without any unreasonable 
delay, release the vessel and her custody to the owner, operator or any such person recognised as 
responsible for the vessel under this Act.  
(4) Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this Act, the procedures for dete ntion, formality, fees 
and conditions to be followed and observed by the concerned officer or authority or court, appointed or 
authorised or constituted under this Act, for the purpose of detaining a vessel, shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(5) An officer so authorised to enter any vessel may, for the purpose of enforcing the order of 
detention or forfeiture, call to his aid, any police officer or any other person authorised under this Act or 
such other laws in force in India.   30 
 86. Constitution of Development Fund .—(1)There shall be a Fund constituted by the State 
Government to be called the Development Fund, to be utilised for — 
(a) meeting emergency preparedness;  
(b) meeting containment of pollution caused by discharge of oil, mix tures, obnoxious substances, 
chemicals and other noxious and harmful substances, to preserve and protect inland waters;  
(c) supporting, part or whole of expenses of owners or economically backward sector involved in 
activities of trade and living depending  solely on inland waters;  
(d) removal of unidentified wreck or obstruction affecting and impeding navigation; and  
(e) boosting up development works of inland water navigation with respect to safety and 
convenience of conveyance.  
(2) For the purposes of con stitution of the Development Fund under sub -section ( 1), endeavour shall 
be made to design schemes of contribution from — 
(a) the State Government;  
(b) stake holders;  
(c) the amount collected from sale of wreck or cargo or remains thereof after deducting the 
expenses incurred;  
(d) excess fund out of judicial sale of vessels or any property or cargo after meeting the expenses 
incurred or set -off against the court to meet damages or functioning of the court or administrative 
machinery; and  
(e) part or propor tionate disbursement of fees collected by the respective State Government as 
provided in this Chapter.  
CHAPTER XVI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
87. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever, contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be 
punishable with penalty as mentioned in the third column of the Table provided in sub -section (2).  
(2) The classification of offences for contravention of the provisions of this Act and the 
corresponding penalties therefor shall be as provided in the following Table, name ly:— 
 
Section  Offence  Penalty  
(1) (2) (3) 
8 Any owner, operator or construction yard, 
found guilty of construction, alteration or 
modification of mechanically propelled inland 
vessel in contravention of section 8.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for every non -compliance found.  
14 (1) Owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel, using 
such vessel, without a valid certificate of 
survey has acted in contravention of                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 14.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the first offence and twenty -
five thousand rupees for subsequent 
offences.  
 31 
  
Section  Offence  Penalty  
(1) (2) (3) 
18 (1) Owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel 
proceeding on any voyage or use a 
mechanically propelled inland vessel required 
to be registered, for any service, without a 
valid certificate of registration and in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 18.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the fir st offence and fifty 
thousand rupees for subsequent offences.  
19 (1) Owner or master who does not carry a valid 
certificate of registration or not making the 
same available for inspection, has acted in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 19.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for every non -compliance found.  
24 (3) Owner not displaying the official number on 
the conspicuous part of a vessel has acted in 
contravention of sub -section ( 3) of section 24.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees.  
27 Owner, operator or any person responsible for 
the operation of the vessel, has acted in 
contravention of section 27.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the first offence and twenty -
five thousand rupees for subsequent 
offences.  
28 (2) Owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel not 
registering the details of alterations that are 
mandated to be registered as specified in sub -
section ( 2) of section 28.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the fir st offence and twenty -
five thousand rupees for subsequent 
offences.  
29 Owner or operator of any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel, who does not comply 
with the requirements or has acted in 
contravention of section 29.  Fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day of non -compliance.  
30 Owner of any mechanically propelled inland 
vessel, has acted in contravention of                     
section 30.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees per day or imprisonment which 
may extend to one  year, or with both.  
32 (1) Owner of any mechanically propelled inland 
vessel, has acted in contravention of sub -
section ( 1) of section 32.  Fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees for every day of non -compliance.  
34 (2) Owner or operator on whose v essel, persons 
under the age of eighteen years are employed, 
has acted in contravention of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 34.  Fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees for every day of non -compliance 
or imprisonment not exceeding six 
months, or with both.  
35 Owner or operator of any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel without complying 
with the specified minimum manning scale 
has acted in contravention to section 35.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for the first offence and twenty -
five thousa nd rupees for subsequent 
offences.  
40 (1) and 
(4) The holders of certificate of competency, has 
acted in contravention to the provisions of this 
Act or not surrendered the suspended, 
cancelled or varied certificate issued under 
non-submission of suspended  or cancelled 
certificates.  Fine up to five thousand rupees per day 
or imprisonment extending up to six 
months, or with both.  
 32 
  
Section  Offence  Penalty  
(1) (2) (3) 
44 Owner or operator or any person responsible 
for the operation of special category vessel, 
which does not comply with the provisions of 
Chapter VII.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for every day of non -compliance 
or imprisonment extending up to six 
months, or with both.  
47 Owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled vessel registered, 
recognised or identified under this Act, for not 
equipping the vessels or exhibiting the lights 
and signals specified under Chapter VIII.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupee s for the first offence and twenty -
five thousand rupees for subsequent 
offences.  
48 Owner, operator or master not ensuring safe 
navigation or causing damage due to non -
observance of regulations.  Fine which may extend to twenty -five 
thousand rupees.  
49 and 
50 (1) Owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled vessel plying in inland 
waters abstaining from proceeding to render 
assistance after answering to the distress 
signal.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees.  
   
51 (2) The owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel 
proceeding to conduct any voyage without 
complying with the requirements of 
navigation aids, life -saving appliances, fire 
detection and extinguishing appliances and 
communication appliances as specified under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 51.  Fine which may extend up to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
52 (2) and 
(3) The owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled vessel causing 
pollution by discharging or dumping of 
pollutants in inland waters.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees.  
53 (4) The owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled vessel, who are 
required under this Act to possess a valid 
prevention of pollution certificate, plying or 
using the vessel without the said  valid 
certificate.  Fine which may extend to twenty -five 
thousand rupees.  
54 (2) and 
(5) The owner or operator of any reception 
facility who does not comply with the 
standards and obligations stipulated.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees.  
55 (4) The owner or operator of the terminal who 
operates without complying with the notice 
issued under sub -section ( 4) of section 55.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees per day of non -compliance 
beyond period of notice.  
57 Any owner, operator or  any person who 
intentionally cause wreck within inland 
waters.  Fine amounting to fifty thousand rupees 
and imprisonment which may extend to 
three years.  
58 (2) Any person who is guilty of offence 
committed by contravention of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 5 8. Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees.  33 
  
 
Section  Offence  Penalty  
(1) (2) (3) 
66 Any owner or master plying any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel without a valid 
insurance as provided under section 66.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees and detention of the vessel till 
certificate of insurance is procured.  
74 (2) The owner, operator or master of any 
mechanically propelled inland vessel not 
complying with sub -section ( 2) of section 74.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees.  
79 (2) Any person who holds a certificate issued 
under Chapter VI and fails to surrender 
suspended or cancelled certificates.  Fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees for every day of non -submission.  
80 Any person, in the capacity of a service 
provid er or a service user, who acts in 
contravention of section 80.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees.  
82 Master or operator of any foreign vessels 
acting in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 82.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or with both.  
83 Owner, operator or master of mechanically 
propelled inland vessel, who does not comply 
with the requirement of pilotage in 
contravention of section 83.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or imprisonment which may 
extend to three years, or with both.  
97 Any person employed on inland vessel for 
neglect or refusal to join or desertion of vessel 
in violation of his obligation as provided 
under section 97.  Forfeiture of a sum n ot exceeding two 
days' pay, and in addition for every 
twenty -four hours of absence, either a 
sum not exceeding six days' pay or any 
expenses properly incurred in hiring a 
substitute, from his wages and also to 
imprisonment which may extend to two 
months.  
102 Any person found guilty of causing 
obstruction or has acted in contravention of 
section 102.  Fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees or imprisonment which may 
extend to three years, or with both.  
(3) Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
but for which an offence is not specifically provided in this Act, shall be punishable with fine not 
exceeding three lakh rupees or with imprisonment up to a term which may extend to three years, or with  
both.  
(4) Where the owner or master of any mechanically propelled inland vessel is convicted of an offence 
under this Act or any rule made thereunder, committed on board, or in relation to that mechanically 
propelled vessel, and is sentenced to pay a fine , the Magistrate who passes the sentence may direct the 
amount of the fine to be levied by distress and sale of the mechanically propelled vessel, or its 
appurtenance so much thereof as is necessary.  
(5) Where an inland vessel has been used in contraventio n of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, the details of the offence, the offender and the vessel shall be recorded in such form and 
manner, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification.  34 
 (6) The State Government shall a ppoint courts not inferior to that of a Magistrate of the first class, for 
the purpose of conducting trial of any person who is charged of any offence as provided under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder.  
88. Offences by company, limited liability partnership firm or any such arrangement .—(1) 
Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company or a limited liability partnership firm 
or any such arrangement, every person who, at the time the offence  was committed was in -charge of, and 
was responsible to the company or the limited liability partnership firm or any such arrangement, for the 
conduct of the business, and the company or the limited liability partnership firm or any such 
arrangement, shall  be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was commit ted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company or a limited liability pa rtnership firm or any such arrangement and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on 
the part of, any director, manager, secretary or partner or other officer of the company or the limited 
liability partnership firm or any such arrangement, as the case may be, such director, manager, secretary 
or partner or other officer, as the case may be; shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded aga inst and punished accordingly.  
89. Fees, additional fee, payment and collection .—(1) Unless otherwise specified, the State 
Government shall collect, the fees and additional fees for the services provided under this Act and any 
other charges or payment made  to it against payments towards penalties, at such rates and intervals, as 
may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) The State Government shall appoint or authorise such officers, or constitute such offices within its 
jurisdictions, by notification, t o act as single point collection offices within the districts or ports, 
considering proximity and convenience of remittance.  
(3) The procedures, forms and format of receipts, maintenance of accounts and any other matter that 
is necessary for the purpose of  the remittance, collection, accounts and accountability of collected fees, 
additional fees, charges or payment against penalties of pecuniary nature shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(4) The owner, operators or their representati ves, as the case may be, shall remit the fees or additional 
fees in such manner and at such rates as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(5) All fees payable under this Act may be recovered as fine under this Act.  
90. Cognizance of offence .— No cour t shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, except 
on a complaint in writing made by the Central Government or any officer authorised by the State 
Government, as the case may be, for this purpose.  
CHAPTER XVII  
NON-MECHANICALLY PROPELLED INLAND VESSEL  
91. Local self -governance .— (1) The State Government may authorise any of its department (herein 
in this Chapter referred to as the authorised department) to administer and implement the provisions of 
this Chapter.  
(2) The office of the authorised department shall be located at such places which are accessible to 
owners, operators of non -mechanically propelled inland vessel and service users of such vessels.  
(3) The offices of the authorised department shall in the order  of hierarchy of power, be at district, 
taluk and panchayat or village level, or any other hierarchy as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, and shall exercise the powers and functions as may be prescribed by that Government, 
which shall include the powers and functions to — 35 
 (a) enrol the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel under this Chapter;  
(b) collate data with regard to the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel enrolled under this 
Act and report it to the higher authority in the hierarchy of power;  
(c) administer the welfare fund constituted under this Chapter in accordance with such authority 
and obligation;  
(d) advise and conduct awareness programmes  for assisting the owners, operators or service users 
of non -mechanically propelled inland vessel enrolled under this Act; and  
(e) perform such other functions as may be assigned under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
92. Obligation to enroll.—(1) The owner or operator may enrol, by submitting the details of the 
ownership of non -mechanically propelled inland vessel, undertaking that the vessel is put into motion by 
solely employing human labour and such other details as may be prescribed by the State Government, at 
the office of the authorised department, which is located nearest to the place of residence of the owner or 
area of plying of the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) The form prescribed by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the 
respective vernacular language, apart from Hindi or English, as the case may be.  
(3) For the purposes of identification and categorisation of non -mechanically propelled inland vessels, 
to be enrolled in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall publish 
such criteria for categorisation which may include the size, purpose of employment, age, construction, 
design or such other cr iteria of the vessels.  
(4) The enrolment of non -mechanically propelled inland vessels shall be a prerequisite for such 
vessels to be entitled for the benefits and preferential treatment accorded under this Chapter.  
(5) The details of the enrolled vessels s hall be recorded in the registry of enrolment and be reported 
by the offices of lowest order in the hierarchy of power to the highest hierarchy and the collated list of 
enrolled vessels shall be maintained by the office of District Magistrate or such offic er appointed or 
authorised under this Chapter, for the said purpose.  
(6) The State Government shall maintain a central data base to record the details of the non -
mechanically propelled inland vessel enrolled within the respective jurisdiction, in such form  and manner 
as may be prescribed by it.  
(7) The lowest ranking officer of the office of the authorised department shall report of any change to 
the registry of enrolment maintained by him and bring to the notice of the authority higher in the 
hierarchical order, and the changes shall be brought out accordingly, in every such register maintained by 
the respective authorities including the central data base maintained by the Principal Secretary or 
Secretary of the State Government.  
93. Certificate of enrolmen t and marking of vessel .— (1) The officer of the authorised department 
appointed or authorised to maintain the registry under this Chapter, shall issue a certificate of enrolment 
to the non -mechanically propelled inland vessels that have enrolled in the re gistry of enrolment.  
(2) The certificate of enrolment shall be issued, in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the 
respective State Government, and details to be specified in such certificate shall include — 
(a) name, permanent address as given in the Unique Identification Document issued by Unique 
Identification Authority of India, electoral identification document or such other document of the 
owner, as may be prescribed by the State Government;  
(b) details such as year of construction, laying of keel or such other information;  
(c) details of design, if identified or categorised under this Chapter;  
(d) details of officer issuing or granting the certificate; and  
(e) number given to the vessels enrolled by the issuing authority.  36 
 (3) The authorised de partment in every State shall issue a number to the non -mechanically propelled 
inland vessel enrolled within the respective jurisdiction, which shall be unique for the purpose of 
identification of enrolment with the authorised department of the respective State.  
(4) The number so issued under sub -section ( 3) shall be exhibited on a conspicuous part of the non -
mechanically propelled inland vessel in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the respective 
State Government.  
94. Standards of construction an d safety .—(1) The basic minimum standards that may be 
reasonably observed during the construction of any non -mechanically propelled inland vessel, shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall specify, the 
standards of construction, which any class or category of non -mechanically propelled inland vessel shall 
comply with, in such manner as may be prescribed by it:  
Provided that the standards prescribed by the  State Government shall be in harmony with the 
traditional knowledge and practices passed on as customary or ancestral means that are applied by skilled 
and talented persons involved in the designing and construction of non -mechanically propelled inland 
vessel. 
(3) The State Government may specify the minimum safety gears and equipment by notification in 
the Official Gazette with which the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel shall be equipped with for 
the purpose of ensuring safety of such vessels.  
(4) The State Government may provide for standards of overhauling, modifying, altering or refitting 
the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel for the purpose of ensuring safe navigation.  
(5) The non -mechanically propelled inland vessels enrolled under this  Act, shall comply with the 
safety standards as stipulated under this Chapter or the rules made in this regard.  
(6) For the purposes of ensuring safe navigation of non -mechanically propelled inland vessels, the 
State Government may, by notification, specif y the routes, areas or stretch of inland waters that are 
prohibited from being used or subject to such terms and conditions, for the navigation of non -
mechanically propelled inland vessel.  
95. Power of State Government to make rules to regulate non -mechani cally propelled inland                    
vessels .— (1) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, specify the measures to regulate 
non-mechanically propelled inland vessels.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the State Government may make rules for the following, 
namely:— 
(a) for prevention and minimising pollution caused by the non -mechanically propelled inland 
vessels;  
(b) for removal of obstructions to safe navigation;  
(c) measures that may be adopted to avert accidents and casualty; and  
(d) any other measure which the State Government may deem fit in implementing the provisions 
of this Chapter.  
96. Constitution of welfare fund .— (1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
welfare fund at district level, for allocation of such fund to assist the non -mechanically propelled inland 
vessels enrolled under this Chapter.  
(2) Any officer appointed or authorised under this Chapter to be in -charge of the fund for the non -
mechanically propelled in land vessel shall, with the previous approval in writing of the respective State 
Government or such other authority appointed for the said purpose, utilise the fund to — 
(a) create awareness and conduct knowledge dissemination sessions for educating the own er, 
operator and service user on improvements required for safe navigation;  37 
 (b) provide equipment and devices of safety and navigation at a subsidised rate;  
(c) provide support or relief during casualties, accidents or such emergencies; and  
(d) for such other purposes as it may deem fit.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
97. Desertion and absence without leave .— No person employed or engaged in any capacity on 
board a mechanically propelled vessel shall — 
(a) neglect or refuse, without reasonable cause, to join  his mechanically propelled vessel or to 
proceed on any voyage in his vessel;  
(b) cause to be absent from his vessel or from his duty at any time without leave and without 
sufficient cause;  
(c) desert from his mechanically propelled vessel;  
(d) fail to act  or behave with discipline befitting his duty and mandate.  
98. General powers of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may 
make rules for — 
(a) implementation of standards for the use of special category of vessels within inland 
waterways;  
(b) providing the requirements and standards of — 
(i) river information services;  
(ii) vessel traffic and transport management, safety and information services;  
(iii) vessel tracing and tracking information;  
(iv) to tackle calamities and furthera nce of emergency preparedness;  
(v) to quarantine the vessels and to adopt such other measures to effectively control any 
epidemic or disease of contagious nature;  
(c) enforcing standards to avoid and tackle pollution arising in inland waterways;  
(d) exemption, inclusion or extension of the application of any or all the provisions of this Act to 
any vessel registered, recognised or identified and intended to ply, or plying in the inland waters;  
(e) any other matter as it may deem fit and necessary in  the proper implementation of this Act for 
the purposes of ensuring safe navigation, safety of life and prevention of pollution caused by inland 
vessel.  
(2) For the purposes of administration of the notifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1), the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall authorise or appoint officers by 
notification.  
99. Emergency preparedness .— (1) Every State Government may, appoint or authorise the advisory 
committee or officers, by notification, to take adequ ate measures, as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, to minimise or counter emergency.  
(2) The owner, operator, master, crew or any other person connected with inland vessel plying in 
inland waters shall upon finding or apprehending a situation of c risis, which could adversely affect or is 
adversely affecting the safety of navigation, safety of human life or preservation of inland waters, inform 
or report the advisory committee or such other officers, appointed under sub -section ( 1) having respective  
jurisdiction or jurisdictions over such crisis that is found or is anticipated to affect adversely.  
(3) The advisory committee or officers, who are appointed or authorised under sub -section ( 1), on 
receipt of information under sub -section ( 2), or as direc ted by the Central Government or the State 38 
 Government or on their own initiative, may record the crisis as emergency and, shall adopt such measures 
as prescribed under sub -section ( 1), and such other measures which are feasible and in best of the 
judgment necessary to minimise or counter such emergency.  
(4) The advisory committee or officers, appointed or authorised under sub -section ( 1) may request the 
navy, coast guard, any other emergency force, or any inland vessel available for such assistance as 
necessary.  
(5) No mechanically propelled inland vessel directed or acting voluntarily in rendering assistance as 
mentioned in sub -section ( 4) shall be bound by the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(6) Any mechanically propelled inland v essel acting voluntarily, for the purpose of saving life or 
vessel or providing basic amenities, shall report to the advisory committee or officers appointed or 
authorised under sub -section ( 1) regarding the presence and reasons for the acts in writing, at  the earliest 
possible.  
(7) The advisory committee or officers appointed or authorised under sub -section ( 1) shall disburse 
all basic amenities necessary and essential as it may deem fit, to the persons or vessels affected by such 
emergency.  
(8) The adviso ry committee or officers appointed or authorised under sub -section ( 1) shall report to 
the Central Government or the State Government, the complete description of the events, consequences 
and such measures adopted under sub -section ( 3) and the effectivenes s of such measures in countering the 
emergency.  
100. Removal of lawful obstruction .— (1) If any obstruction or impediment to the navigation of any 
inland water has been lawfully made or has become lawful by reason of the long continuance of such 
obstructio n or impediment or otherwise, the authorised officer shall report the same for the information of 
the State Government and shall, with the sanction of the State Government, cause the same to be removed 
or altered, making reasonable compensation to the pers on suffering damage by such removal or alteration.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of or concerning such compensation shall be determined according to the 
provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013).  
101. Validity of certificates issued under laws other than this Act .— (1) Every certificate issued in 
respect of any person or vessel, under any other enactment in force in India, by the Central Government, 
shall be valid and effective as a certificate issued under this Act and the relevant provisions of this Act 
shall apply in relation to such persons or vessel as they apply to, any person who has been issued with a 
certificate  under Chapter VI or any mechanically propelle d inland vessel registered, recognised or 
identified under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the State Government may impose additional 
conditions and requirements for the purpose of recognition of certificates as provided under                           
sub-section ( 1). 
102. Obstruction to officer appointed or authorised .— No person shall wilfully  cause obstruction 
or attempt to obstruct any authority or officer appointed under this Act in exercise of the respective 
functions and powers conferred upon such authority or officer, or in the discharge of any duty imposed by 
or under this Act; by abstin ence, failure to facilitate inspection, or restraining or physically objecting the 
entry or movement or non -production of books or records as and when demanded by such authority or 
authorised officers.  
103. Place of trial .— Whoever contravenes any of the p rovisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, shall be triable for the offence in any place where he may be found or at the place of 
occurrence or at the place in the State where the offence has been committed or a place which the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, by notification, specify in this behalf, or any 
other place in which he might be tried under any other enactment for the time being in force.  
104. Composition of offences .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence punishable with 39 
 imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on an application of the accused 
person, either before or aft er the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by competent authority or 
in the event of the matter being referred to the court of competent jurisdiction, such offence may be 
compounded by the competent authority with the permission of such court.  
(2) The competent authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound an 
offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the appropriate Government.  
(3) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be mad e in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(5) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the competent authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) in writing, to the 
notice of the court in which the prosecution is pending a nd on such notice of the composition of the 
offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
(6) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the competent authority referred to in sub -
section ( 1), shal l be liable to pay a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for 
the offence, in addition to such fine.  
(7) No offence punishable under the provisions of this Act shall be compounded except under and in 
accordance with the provisions of this section.  
105. Appeal .— (1) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by 
the officers or authorities under this Act, may appeal to the State Government against refusal, suspension, 
cancellation, detentio n, removal or such other order, issued under this Act, within thirty days from the 
date of receipt of such order.  
(2) The State Government shall cause notice of every such appeal to be given to concerned officers or 
authorities whose order is made the subj ect matter of the appeal, and after giving an opportunity to the 
appellant; shall pass appropriate order by recording reasons thereof, which shall be final.  
106. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) For the purposes of effective 
implementation of  the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rule s may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the centralised record to be maintained in e -portal, for recording the data and details of vessel, 
vessel registration, crew, manning, certificates issued, reception facilities and such ot her data to be 
recorded under clause ( f) of section 3;  
(b) the requirements for compliance to be specified in a cover note for the purpose of issuance of 
certificate of insurance under clause ( g) of section 3;  
(c) the procedure to be laid down and rates to  be specified so as to calculate the rate of extent of 
liability within which the owner or such other persons entitled under this Act, may limit the liability 
or be permitted to limit or cap the liability arising out of claims under clause ( t) of section 3 ; 
(d) the standard and number of persons required for safe manning and navigation of vessels under 
clause ( z) of section 3;  
(e) the classification, criteria for such classification and standards of design, construction, fitness 
and crew accommodation to cl assify or categorise any mechanically propelled inland vessel under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  40 
 (f) the manner of carrying out construction and any alteration or modification of mechanically 
propelled inland vessels with the prior approval of design from  the designated authority under                  
section 8;  
(g) the standards for type and periodicity of surveys for all mechanically propelled inland vessels, 
which are newly constructed and already in service under sub -section ( 1) and the form and conte nt of 
request for survey to be submitted by the applicant under sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(h) the minimum criteria and qualifications for the appointment of surveyors, which the State 
Governments shall adopt in the appointment of surveyors under sectio n 10;  
(i) the form of application for conducting survey to be submitted by owners, masters or 
construction yard under sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(j) the form and contents of the declaration of survey of a mechanically propelled inland vessel 
and the time period for which such certificate shall be valid, under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(k) the form of the certificate of survey including any particulars or terms and conditions under                 
sub-section ( 3) of section 12;  
(l) the form of pro visional certificate of survey and the period of validity provided under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(m) the terms and conditions to be complied with for permitting any mechanically propelled 
vessels registered under such laws of countr ies other than India; which shall only be permitted to ply 
within the inland waters under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(n) the form, contents or particulars of the book of registry as provided under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 21;  
(o) the fo rm and manner for maintenance of central data base for inland vessels by the officers 
appointed by the Central Government under section 22;  
(p) the functions to be performed by the officers appointed by the Central Government under 
section 22;  
(q) the form  and manner of making application for registration of a mechanically propelled inland 
vessel and the particulars along with which such application is to be made under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23;  
(r) the list of documents to be submitted or adduced by the applicants for registration under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 23;  
(s) the form and content of certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(t) the form of application, fee and the manner of issuance of provisional certif icate of registration 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(u) the procedures to be complied with by the owner of any mechanically propelled inland vessel 
who ceases to be the owner or applies for the requirement of transfer of registry or any such 
circums tances leading to change of the registered address under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(v) the procedures for validating the transfer of mechanically propelled inland vessel from India 
to outside India under section 30;  
(w) the time within which the owner  of the mechanically propelled inland vessel shall report to 
the Registrar of Inland Vessels of the place where such vessel is registered, if that vessel is declared 
missing, destroyed, lost, abandoned or has been rendered permanently unfit for service or destined for 
scrapping or dismantling or sold abroad;  
(x) the form of instrument creating the security for a mortgage for a loan or other valuable 
consideration under sub -section ( 1) of section 33;  
(y) the manner and conditions governing mortgage and its procedures under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 33;  41 
 (z) the standards for qualification, training, training institute, examination and grant of 
competency certificates under sub -section ( 1) of section 34;  
(za) the minimum manning scale applicable to different class or category of mechanically 
propelled inland vessels, categorised under this Act or such other laws for the time being in force in 
India, under section 35;  
(zb) the criteria and qualifications for appointment of examiners under sub -section ( 1) of                 
section 36;  
(zc) the form, contents and particulars of certificate of competency specified under                            
sub-section ( 3) of section 37;  
(zd) the period of validity of certificate of service issued under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 38;  
(ze) the form of certificate of service and the conditions subject to which such certificate is issued 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 38;  
(zf) the conditions subject to which the certificate of competency shall be valid throughout India 
under s ection 39;  
(zg) the intervals and manner in which the State Government shall report and update the Central 
Government with the information on data and details of certificates issued, granted, cancelled or 
suspended or such other remarks, made by the respec tive authority under sub -section ( 2) of                 
section 41;  
(zh) the criteria and standards to identify any class or category of mechanically propelled inland 
vessels as special category vessels based on their design, construction, use, purpose, ar ea of plying, 
source of energy or fuelling or any other criteria under sub -section ( 1) of section 42;  
(zi) the requirements of construction, design, survey, registration, manning, qualification, 
competency, or the requirements in addition to those containe d elsewhere in this Act under                      
sub-section ( 2) of section 42;  
(zj) the specifications and requirements of signals and equipment based on classification and 
categorisation of mechanically propelled vessels, to be complied with by such ve ssels under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 47;  
(zk) the fog and distress signals to be carried and used, the steering and sailing rules to be 
complied with and the different protocols for exhibition and display of different standards of light s, 
shapes and signals, by any mechanically propelled vessel plying in inland waters under                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 47;  
(zl) the class or category of mechanically propelled inland vessels to be equipped with navigation 
aids, life saving  appliances, fire detection and extinguishing appliances and communication 
appliances under sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(zm) the standards to be followed by the owner or master of any mechanically propelled inland 
vessel and the manner for discharge or dispose of sewage and garbage under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 52;  
(zn) the standards of construction and equipment of the mechanically propelled inland vessels to 
ensure compliance with the requirements of the provisions of Chapter IX under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 53;  
(zo) the form, validity and content of prevention of pollution certificate under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 53;  
(zp) the conditions for construction, use and maintenance of reception facilities for the 
containment of pollution and removal of pollutants arising from spillage or discharge arising from 
mechanically propelled inland vessels at all cargo terminals or passenger terminals under                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 54;  
(zq) the purposes for Chapter X as specified in clause s (a) to ( g) of section 59;  42 
 (zr) the limits of liability and the criteria in determining compensation for any claim specified in 
sub-section ( 5) of section 64;  
(zs) the form, content, and the conditions subject to which a certificate of insurance is issued  by 
the insurer to the insured under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(zt) the terms and conditions to be incorporated in the contract of insurance entered between 
insurer and insured to cover the risks, as provided in section 66, under sub -section ( 2) of section 68;  
(zu) the terms, conditions and procedures to be complied with by insurers and insured including 
those specified in clauses ( a) to ( h) therein, under section 73;  
(zv) minimum standards, terms and conditions to protect the interests a nd to ensure safety of 
service providers and service users under section 80;  
(zw) the conditions for carrying the list of dangerous goods under section 81;  
(zx) the terms and conditions subject to which permission of the Central Government is granted 
for u se or employment of a vessel, registered in any country other than India, for the purposes of, 
carriage of goods, transportation of passengers, storage units, accommodation, floating units or for 
such other purposes within the inland waters under sub -section (1) of section 82;  
(zy) the fees for grant of a certificate or licence under this Act similar to any certificate granted by 
any other foreign country in accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force in 
that country under sub -section (2) of section 82;  
(zz) the period and extent of validity of certificate granted under sub -section (2) of section 82, as 
specified in sub -section ( 3) of the said section;  
(zza) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under the provisions of this 
Act for the purpose of implementation and administration of such provisions.  
107. Power of State Government to make rules .— (1) The State Government may, after p revious 
publication, make rules for the provisions specified to be administered by it under this Act or as delegated 
to it by the Central Government for the purposes of effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without p rejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the requirements for the appointment of qualified persons as pilots under clause ( zk) of       
section 3;  
(b) the fee for issuan ce of certificate of survey under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) the manner and conditions subject to which any mechanically propelled inland vessel, which 
has been issued with a provisional certificate of survey or endorsement may proceed on voyage or  use 
in service, temporarily, pending the issue of certificate of survey under sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(d) the manner of issue the notice of suspension of certificate of survey to the owner, operator, 
master, or construction yard under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(e) the functions to be performed by the Registrar of Inland Vessels in respect to the port or place 
of registry for which he is appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(f) the manner and period in which the Registrar of Inland Ves sels shall report the details of the 
book of registry or entries made therein, to the State Government at regular intervals, under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 21;  
(g) the fee for granting the certificate of registration to the applicant under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 24;  
(h) other particulars to be contained in the certificate of registration under clause ( e) of             
sub-section ( 2) of section 24;  43 
 (i) the conspicuous part of the vessel where the owner shall display the official number und er      
sub-section ( 3) of section 24;  
(j) the form and manner in which the registered owner shall apply for a duplicate certificate to the 
Registrar of Inland Vessels under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(k) the fees or additional fees for applying for a duplicate certificate to the Registrar of Inland 
Vessels under sub -section ( 2) of section 26;  
(l) the form, manner and period within which the owner, operator or master of the mechanically 
propelled inland vessel shall make an application, for entry of alt erations or modifications made, in 
the certificate of registration, under sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(m) the fee for applying to the Registrar of Inland Vessels for registration of alterations under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 28;  
(n) the conditions to be complied with and the period for such compliance to be stated in the 
notice of suspension issued by the Registrar of Inland Vessels under sub -section ( 4) of section 31;  
(o) the form and manner for maintenance of registers to record, the details and data  of the 
certificate, and the certificates specified therein, under sub -section ( 1) of section 41;  
(p) the form of application, form of certificate of fitness and such other conditions including 
validity, subject to which and the manner of granting the cert ificate of fitness under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 43;  
(q) the safety features, gears and such other measures by which any mechanically propelled 
inland vessel, identified as special category vessel, shall comply with and be equipped in accordance 
with th e categorisation of such vessel, under sub -section ( 1) of section 44;  
(r) the maximum carrying capacity of the vessel identified as special category vessel by 
specifying the safety waterline or the limits of load water line to keep them afloat, or such oth er 
criteria and conditions, for the safe voyage of such inland vessel under sub -section ( 2) of section 44;  
(s) the rates of charges to be received by the owner or operator of all cargo terminals or passenger 
terminals, providing reception facilities shall receive charges under sub -section ( 3) of section 54;  
(t) the form of report of compliance to be submitted by the owner or operator of the passenger or 
cargo terminal under sub -section ( 5) of section 54;  
(u) the manner in which the owner, operator or master  of any mechanically propelled vessel used 
or plying within inland waters, shall discharge the pollutants at the port reception facilities under              
sub-section ( 6) of section 54;  
(v) the procedure for detaining any mechanically propelled inland v essel in connection with a 
claim, or an offence under section 63;  
(w) the form and manner of giving information of any wreck, abandonment, damage, casualty, 
accident, explosion or loss occurred to or on board such a vessel while in the inland waters, to th e 
officer in -charge of the nearest police station and to the designated authority appointed under                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 74;  
(x) the powers of the District Magistrate and the procedures to be followed in holding inquiry 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 75;  
(y) the qualifications, criteria and consideration, fees or charges for the assessors, who have 
experience in the merchant service or in the navigation of the mechanically propelled inland vessels 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 76 ; 
(z) the procedures for detention, formality, fees and conditions, if not specified in this Act, to be 
followed and observed by the concerned officer or authority or court, appointed or authorised or 
constituted under this Act, for the purpose of detainin g a vessel, under sub -section ( 4) of section 85;  44 
 (za) the rates of fees and additional fees to be charged for the services provided under this Act, 
and any other charges or payment made to it against penalties of pecuniary nature to be collected by 
the Sta te Government, and the intervals at which such fees, charges or penalties shall be collected, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 89;  
(zb) the procedures, forms and format of receipts, maintenance of accounts and any other matter 
that is necessary for the pur pose of the remittance, collection, accounts and accountability of collected 
fees, additional fees, charges or payment against penalties of pecuniary nature under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 89;  
(zc) the manner and rates of fees or additional fees, the owne r, operators or their representatives, 
as the case may be, shall remit under sub -section ( 4) of section 89;  
(zd) the hierarchy of the offices of the authorised department and the powers and functions to be 
exercised by such offices under sub -section ( 3) of section 91;  
(ze) the authority and obligation to administer the welfare fund constituted for the purposes of 
Chapter XVII under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 91;  
(zf) such other details to be submitted by the owner or operator of non -mechanical ly propelled 
inland vessel at the office of the authorised department and the form and manner of making such 
submission, under sub -section ( 1) of section 92;  
(zg) the form and manner of central data base to record the details of non -mechanically propelled 
inland vessels under sub -section ( 6) of section 92;  
(zh) the form and manner of issuance of certificate of enrolment and such other document 
containing details of the owner, to be specified in the said certificate, under sub -section ( 2) of section 
93; 
(zi) the form and manner of exhibiting a number issued to a non -mechanically propelled inland 
vessel under sub -section ( 4) of section 93;  
(zj) the basic minimum standards that may be reasonably observed during the construction of any 
non-mechanically propelled  inland vessel under sub -section ( 1) of section 94;  
(zk) the manner of complying with the standards of construction specified by the State 
Government, by any class or category of non -mechanically propelled inland vessel under sub -section 
(2) of section 94;  
(zl) the measures to regulate the non -mechanically propelled inland vessel under section 95;  
(zm) the measures to be taken by the advisory committee or officers authorised in this behalf to 
minimise or counter emergency under sub -section ( 1) of section 99 ; 
(zn) for the purposes of implementation and administration of Chapter XVII of this Act, 
pertaining to non -mechanically propelled inland vessels;  
(zo) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under the provisions of                   
this Act.  
108. Power of Central Government to give directions .— The Central Government may, for 
carrying into execution of this Act in the State, give directions to the State Government, and the State 
Government shall abide by such directions.  
109. Protection of action taken in good faith .— (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person or officer appointed or authorised under this Act, in respect of anything done 
or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.  
(2) For the purpose of claiming immunity under sub -section ( 1), the officers appointed or authorised 
under this Act, shall perform and carry out the respective functions and responsibilities, with utmost care 
and due diligence.  45 
 110. Power to remove difficu lties.— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be nec essary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of three 
years, from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
111. Consistency with other laws .— (1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not be 
construed in derogation of the provisions of any other law, and shall be construed as consistent with such 
law, for the time being in force.  
(2) In the event of any conflict between a provision of this Act and a provision of any other law for 
the time being in force in the whole of India or restricted to the application within the territory of any 
State, the prov ision of this Act shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.  
112. Suspension or alteration of application and operation of Act .— (1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, declare that all or any of the provisions, under this Act or the rules made  
thereunder — 
(a) other than that provided for safety, manning and prevention of pollution, shall not apply to 
any specified class or category of the mechanically propelled inland vessels; or  
(b) shall apply to any specified class or category of the mechanically propelled inland vessels 
with such modifications, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government may, by notification, 
suspend or relax to a specified extent, either inde finitely or for such period as may be specified in that 
notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
113. Laying of rules and notifications .— (1) Every rule made or notification issued under this Act, 
by the Central Government s hall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of t he session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
notification, or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made, the rule or notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or notification.  
(2) Every rule made or notification issued under this Act by the State Government shall, as soon as 
after it is made or issued, be laid before the State Legislature.  
114. Repeal and savings .— (1) The Inland Vessels Act, 1917 (1 of 1917) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactment referred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye -law, order or exemption issued, made or granted under 
the enactment hereby repealed shall, if it is not inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act, continue 
to be in force unless and until revoked, and shall have effect as if it had been issued, made or granted 
under the corresponding provision of this Act;  
(b) any officer appointed and anybody elected or constituted under any enactment hereby 
repealed shall continue and shall be deemed to have been appointed, elected or constituted unless 
specifically removed or replaced by appointment of officer or offices, as the case may be, under this 
Act; 
(c) any document referring to the enactment hereby repealed shall be constructed as referring to 
this Act or to the corresponding provision of this Act;  46 
 (d) any fine levied or penalty imposed under the enactment hereby repealed may be recovered as 
if it had been levied under this Act;  
(e) any offenc e committed under the enactment hereby repealed may be prosecuted and punished 
as if it had been committed under this Act;  
(f) sailing vessels or sailing boats registered under the enactment hereby repealed shall be deemed 
to have been registered under the  Act; 
(g) mortgages of any mechanically propelled inland vessels recorded in any register book 
maintained at any port in India under the enactment hereby repealed shall be deemed to have been 
recorded in the register book under the corresponding provision of this Act;  
(h) any licence, certificate of competency or service, certificate of survey, licenses or any other 
certificate or document issued, made or granted under the enactment hereby repealed and in force at 
the commencement of this Act shall be deeme d to have been issued, made or granted under this Act 
and shall, unless cancelled under this Act, continue in force until the date shown in the certificate or 
document, as the case may be.  
(3) The matters specifically provided in this section, shall not be  held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of  section 6  of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (X of 1897).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA ACT, 2020  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.   
2. Declaration of institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda as an institution of 
national  importance . 
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Anteceding Institutions as Institute of   Teaching and Research 
in Ayurveda . 
5. Effect of incorporation of Anteceding Institutions as Institute of Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda.  
6. Composition of Institute . 
7. Terms of office of, and vacancies among, members . 
8. President of Institute . 
9. Meetings of Institute . 
10. Governing Body and other committees of Institute . 
11. Staff of Institute . 
12. Objects of Institute . 
13. Functions of Inst itute. 
14. Payment to Institute . 
15. Fund of Institute . 
16. Budget of Institute . 
17. Accounts and audit . 
18. Annual report . 
19. Pension and provident funds . 
20. Authentication of orders and instruments of Institute . 
21. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
22. Grant of  degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute . 
23. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Institute . 
24. Control by Central Govern . 
25. Resolution of differences . 
26. Returns and information . 
27. Power to make rules.  
28. Power to make regulations . 
29. Rules and regulations to be laid be fore Parliament.  2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Power to remove difficulties . 
31. Transitional provisions.  
 
  3 
 THE INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 16 OF 2020  
[21st September , 2020.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda 
and to declare it as an Institution of national importance for the promotion of quality and 
excellence in education, research and training in Ayurveda and allied disciplines and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. ---(1) This Act may be called the Institute of Teaching and 
Research in Ayurveda Act, 2020.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration of institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda  as an institution of 
national  importance. —It is hereby declared that the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda 
incorporated under this Act shall be an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions. ---In this Act, unless the context otherwise requir es,— 
(a) “Anteceding Institutions” means the Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar and the Indian 
Institute of Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar;  
(b) “Departmen t of Swasthvritta” means the Maharishi Patanjali Institute for Yoga Naturopathy 
Education and Research, Jamnagar, a constituent institute of the Gujarat Ayurveda University, to be 
established as a Department of the Institute;  
(c) “Director” means the Direc tor of the Institute appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(d) “Fund” means the Fund of the Institute maintained under section 15;  
(e) “Governing Body” means the body constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(f) “Gujarat Ayurved  University” means the University established and incorporated under the 
Gujarat Ayurved University Act, 1965  (40 of 1965) ; 
(g) “Indian Institute of Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar” means an institution 
established by the Gujarat Ayurveda University for con ducting Pharmacy courses in Ayurveda and 
includes the Pharmacy Unit established for preparation of Ayurvedic drugs for use in hospital of the 
Institute;  
(h) “Institute” means the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda established by 
conglomerating Anteceding Institutions and incorporated under section 4;  
(i) “Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar” means a national 
institute for postgraduate courses in Ayurveda established and funded by the Government of India, 
but ma intained by the Gujarat Ayurveda University under a lease agreement entered between the 
Government of India and that University;  
                                                           
1. 15th October, 2020 , vide notification No. S.O. 3608 (E), dated 14th October, 2020,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii).  4 
 (j) “member” means a member of the Institute;  
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “regulation” means a regulation made by the Institute.  
(m) “Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar” means a constituent institute of 
the Gujarat Ayurveda University for conducting undergraduate courses in Ayurveda.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment  and incorporation of Anteceding Institutions as Institute of   Teaching and 
Research in Ayurveda. —(1) The Anteceding Institutions, namely, the Institute of Post Graduate 
Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar, Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya , 
Jamnagar and the Indian Institute of Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar are hereby 
conglomerated and established as a body corporate under this Act and on such incorporation be called the 
Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda.  
(2) The I nstitute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and may by that name sue or be sued.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Anteceding Institutions as Inst itute of Teaching and Research in 
Ayurveda. —On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other instrument to 
Anteceding Institutions shall be deemed as a reference to the Institute;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to Anteceding Institutions shall vest in 
the Institute;  
(c) all the rights and liabilities of Anteceding Institutions shall be transferred to, and be the rights 
and liabilities of, the Institute;  
(d) every person who is employed in the Anteceding Institutions immediately before such 
commencement shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, become the employee of the Institute and 
hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuner ation and upon the same 
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident 
fund, and other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall 
continue to do so unless and un til his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration 
and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensation 
equivalent to not less than three months’ remuneration in the case of permanent employees and  not 
less than one month’s remuneration in the case of other employees;  
(e) the Director of the Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar 
shall be deemed to have been appointed as the Director of the Institute under this Act an d shall hold 
office for a period of five years with effect from such commencement or until he attains the age of 
sixty -five years, whichever is earlier;  
(f) the Directors of Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar and the Indian 
Institute of Ay urvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar shall be deemed to have been appointed as 
Deputy Director (Undergraduate) and Deputy Director (Pharmacy), respectively, under this Act and 
shall hold office for a period of five years with effect from such commence ment or until they attain 
the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier;  5 
 (g) every person pursuing any academic or research course in Anteceding Institutions before such 
commencement, shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the Institute a t the same level 
of course in the Institute;  
(h) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against Anteceding Institutions, immediately before such commencement, shall be continued or 
instituted by or agains t the Institute.  
6. Composition of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry of AYUSH, ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH, ex officio ; 
(c) the Secretary, Department of Health, Government of Gujarat , ex officio ; 
(d) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(e) the technical head of Ayurveda, not below the level of Advisor (Ayurveda), Ministry of 
AYUSH, ex officio ; 
(f) the Secret ary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary) Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, ex officio ; 
(g) the Vice -Chancellor of Gujarat Ayurved University, Jamnagar , ex officio ; 
(h) the Director -General, Central  Council for Research in Ayurveda, ex officio ; 
(i) the Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary) in the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, ex 
officio ; 
(j) three experts in Ayurveda, having special knowledge and experience in the field of education, 
industry and research, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(k) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the Hous e of the People and one from among themselves by members of the Council of 
States.  
(2) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Institute shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of either House of Parliamen t. 
7. Terms of office of , and vacancies among, members. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this 
section, the term of office of a member including nominated or elected member of the Institute shall be 
five years from the date of his nomination or election.  
(2) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 shall come 
to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister or the Speaker or the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to 
be a member of the House from which he was elected.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(4) The term of office  of a member nominated or elected to fill a causal vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated or elected.  
(5) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue i n office 
until another person is nominated or elected as a member in his place.  6 
 (6) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office till his resignation is accepted by that Govern ment.  
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
8. President of Institute. —(1) There  shall be a President of the Institute who shall be nominated by 
the Central Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act 
or as may be prescribed.  
(3) The President and other members shall receive such allowances from the Institute as may be 
prescribed.  
9. Meetings of Institute. ---The Institute shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Cen tral Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government, and thereafter, the 
Institute shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of proc edure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings (including quoram) as may be specified by regulations.  
10. Governing Body and other committees of Institute. —(1) There shall be a Governing Body of 
the Institute which shall be constituted by t he Institute in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Institute and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Institute may, by regulations made in this behalf, c onfer or 
impose upon it.  
(3) The President of the Institute shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Body and as Chairperson 
thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be specified by regulations.  
(4) The procedure to be follow ed in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body shall be such as may be specified by regulations.  
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Institute may constitute as many 
standing committees and ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any 
function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or  advising upon, any matter which the Institute 
may refer to them, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(6) The Chairperson and members of the Governing Body and the Chairperson and the members of a 
standing committee or an ad hoc committee sh all receive such allowances, as may be specified by 
regulations.  
11. Staff of Institute. —(1) There shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be 
designated as the Director of the Institute and shall, subject to such rules as may be made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, be appointed by the Institute:  
Provided that the Director of the Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar shall be deemed to have been appointed as the first Director of the Institute.  
(2) The Director shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as  may be specified by 
regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or the President of the Institute or the 
Governing Body or the Chairperson of the Governing Body.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this beh alf, the Institute may 
appoint Deputy Director (Undergraduate), Deputy Director (Postgraduate) and Deputy Director 7 
 (Pharmacy) and such number of other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its 
powers and discharge of its functions and the designations and grades of other officers and employees 
shall be such as may be specified by regulations:  
Provided that the Director of Shree Gulabkunverba Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar shall be 
deemed to have been appointed as the first Deputy D irector (Undergraduate) of the Institute:  
Provided further that the Director of the Indian Institute of Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Jamnagar shall be deemed to have been appointed as the first Deputy Director (Pharmacy) under this Act.  
(5) The Direc tor, Deputy Director (Undergraduate), Deputy Director (Postgraduate) and Deputy 
Director (Pharmacy) and other officers and employees of the Institute shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of service in res pect of leave, pension, provident 
fund and other matters as may be specified by regulations.  
12. Objects of Institute. —The objects of the Institute shall be — 
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical education in 
Ayurveda and Pharmacy so as to demonstrate a high standard of such medical education to all 
medical colleges and other allied institutions of Ayurveda in India;  
(b) to bri ng together in one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of 
personnel in all important branches of Ayurveda including Pharmacy;  
(c) to attain self -sufficiency in postgraduate education to meet the country’s needs for specialist s 
and medical teachers in Ayurveda;  
(d) to make an in -depth study and research in the field of Ayurveda.  
13. Functions of Institute. —With a view to the promotion of the objects specified in section 12, the 
Institute may — 
(a) provide for undergraduate and p ostgraduate teaching in Ayurveda, including Pharmacy;  
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of Ayurveda including Pharmacy;  
(c) prescribe courses and curricula for both undergraduate and postgraduate studies in Ayurveda 
including Phar macy;  
(d) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish and 
maintain — 
(i) one or more Ayurveda medical colleges with different Departments including department 
of Swasthvritta and such other departments as may d eemed to be necessary for scientific 
validation of Ayurveda, implementing Ayurveda principles and theories in public health and 
further expansion of Ashtanga Ayurveda with the help of modern scientific advances sufficiently 
staffed and equipped to undertak e undergraduate and postgraduate Ayurveda education including 
Pharmacy;  
(ii) one or more well -equipped hospitals;  
(iii) colleges for Ayurveda supporting staffs such as nurses, Pharmacists, Panchakarma  
technicians or therapists and such other allied disciplines of Ayurveda sufficiently staffed and 
equipped for training such students;  
(iv) rural and urban health organisations which will form centres for the field training in 
Ayurveda and for research int o community health problems; and  
(v) other institutions for the training of different types of health workers, such as 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists and Ayurvedic medical technicians of various kinds;  8 
 (e) train  teachers for the different Ayurveda colleges in India;  
(f) hold examinations (including for admissions) and grant degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions and titles in undergraduate and postgraduate education in Ayurveda and Pharmacy as may 
be laid down in the regulations;  
(g) institute, and appoint persons to professorships, readerships, lectureships and posts of any 
description in accordance with regulations;  
(h) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests an d transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(i) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting th e objects specified in section 12;  
(j) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be specified by regulations;  
(k) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulations as may be made in this b ehalf;  
(l) establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the residence of students;  
(m) supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the Institute and 
to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare  and cultural and corporate life;  
(n) institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(o) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;  
(p) to perform all s uch things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all 
or any of the objects of the Institute.  
14. Payment to Institute. —The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as may be considered necessary for the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions 
under this Act.  
15. Fund of Institute. —(1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shal l be credited — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys  received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund  shall be utilised towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under section 13.  
16. Budget of Institute. —The Institute shall prepare in such form and at such time ever y year a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Institute and shall forward to the Central Government such number of copies thereof as may be 
prescribed.  9 
 17. Accounts and audit. —(1) The In stitute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet, in such form as the Central 
Government may prescribe by rules, and in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by 
that Government, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same righ ts, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, co nnected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.  
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with th e audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both the 
Houses of Parliament.  
18. Annual report. —The Institute shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be 
prescribed and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one month of its 
receipt.  
19. Pension and providen t funds.—(1) The Institute shall constitute for the benefit of its officers, 
teachers and other employees, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by 
regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit:  
Provided that the pension and provident fund constituted by the Anteceding Institutions before the 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the pension and provident fund under this section.  
(2) Where any such provident fund has been constituted, the Central Government may declare that the 
provisions of the  Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall  apply to such fund as if it were a 
Government Provident Fund.  
20. Authenti cation of orders and instruments of Institute. —All orders and decisions of the 
Institute shall be authenticated by the Director or any other member authorised by the Institute in this 
behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticated by the signature  of the Director or such other 
officers  as may be authorised by the Institute.  
21. Acts and proceedings not to b e invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act done or proceeding 
taken by the Institute, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc committee under this  Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the 
Institute, Governing Body or such standing or ad hoc committee.  
22. Grant of degrees, diplomas, etc., by Institute. —Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant medical degrees, diplomas 
and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.  
23. Recognition of medical quali fications granted by Institute. —Notwith standing anything 
contained in the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (49 of 1970) and the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956) , the medical degrees or diplomas granted by the Institute under this 
Act shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes  of the Acts aforesaid and shall be deemed 
to be included in the Schedule to the respective Acts.  10 
 24. Control by Central Government. —The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued 
to it from time to time by the Central Government for the ef ficient administration of this Act.  
25. Resolution of differences. —If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute or difference arises between the Institute and 
the Centr al Government, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
26. Returns and information. —The Institute shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
27. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of filling vacancies among members of the Institute under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 7;  
(b) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the allowa nces, if any, to be paid to the President and members of the Institute under sub -
section ( 3) of section 8;  
(d) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing committees and ad hoc 
committees under sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(e) the form in which and the time at which the budget showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure of the Institute shall be prepared by the Institute and the numbers of copies thereof to be 
forwarded to the Central Government under  section 16 ; 
(f) the form in which annual report shall be prepared and the date before which such report shall 
be submitted to the Central Government under se ction 18;  
(g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
28. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Institute, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, such regulations may provide for: — 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings other than the first meeting of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the 
number of members necessary to form a quorum under section 9;  
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(c) the  powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Governing Body under              
sub-section ( 2) of section 10;  
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 10;  
(e) the proce dure to be followed by the Governing Body, the term of office of, and the manner of 
filling vacancies among, the members of the Governing Body under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(f) the manner of constituting standing committees and ad hoc committees und er sub -section ( 5) 
of section 10;  11 
 (g) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairperson and the members of the Governing Body 
and of standing committee and ad hoc committee under sub -section ( 6) of section 10;  
(h) the powers and functions to be exercis ed and discharged by the Director of the Institute under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(i) the designations and grades of other officers and employees under sub -section ( 4) of section 
11; 
(j) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of services of  the Director, Deputy Director 
(Undergraduate), Deputy Director (Postgraduate) and Deputy Director (Pharmacy) and other officers 
and employees of the Institute under sub -section ( 5) of section 11;  
(k) the examinations which may be held and the degrees, dip lomas and other academic 
distinctions and titles which may be granted by the Institute under clause ( f) of section 13;  
(l) the professorships, readerships, lectureships and other posts which may be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such profes sorships, readerships, lectureships and other posts under 
clause ( g) of section 13;  
(m) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute under   
clause ( j) of section 13;  
(n) the construction of quarters for the staff and allotm ent of such quarters under clause ( k) of 
section 13;  
(o) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, pension and provident funds may be 
constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute under               
sub-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(p) any other matter for which provisions under this Act may be made by regulations.  
(2) Until the Institute is established under this Act, any regulation which may be made under                   
sub-section ( 1) may be made by the Central Government; and any regulation so made may be altered or 
rescinded by the Institute in exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
29. Rules and regulation s to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may b e after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modif ied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
30. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficu lty arises is giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removi ng 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament . 
  12 
 31. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the Board of Governors or any other governing system of the Anteceding Institutions 
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so function 
until a Governing Body is constituted for the Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a new 
Governing Body under this Act, the members of the Board holding office before such constitution 
shall, unless otherwise provided in this Ac t, cease to hold office;  
(b) the committees constituted in relation to the Anteceding Institutions before the 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be constituted under this Act until new committees are 
constituted for the Institute.  
--------------------------The Jammu and Kashmir Official Languages Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT, 2020  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Official languages of Union territory.  
4. Promotion and development of regional languages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 23 OF 2020  
[26th September , 2020.] 
An Act to provide for the languages to be used for the official purposes of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament  in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jammu and 
Kashmir Official Languages Act, 2020.  
 (2) It extends to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir . 
 (3) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that the Administrator may appoint different dates for different areas in the 
Union territory.  
2. Definitions. — In this Act, unless the c ontext otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator” means the Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Jammu and Kashm ir. 
3. Official languages of Union territory. —With effect from such date as the 
Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, the 
Kashmiri, Dogri, Urdu, Hindi and English languages shall be the official languages to be 
used for all or any of the official purposes of the Union territory:  
Provided that the English language may continue to be used, for those administrative and 
legislative purposes, in the Union territory for which it was being used before the 
commencement of this Act:  
Provided further that the business in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall 
be transacted in the official language or languages of the Union territory . 
4. Promotion and development of regional languages. — (1) The Administrator ma y, for 
the promotion and development of regional languages of the Union territory, take necessary 
steps to strengthen the existing institutional mechanisms such as the Academy of Art, Culture 
and languages in the Union territory.  
(2) The institutional mec hanisms referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall make special efforts 
for the promotion and development of Gojri, Pahari and Punjabi languages.  
                                                           
1. 29 th September , 2020 , vide notification No. S.O. 3394( E), dated 29 th September , 2020  see Gazette  of India, 
Extraordinary , Part II , sec. 3 (ii). 
--------------------------The Major Port Authorities Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
BOARD OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITY  
3. Constitution and composition of Board of Major Port Authority.  
4. Qualifications of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of Board . 
5. Disqualification of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Member from office in certain 
circumstances . 
6.  Term of office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson a nd Members . 
7. Disclosure of interest . 
8. Resignation of Members . 
9. Removal from office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members . 
10. Filling of casual vacancies . 
11. Honorarium payable to Independent Members . 
12. Powers and duties of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and  Members . 
13. Meetings of Board . 
14. Committees of Board . 
15. Delegation of powers . 
16. Restriction of re -employment . 
17. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board . 
18. Power to make appointments . 
19. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board . 
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  
A. S TAFF OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITY  
20. List of staff of Board.  
B. P ROPERTY OF CONTRACTS  
21.  Board to be deemed as successor of Board of Trustees of Major Port.  
22. Usage of port assets by Board.  
23.  Procedure when immovable property cannot be  acquired by agreement.  
24. Contracts by Board.  
C. P LANING AND DEVELOPMENT  
25. Master Plan.  
26. Powers of Board in respect of planning and development.  
D. I MPOSTION OF RATES  
27. Scale of rates for assets and services available at Major Port.  
28. Board's lien for rates.  
29. Ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges.  
30. Sale of goods and application of sale proceeds in certain cases.  
31. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel.  
32. Application to Adjudicatory Board.  
 
 2 
 CHAPTER IV  
POWER S OF BOARD S OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORIT IES IN RESPECT OF LOANS AND SECURITIES  
A. F INANCIAL POWERS OF  BOARDS OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITIES  
SECTIONS  
33.  Power to raise loans and issue securities.  
34. Endorsements to be made on security itself.  
35. Endorser of security not liable for amount thereof.  
36. Recognition as holder of port securities in certain cases and legal effect thereof.  
37. Discharge in certain cases.  
38. Security for loans taken out by Boards of Major Port Authorities.  
39. Power of Board to repay loans to Government before due date.  
40.  Establishment and application of sinking fund.  
41.  Existing loans and securities to continue.  
B. G ENERAL  ACCOUNTS  OF MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES  
42. General accounts of Board.  
43. Application of money in general accounts.  
C. A CCOUNTS AND AUDITS  
44. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
SUPERVISION OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
45. Administration report.  
46. Power of Central Government to order survey or examination of works of Board.  
47. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at cost of Board.  
48. Power of Central Government to take over management of Board.  
49. Laying of report.  
50. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation to use port assets.  
51. Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties, rights, powers and authorisations 
without sanction of Central Government.  
52. Remedies of Government in r espect of loans made to Board.  
53. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
CHAPTER  VI 
CONSTITUTION OF ADJUCATORY  BOARD  
54. Constitution of Adjudicatory Board.  
55. Composition of Adjudicatory Board.  
56. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer and members of 
Adjudicatory Board.  
57. Removal and suspension of Presiding Officer and members of Adjudicatory Board.  
58. Powers and functions of Adjudicatory Board.  
59. Bar of jurisdiction of any court.  
60. Review and appeal.  
61. Officers and employees of Adjudicator y Board.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
62. General provision for punishment of offences.  
63. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
64. Cognizance of offences.  
65. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
66. Employees of Board or Adjudicatory Board to be public servants.  
67. Application of other laws not barred.  
68. Power to evict certain persons from premises of Board.  
69. Alternate remedy by suit.  
70. Corporate Social Responsibility and development of infrastructure by Board.  3 
 SECTIONS  
 
71.  Power of Central Government to make rules.  
72. Power of Board to make regulations.  
73. Laying of rules and regulations.  
74. Power to remove difficulties.  
75. Repeal and savings.  
76. Transitional provision.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
THE MAJOR PORT AUTHORITIES ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 1 OF 2021  
[17th February , 2021.]  
An Act to provide for regulation, operation and planning of Major Ports in India and to vest 
the administration, control and management of such ports upon the Boards of Major Port 
Authorities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -Second Year of the Republic of India as follows: –– 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Major Port 
Authorities Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force  on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It shall apply to the Major Ports of Chennai, Cochin, Deendayal (Kandla), Jawaharlal Nehru 
(Nhava Sheva), Kolkata, Mormugao, Mumbai, New Mangalore, Paradip , V.O. Chidambaranar 
(Tuticorin) and Visakhapatnam.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Adjudicatory Board ” means the Board constituted by the Central Government under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section  54; 
(b) “Board” means the Board of Major Port Authority constituted by the Central Government in 
accordance with sub -section ( 1) of section 3  for each Major Port under this Act;  
(c) “capital reserves ” for the purpose of  this Act, shall mean the total of the reserves excluding 
the reserves set forth in sub -section ( 1) of section 43  and the value of the current assets of the 
Board in the preceding financial year;  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board appoint ed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(e) “Deputy Chairperson ” means the Deputy Chairperson of the Board appointed under sub -
section ( 1) of section 4;  
(f) “dock” includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving docks, graving blocks, inclined 
planes, slipways, gridirons, moorings, transit -sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways and other 
works and things appertaining to any dock, and also the portion of the sea enclosed or protected by 
the arms or groynes of a harbour;  
(g) “foreshore ”, in relation to a Major Port, means the area between the high -water mark and 
the low -water mark relating to that Major Port;  
(h) “goods” includes livestock and every kind of movable  property;  
(i) “grave emergency ” means a condition as determined by the Central Government wherein the 
Board is unable to discharge its duties appropriately and includes acts of sedition, non -
performance, unlawful and illegal actions, negligence and financ ial misappropriation;  
(j) “high-water mark ”, in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through the highest 
points reached by ordinary spring -tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;  
                                                           
1. 3rd November, 2021, Vide notification No. S.O. 4504 (E), dated 29th October, 2021 , see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(ii).  5 
 (k) “immovable property ” includes wharfage -rights and all  other rights exercisable on, over, or 
in respect of, any land, wharf, dock or pier;  
(l) “Independent Member ” means a Member of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 4;  
(m) “Indian Ports Act ” means the Indian Ports Act, 1908 ( 15 of 1908);  
(n) “land” includes the bed of the sea or river below high -water mark, and also things attached 
to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;  
(o) “low-water mark ”, in relation to a Major Port, means a line drawn through the lowest p oints 
reached by ordinary spring -tides at any season of the year at that Major Port;  
(p) “Major Port ” or “Major Port Authority ” means the Major Port as defined in clause ( 8) 
of section 3  of the Indian Ports Act;  
(q) “Major Port approaches ”, in relation to a Major Port, means those parts of the navigable 
rivers and channels leading to the Major Port, where the Indian Ports Act is in force;  
(r) “master”, in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any Major Port, means any 
person having for the time being the charge or control of such vessel or such aircraft, as the case 
may be, except a pilot, harbour master, assistant harbour master, dock master or berthing master of 
the Major Port;  
(s) “Member” means the Member of the Board appo inted under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) 
of section 4;  
(t) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” and “notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(u) “Presiding Officer ” means the Presiding Officer of the Adjudicatory Board appointed by the 
Central Government under  section 55;  
(v) “owner”, — 
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for the sale, 
custody, loading or unloading of such goods; and  
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any Major Port, includes any  part-
owner, charterer, consignee, or mortgagee in possession thereof;  
(w) “pier” includes any stage, stairs, landing place, hard, jetty, floating barge, tr anshipper or 
pontoon and any bridges or other works connected therewith.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this clause, the term “transhipper ” means a floating craft or 
vessel, whether dumb or self -propelled, on which gears are provided for discharging car go from a 
barge or wharf and loading it into a ship;  
(x) “port assets ” means any asset within the port limits including land, movable or immovable 
property or any other property, whether tangible or intangible, owned by or vested with the Board 
through the  Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be;  
(y) “port limits ” in relation to a Major Port, means the limits including any piers, jetties, 
landing -places, wharves, quays, docks and other works made on behalf of the public for 
convenienc e of traffic, for safety of vessels or for the improvement, maintenance or good 
governance of the Major Port and its approaches whether within or without high -water mark, and 
subject to any rights of private property therein, any portion of the shore or ba nk within fifty yards 
of high -water mark and the area of such Major Port as may be determined by the Central 
Government by way of notification from time to time;  
(z) “port related use ” means any use directly or indirectly related to port operations and 
activities;  6 
 (za) “port securities ” means the debentures, bonds or stock certificates issued by the Board in 
respect of any loan contracted by it under the provisions of this Act or issued  by any other 
Authority for the payment of which the Board is liable under this Act;  
(zb) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(zc) “Public Private Partnership project ” means the projects taken up through a concession 
contract entere d into by the Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(zd) “rate” includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge leviable under this Act;  
(ze) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(zf) “vessel” includes anything made for the conveyance, by water, of human beings or of 
goods; and  
(zg) “wharf” includes any wall or stage and any part of the land or foreshore that may be used 
for loading or unloading goods, or for the embarkation or disembarkation o f passengers and any 
wall enclosing or adjoining the same.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Ports Act 
shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
BOARD OF  MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITY  
3. Constitution and composition of Board of Major Port Authority .—(1) The Central 
Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by 
notification, in respect of each Major Port, constitute a Board called the Board of Major Port 
Authority for that Major Port which shall consist of the following Members, namely :— 
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) a Deputy Chairperson;  
(c) one Member each from the — 
(i) concerned State Government in which the Major Port is situate d; 
(ii) Ministry of Railways;  
(iii) Ministry of Defence; and  
(iv) Customs, Department of Revenue;  
(d) not less than two and not exceeding four Independent Members;  
(e) one Member not below the rank of Director nominated by the Central Government,                  
ex officio ; and  
(f) two Members representing the interests of the employees of the Major Port Authority:  
Provided that until the constitution of the Board of Major Port Authority, the Board of Trustees 
constituted under  section 3  of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) shall continue to function 
and shall cease to exist immediately after the constitution of the Board under this Act.  
(2) The Board of each Major Port Authority constituted under this Act shall be a permanent body 
having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold or dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the 
said name, sue or be sued.  
4. Qualifications of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members of Board .—(1) The 
Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the Board shall be appointed by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of such persons and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed.  7 
 (2) The Members of the Board as mentioned in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
3 shall possess such qualifications and experiences and shall be appointed by the Centr al Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Members referred to in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of Section 3  shall be appointed by the 
Central Government from amongst serving employ ees of the Board of Major Port  Authority in such 
manner as may be prescribed after obtaining the opinion of the trade unions, if any, composed of 
persons employed in the Major Port and registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 ( 16 of 1926).  
(4) Every person nominated or appointed to the office of the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or 
Member of the Board, shall, within thirty days of his nomination or appointment, furnish to the Board 
his consent and a declaration that he is not disqualified or ineli gible or has conflict of interest to hold 
such office.  
5. Disqualification of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Member from office in certain 
circumstances .—(1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment or to continue as a Chairperson, 
Deputy Chairperson or Member of the Board, if — 
(a) he has been adjudged as an insolvent;  
(b) he has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson, Deputy 
Chairperson or Member;  
(c) he has been convicted of an offence, involving moral turpi tude;  
(d) he holds an office of profit;  
(e) he has made a false declaration under sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(f) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of a Major Port Authority, Government 
or a body corporate owned or controlled by the Centr al Government or the State Government; or  
(g) an order disqualifying him for appointment as a Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or 
Member has been passed by a court or tribunal and such order is in force.  
(2) The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his 
office except by an order of the Central Government on the ground of his proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity or in contravention of the provisions of section 7 after the Central Government, has, on an 
inquiry, held in acc ordance with the procedure prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, 
come to the conclusion that the Member ought on any such ground to be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or any other 
Member in  respect of whom an inquiry under sub -section ( 2) is being initiated or pending till the 
Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.  
6. Term of office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson 
and Deputy Chairperson shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which 
they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person appoi nted as a Member of the Board by virtue of 
an office under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 shall continue to be a Member of the Board 
so long as he continues to hold that office.  
(3) An Independent Member shall hold office for a term of three ye ars from the date of his 
appointment or up to the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re -
appointment:  
Provided that no Independent Member shall hold office for more than two terms:  
Provided further that an Independent Member shall not, during the said period of three years, be 
appointed to or be associated with any Major Port Authority in any other capacity, either directly or 
indirectly.  8 
 (4) The Member appointed under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 shall hold office for a 
term of three years from the date of his appointment or until he attains the age of superannuation, 
whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that no such Member shall hold office for more than two terms.  
7. Disclosure of interest .—Before appointing any person as a Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or 
Member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that the person does not have any such financial 
or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson, Deputy 
Chairperson or Member:  
Provided that where the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or any Member who is not so concerned 
or interested at the time of occupying such office, he shall, if he becomes concerned or interested 
afterwards, disclose his concern or interest forthwith when he becomes so concerned or interested or 
at the first meeting of the Board held after he becomes so concerned or interested and resign 
forthwith.  
8. Resignation of Members .—The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members may, by 
notice in writing under their hand addressed to the Central Government, resign their office and on 
such resignation being accepted by that Government, shall be deemed to have vacated their office.  
 9. Removal from office of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members .—The Central 
Government shall remove the Chairperson, Deputy Ch airperson or any Member, if he — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 5; or  
(b) has, in  the opinion of the Central Government, ceased to represent the interest by virtue of 
which he was appointed or elected; or  
(c) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or  
(d) is, without the previous permission of the Board absent from six consecuti ve ordinary 
meetings of the Board; or  
(e) is absent from the meetings of the Board for a period exceeding six consecutive months; or  
(f) acts in contravention of the provisions of this Act.  
10. Filling of casual vacancies .—Any vacancy occurring in the office of the Chairperson, Deputy 
Chairperson or any other Member whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to discharge 
his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, shall be filled by the Central Government by 
making a fresh appointm ent within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy 
occurs and the Member so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the 
person in whose place he is so appointed.  
11. Honorarium payable to Independent Memb ers.—The Independent Members shall be paid 
such honorarium as may be prescribed.  
12. Powers and duties of Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and Members .—The Chairperson 
and in his absence, the Deputy Chairperson or such other person authorised by the Central  
Government shall have powers of general superintendence and directions in the conduct of affairs of 
the Major Port Authority and he shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, 
exercise supervision and control over the acts of all emplo yees of the Major Port Authority in matters 
of executive administration and in matters concerning the accounts and records of such Board.  
13. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such 
meetings), as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) If the Chairperson for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the Deputy 
Chairperson and in the absence of such Deputy Chairperson, any other Member chosen by the 
Members present amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting or any person 
authorised by the Central Government.  9 
 (3) All questions which come up before any meetin g of the Board shall be— 
(a) decided by a majority of votes by the Members present and voting, and in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the person presiding shall have a second or 
casting vote;  
(b) dealt with as expeditiously as possib le and the Board shall dispose of the same within a 
period of sixty days from the date of receipt of the application:  
Provided that where any such application could not be disposed of within the said period of 
sixty days, the Board shall record its reasons  in writing for not disposing of the application within 
that period.  
 14. Committees of Board .—(1) A Board may, from time to time, from amongst its Members and 
any other person, constitute committees for the purpose of discharging such functions as may be 
delegated to such committee or committees by the Board.  
(2) The committee or committees constituted under this section shall meet at such time and at such 
places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings (including the quorum) as may be specified by the regulations made under this Act.  
15. Delegation of powers .—The Board may, for the purpose of exercising and discharging its 
powers, functions and duties, by general or spe cial order in writing, specif y— 
(a) the powers and duties conferred or imposed upon the Board by or under this Act, which 
may also be exercised or performed by the Chairperson; and  
(b) the powers and duties conferred or imposed on the Chairperson by or under this Act, which 
may also be exercised or performed by the Deputy Chairperson or any officer or officers of the 
Board and the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to which the powers and duties may be 
exercised and performed:  
Provided that any powers and duties conferred or  imposed upon the Deputy Chairperson or any 
officer of the Board under this clause shall be exercised and performed by him subject to the 
supervision and control of the Chairperson.  
16. Restriction of re -employment .—(1) The Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and other 
Members, on ceasing to hold office shall not, for a period of one year, accept any employment 
(including as consultant or otherwise) in any organisation relating to Major Port whose matter has 
been dealt with by such Chairperson, Deputy Chairpers on or Member, as the case may be, or has been 
before the Board when he held office as such Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or Member.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prevent the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson or a Member, as 
the case may be, to accep t any employment in any organisation relating to Major Port controlled or 
maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.  
17. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board .—No act or proceedings of the 
Board shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of such Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
18. Power to make appointments .—(1) The power of appointing any person to any post, whether 
temporary or permanent shall — 
(a) in the case of a post — 
(i) the incumbent of which is to be regarded as the Head of a Department; or  
(ii) to which such incumbent is to be appointed; or  10 
 (iii) the maximum of the pay scale of which (exclusive or allowances) exceeds such amount 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix,  be exercisable by 
the Central Government after consultation with t he Chairperson;  
(b) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the Chairperson or by such authority, as may 
be specified by the regulations:  
Provided that no person shall be appointed as a pilot at any port, who is not for the time being 
authorised b y the Central Government under the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908                 
(15 of 1908) to pilot vessels at that or any other port.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify any post the incumbent of which shall, for the 
purposes of  this Act, be regarded as the Head of a Department.  
19. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board .—All orders, decisions and other 
instruments issued by the Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT AND  ADMINISTRATION  
A. S TAFF OF  MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITY  
20. List of staff of Board .—The Board shall after every five years prepare and submit to the 
Central Government a list of the employees of the Board of Major Port Authority indicating therein 
the designations and grades of employees, and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to 
be paid to them.  
B. P ROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
21. Board to be deemed as successor of Board of Trustees of Major Port .—On and from the 
date of constitution of  the Board — 
(a) the Board of the Major Port Authority shall be the successor of the Board of Trustees 
constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963);  
(b) all the assets and liabilities of the Board of Trustees shall stand transferred to, and vested in, 
the Board.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( b), the assets of the Board of Trustees shall be 
deemed to include all rights and powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, 
in particular, cash balances, deposits and  all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such 
properties as may be in the possession of the Board of Trustees and all books of account and other 
documents relating to the same; and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities  and 
obligations of whatever kind;  
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all debts, obligations and liabilities 
incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the 
Board of Trustees immedi ately before that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the said 
Board of Trustees, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, 
with or for, the Board;  
(d) all sums of monies due to the Board of Trustees immediate ly before that date shall be 
deemed to be due to the Board;  
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted  or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Board of Trustees immediately before that date may be continued or may be instituted 
by or against the Board;  
(f) every employee serving under the Board of Trustees of the Major Port immediately before  
such date shall become an employee of the Board, shall hold his office or service therein by the 
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service as he would have held if the Board 
had not been established and shall continue to do so unless a nd until his employment in the Board 11 
 is terminated or until  his tenure, remuneration or terms and conditions of service are duly altered 
by the Board:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such 
employee shall not  be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government; and  
(g) every person who was receiving any retirement benefit from the Board of Trustees under 
the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) immediately before such dat e, shall continue to 
receive the same benefit from the Board:  
Provided that the retirement benefit of such person shall not be altered by the Board to his 
disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
22. Usage of port assets by Boa rd.—(1) The Board of each Major Port shall be entitled to use its 
property, assets and funds in such manner and for such purposes as it may deem fit for the benefit of 
that Major Port.  
(2) All port assets shall be used and developed as per the regulations made by the Board in that 
behalf and to the exclusion of any municipal, local or Government regulation:  
Provided that the manner of any contract or arrangement by the Board for sale of land or 
immovable property, or period and manner for lease of land or immovable property for port related 
use and non -port related use, shall be in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the tenure for lease of land or immovable property for Public Private 
Partnership projects by the Board shall be subject t o the policy notified by the Central Government in 
respect of such Public Private Partnership projects.  
(3) The Board of each Major Port may erect, construct or build such civil structures for port 
development or improving commerce and trade in national interest for which no regulatory license or 
approval from the State authorities shall be required, unless so mandated by the Central Government.  
(4) For those port assets that relate to landing places and limits of customs area and which require 
fresh appr oval from the Commissioner of Customs under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the 
Board of each Major Port Authority shall, by notification, declare the availability and readiness of 
such port assets after the said approval has been received from the Com missioner of Customs.  
23. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement .—Where any 
immovable property is required for the purposes of the Board, the Central Government, or as the case 
may be, the State Government may, at the request of the Board, procure the acquisition thereof under 
the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013 (30 of 2013)  or any other law for the time being in force, and on payment by 
the Board, the comp ensation awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government 
in connection with the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board.  
24. Contracts by Board .—(1) The Board of each Major Port shall be competent to enter into and 
perform any contract necessary for discharging of its functions under this Act.  
(2) Every contract shall, on behalf of the Board of each Major Port, be made by the Chairperson or 
by any such officer of the Board as the Chairperson may by general or special order, auth orise in this 
behalf and shall be sealed with the common seal of the Board  
(3) The form and manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act, shall be such as may 
be specified by regulations.  
C. P LANING AND DEVELOPMENT  
25. Master Plan .—Subject to the rules made under this Act, the Board of each Major Port shall be 
entitled to create specific master plan in respect of any development or infrastructure established or 
proposed to be established within the port limits and the land appurtenant  thereto a nd such master 
plan shall be independent of any local or State Government regulations of any authority whatsoever:  12 
 Provided that in case of any conflict between the master plan created by the Board and any local 
authority, the master plan created by the Bo ard shall prevail.  
26. Powers of Board in respect of planning and development .—(1) For the purposes of 
planning and development of the Major Port, the Board in relation to that Major Port shall have the 
power to make regulations, not inconsistent with the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962)  or any rules 
made thereunder , to— 
(a) undertake, execute and perform such works and provide such services at or within the port 
limits and Major Port approaches on such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary or 
expedient;  
(b) declare availability of the port assets at the Major Port or Major Port approaches for port 
related activities and services subject to such limits, conditions and restrictions as it may deem 
necessary or expedient;  
(c) develop and provide in frastructure facilities including setting up of new ports, jetties, 
navigational channels, dry ports and such other infrastructure in furtherance of the interest of the 
Major Port;  
(d) take charge of the goods from the concerned owner for the purpose of pe rforming any port 
related services;  
(e) order, in case of emergency or for any other reason, the master or owner or agent of any sea -
going vessel, not to bring any vessel alongside of, or to remove such vessel from, any dock, berth, 
wharf, quay, stage, jet ty or pier belonging to or under the control of the Board;  
(f) permit construction and development by itself or through any person, to make, erect, fix or 
remove within the port limits or Major Port approaches any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty, pier, 
building or structure, erection or mooring or undertake any reclamation of foreshore within the 
said limits and buildings and amenities required for the residence and welfare of the employees of 
the Board, subject to such limits, conditions and restrictions a s it may deem necessary or 
expedient;  
(g) provide exemption or remission from payment of any rate or charge leviable on any goods 
or vessels or class of goods or vessels under this Act;  
(h) provide any other services or amenities in respect of vessels, pas sengers, goods or 
employees;  
(i) undertake, execute and perform such works, activities and studies to promote maritime 
education, training skill development of coastal communities, seafarers welfare and Major Port 
related development; and  
(j) make or construct or erect within the port limits such structures, buildings, drains, roads, 
fences, tube -wells, in -take wells, storage facilities, warehouses, pipelines, telephone lines, 
communication towers, electricity supply or transmission equipment and such other works and 
conveniences as the Board of each Major Port thinks proper.  
(2) The power of the Board to make regulations under sub -section ( 1) shall be independent of 
powers of any local authority to make regulations in respect of Major Port:  
Provided that in case of conflict between the regulations made by the local authority and those 
made by Board, the regulations made by Board shall prevail.  
D. I MPOSITION OF RATES  
27. Scale of rates for assets and services available at Major Port .—(1) The Board of each 
Major Port Authority or the committee or committees constituted in this behalf by the Board in 
accordance with section 14, may, — 
(a) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which, any services shall 
be performed or made avai lable;  13 
 (b) frame scale of rates at which, and a statement of conditions under which, the access to and 
usage of the port assets may be allowed by the Board;  
(c) frame consolidated scale of rates for any combination of services specified in clause ( a) or 
for any combination of such service or services with any user or permission to use or access to any 
port assets as specified in clause ( b); 
(d) pass an order for refund of any amount overcharged by the Board in relation to the services 
provided to any person;  
(e) pass an order for recovery of any rate or charge which is short -levied or erroneously 
refunded by the Board to any person under this Act; and  
(f) frame different scales, fees, rates and conditions for different classes of goods and vessels 
unde r this section:  
Provided that the fixation and implementation of such scales, fees, rates and conditions shall be 
in consonance with the norms as may be prescribed and shall. — 
(i) not be with retrospective effect;  
(ii) not be in derogation with the rules made by or directives of the Central Government in 
this behalf;  
(iii) not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003);  and 
(iv) not be inconsistent with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force:  
Provided  that in case of Public Private Partnership projects after the commencement of this Act, 
concessionaire shall fix the tariff based on market conditions and on such other conditions as may be 
notified:  
Provided further that the revenue share and other condi tions would be as per the provisions of the 
specific concession agreement between the Board and the Public Private Partnership concessionaire 
appointed under the Public Private Partnership project.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of su b-section ( 1), the Board may, by auction 
or by inviting tenders, lease any port asset belonging to or in its possession or occupation at a rate 
higher than that provided under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1). 
28. Board's lien for rates .—(1) The Board for the  amount of all rates leviable under this Act in 
respect of any goods and for the rent due to such Board for any buildings, plinths stacking areas, or 
other premises on or in which any goods may have been placed, it shall have a lien on such goods, 
and may seize and detain the same until such rates and rents are fully paid.  
(2) The right of lien referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall have priority over all other liens and claims, 
except for general average and for ship owner's lien upon the said goods for frei ght and other charges 
where such lien exists and has been preserved in the manner provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 29, 
and for monies payable to the Central Government under any law for the time being in force relating 
to customs, other than by way o f penalty or fine.  
(3) The right of lien referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also vest with any concessionaire appointed 
by the Board with whom a concession contract under a Public Private Partnership project for 
operating any berth or terminal within the  port limits has been executed by the said Board.  
29. Ship -owner's lien for freight and other charges .—(1) If the master or owner of any vessel or 
his agent, at or before the time of landing from such vessel or any goods at any port asset belonging to 
or in the occupation of the Board of the Major Port, gives to such Board a notice in writing that such 
goods are to remain subject to a lien for freight or other charges payable to the ship -owner, to 
an amount to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien to such 
amount.  
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at the Board's designated storage or 
godown or warehouse stations at the risk and expense of the owners of the goods until such lien is 14 
 discharge d and godown or storage rent shall be payable by the party entitled to such goods for the 
time during which they may be so retained.  
(3) Upon the production, before any officer appointed by the Board in that behalf, of a document 
purporting to be a receipt  for, or release from, the amount of such lien, executed by the person by 
whom or on whose behalf such notice has been given, the Board may permit such goods to be 
removed without regard to such lien, provided that the Board shall have used reasonable care  in 
respect to the authenticity of such document.  
30. Sale of goods and application of sale proceeds in certain cases .—(1) The Board may, after 
expiry of such time and in such manner as stipulated in  section 48  of the Customs Act, 1962 ( 52 of 
1962) , sell any goods that have passed or placed into the custody of the Board upon landing thereof — 
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods have not been paid; or  
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place on or in whic h such goods have been 
stored has not been paid; or  
(c) if any lien of any ship -owner or Container Freight Station or Inland Container Depot for 
freight or other charges of which notice has been given has not been discharged and if the person 
claiming such  lien for freight or other charge has made to the Board an application for such sale; or  
(d) if such goods are not removed by the owner or the person entitled thereto from the premises 
of the Board:  
Provided that the Board may authorise any concessionaire appointed by it under the Public 
Private Partnership project for operating any berth or terminal within the port limits to sell such 
goods:  
Provided further that any such authorisation by the Board shall be subject to the terms and 
conditions of the conces sion agreement entered into by the Board with such concessionaire.  
(2) The proceeds of sale of goods under sub -section ( 1) shall be applied in the manner as provided 
in section 150  of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962).  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, controlled goods may be sold at such time 
and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
Explanation .-- For the purposes of this section, the expression “controlled goods ” means the 
goods, the price or disposal of which  is regulated under any law for the time being in force.  
31. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of vessel .—(1) If the master of any vessel in 
respect of which any rates or penalties are payable under this Act, or under any regulations or orders 
made in pursuance thereof, refuses or neglects to pay the same or any part thereof on demand, the 
Board on its own or on request of the concessionaire appointed by the Board under the Public Private 
Partnership project, may distrain or arrest such vessel a nd the tackle, apparel and furniture belonging 
thereto, or any part thereof, and detain the same until the amount so due to the Board or such 
concessionaire, together with such further amount as may accrue for any period during which the 
vessel is under di straint or arrest, is paid.  
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost of the distress or arrest, or of the 
keeping of the same, remains unpaid for the space of fifteen days next after any such distress or arrest 
has been so made, the Board on its own or on request of such  concessionaire may cause the vessel or 
other thing so distrained or arrested to be sold, and, with the proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such 
rates or penalties and costs, including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus (if 
any) to the master of such vessel on demand.  
32. Application to Adjudicatory Board .—Any person aggrieved by any action of the Board 
while exercising its powers under sections 22 to 31 (except section 29), may approach the 
Adjudicatory Board constituted under section 54 by filing an application before it in such form, 
manner and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.  
 15 
 CHAPTER IV  
POWER S OF BOARD S OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORIT IES IN RESPECT OF LOANS AND SECURITIES  
A. F INANCIAL  POWERS OF  BOARDS OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITIES  
33. Power to raise loans and issue securities .—(1) The Board may for the purposes of its capital 
expenditure and working capital requirements raise loans in any c urrency or currencies from any — 
(a) scheduled bank  or financial institution located within India; or  
(b) financial institution in any country outside India in compliance with the laws for the time 
being in force:  
Provided that no loan or loans exceeding a sum equivalent to fifty per cent. of the capital 
reserves of the Board shall be raised by the Board without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government.  
(2) The loans may be raised by Board in the open market within India and in any country outside 
India on port securities including but not limited to  debentures, bonds and stock certificates issued by 
the Board or may be obtained from the Central Government or a State Government:  
Provided that no loans shall be raised from and no securities shall be issued to any person resident 
outside India without c omplying with the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), the 
circulars and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India, the Foreign Direct Investment Policy 
issued by the Central Government and any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) The holder of any port security in any form may obtain in exchange thereof, upon such terms as 
the Board may from time to time determine, a port security in such form as may be specified by the 
regulations made by the Board.  
(4) The right to sue in respec t of monies secured by port securities shall be exercisable by the 
holders thereof subject to the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
(5) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the power of the Boards of Major Port 
Authorities to raise loans under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (9 of 1914).  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board may borrow mon ies by means of 
temporary overdraft or otherwise by pledging the securities held by the Board in its reserve funds or 
on the security of the fixed deposits of the Board in its banks:  
Provided that such temporary overdrafts or other loans shall not be taken , without previous 
sanction of the Central Government, if at any time in any year the amount of such overdrafts or other 
loans exceeds a sum equivalent to fifty per cent. of the capital reserves of the Board:  
Provided further that all monies so borrowed by  temporary overdrafts or otherwise shall be 
expended for the purposes of this Act.  
34. Endorsements to be made on security itself .—Notwithstanding anything contained in       
 section 15  of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881  (26 of 1881),  no endorsement of a port security, 
which is transferable by endorsement, shall be valid unless made by the signature of the holder 
inscribed on the back of the security itself.  
35. Endorser of security not liable for amount thereof .—Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881),  a person shall not by reason only of his having 
endorsed any port security be liable to pay any monies due, either as principal or as interest 
thereunder.  
36. Recognition as holder of port securities in certain cases and legal effect thereof .—(1) The 
person to whom a duplicate or new security has been issued under the regulations made by the Board 
shall be deemed for the purposes of sub -section ( 2) to have been recognised by the Board as the  
holder of the security; and a duplicate security or a new security so issued to any person shall be 
deemed to constitute a new contract between the Board and such person and all persons deriving title 
thereafter through him.  16 
 (2) No recognition by the Board of a person as the holder of a port security shall be called in 
question by any court so far as such recognition affects the relations of the Board with the person 
recognised by it as the holder of a port security or with any person claiming an inter est in such 
security; and any such recognition by the Board of any person shall operate to confer on that person a 
title to the security or securities subject only to a personal liability to the rightful owner of the security 
for money had and received on his account.  
37. Discharge in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Lim itation Act, 1963 
(36 of 1963). — 
(a) on payment of the amount due on a port security on or after the date on which payment 
becomes due; or  
(b) when a duplicate securi ty has been issued under the regulations made by the Board under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 36; or  
(c) when a new security has been issued upon conversion, consolidation or sub -division under 
the regulations made by the Board,  the Board shall be discharged  from all its liability in respect of 
the security so paid or in place of which a duplicate or new security has been issued — 
(i) in the case of payment after the lapse of six years from the date on which payment was 
due; 
(ii) in the case of a duplicate sec urity after the lapse of six years from the date of the issue 
thereof or from the date of the last payment of interest on the original security, whichever date 
is later;  
(iii) in case of a new security issued upon conversion, consolidation or sub -division after the 
lapse of six years from the date of the issue thereof.  
38. Security for loans taken out by Boards of Major Port Authorities .—If a loan is raised by 
the Board of any Major Port and a security other than the port security is required to be furnishe d to 
secure such loan, the Board of that Major Por t may secure such loan against — 
(a) the port assets other than — 
(i) any sum set apart by the Board — 
(A) as the sinking fund for the purpose of paying off any loan; or  
(B) for the payment of pension to its employees; or  
(ii) the provident or pension fund established by the Board; and  
(b) income of the Board from the port assets and services.  
39. Power of Board to repay loans to Government before due date .—The Board may apply any 
sums, out of monies which may  come into its hands under the provisions of this Act and which can be 
so applied without prejudicing the security of the other holders of port securities, in repaying to the 
Government any sum which may remain due to it in respect of the principal account  of any loan 
although the time fixed for the repayment of the same may not have arrived.  
40. Establishment and application of sinking fund .—(1) In respect of loans raised by the 
respective Board of the Major Port Authorities under this Act, which are not r epayable before the 
expiration of one year from the date of such loans, such Boards shall set apart out of their income 
enough sinking fund or funds to service or liquidate such loans for a period of at least one year.  
(2) Before the commencement of this A ct, if any sinking fund had been established by the Board 
of Trustees constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) in respect of a loan raised 
by it for which loan, the Board is liable under this Act and the sinking fund so established by  that 
Board of Trusts shall be deemed to have been established by the Board under this Act.  
(3) The sums so set apart by the Board under sub -section ( 1) and the sums forming part of any 
sinking fund referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be applied in such m anner as may be prescribed.  17 
 (4) The Board may apply the whole or any part of the sums accumulated in any sinking fund in or 
towards the discharge of the monies borrowed for the repayment of which the fund has been 
established:  
Provided that the Board pays into the fund in each year, and accumulates until the whole of the 
monies borrowed are discharged, a sum equivalent to the interest which would have been produced by 
the sinking fund, or the part of the sinking fund so applied.  
41. Existing loans and securities to continue .— Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
all loans raised or borrowed and all securities issued or pledged in relation to a Major Port prior to the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to be governed in  accordance with the provisions of the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963).  
B. G ENERAL  ACCOUNT OF MAJOR  PORT AUTHORITIES  
42. General accounts of Board .—All monies received by or on behalf of the Board under the 
provisions of this Act shall be credited to such general account or accounts of the Board which the 
Board may from time to time generally open with any Nationalised Bank or any Scheduled Bank as 
per the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.  
43. Application of money in general accounts .—(1) The monies credited to the general account 
or accounts under section 42, shall be applied by the Board in payment of the following charges, 
namely:— 
(a) the salaries, fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate all owances or other 
monies due to — 
(i) the Members of the Board except Members appointed under clauses ( d), (e) and ( f) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(ii) the serving and  retired employees of the Board; and  
(iii) the surviving relatives, if any, of such employees;  
(b) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in the conduct and administration of 
any provident or welfare fund or loan or special fund established b y the Board;  
(c) the maintenance, development, security and protection of the Board and the docks, 
warehouses and other port assets;  
(d) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property belonging to or vested in the Board and 
all charges upon the same a nd all working expenses;  
(e) the costs, expenses, sums, payments and contributions to be made or incurred by the Board 
for the purposes provided under sections 25 and 26; and  
(f) any other charge or expenditure for which the Board may be legally liable.  
(2) All monies standing to the credit of the Board which cannot immediately be applied in the 
manner or for the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1) may be used for such lawful purposes as the 
Board may from time to time decide.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything  contained in section 42 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), monies 
received by or on behalf of the Board from non -port related use except those falling under section 70 
shall be credited to a designated account and shall be applied by the Board for capital inve stment or 
for such purposes as may be prescribed.  
C. A CCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
44. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such 
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  18 
 (2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
such other person  as may be appointed by him in this behalf and any amount payable to him by the 
Board in respect of such audit shall be debitable to the general account of the Board.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in conne ction 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has 
in connection with the audit of Government acc ounts and, in particular shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Board and the Central Government shall cause the same to 
be laid, as soon  as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
SUPERVISION  OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
45. Administration report .—As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year and not 
later than such date as may be fixed by the Central Government, the Board shall submit to the Central 
Government a detailed report of the administration of the Board during the preceding year ending on 
the thirty -first day of March, in such form as the Central Government may direct.  
46. Power of Cen tral Government to order survey or examination of works of Board .—The 
Central Government may, at any time, order a local survey or examination of any works of the Board, 
or the intended site thereof and the cost of such survey and examination shall be born e and paid by the 
Board from and out of the monies credited to its general account.  
47. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works at cost of Board .—(1) If, at 
any time, the Central Government is of the opinion that the inaction by any Board in repairing, 
completing, restoring, carrying out or providing any work or appliance mentioned in sub -section ( 2) 
has led to a grave emergency, the Central Government may cause such work to be restored or 
completed or carried out, or such repairs to be car ried out or such appliance to be provided and the 
cost of any such restoration, completion, construction, repair or provision shall be paid by the 
concerned Board from and out of the monies credited to its general account.  
(2) The following actions or omis sions may be considered to have led to grave emergency under 
sub-section ( 1), if any Board — 
(a) allows any work or appliance constructed or provided by, or vested in, the Board to fall into 
disrepair; or  
(b) does not, within a reasonable time, complete any  work commenced by the Board or 
included in any estimate sanctioned by the Central Government; or  
(c) does not, after due notice in writing, proceed to carry out effectually any work or repair or 
provide any appliance which is necessary in the opinion of t he Central Government for the 
purposes of this Act.  
48. Power of Central Government to take over management of Board .—(1) If, at any time, the 
Central Government is of the opinion -- 
(a) any Board is unable to perform the duties imposed on it by or under th e provisions of this 
Act or of any other law for the time being in force; or  
(b) that any Board has persistently made defaults in performance of the duties imposed upon it 
by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time being in for ce and as a result 
of such default, the financial position or the administration of that Board has greatly deteriorated,  19 
 the Central Government may, by notification, take over the management of that Board for such 
period, not exceeding twelve months at a time, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in 
clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable time of not less than three months to the 
Board to sho w-cause why its management should not be taken over and shall consider the 
explanations and objections, if any, of that Board.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) for taking over the management of 
the Board,  — 
(a) all the Members of the Board shall, as from the date of taking over, stand removed from 
their respective office or position in the Board;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other 
law for the time being in forc e, to be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Board, shall be 
exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct in this 
behalf until the Board is reconstituted under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3); 
(c) all prope rty vested in the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of taking over specified in the notification issued under    
sub-section ( 1) or at any time prior to such expiration, the Central Go vernment may, by 
notification,. — 
(a) extend the period of taking over the management of the Board for such further term, not 
exceeding twelve months, as it may consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Board by making fresh appointment to all posts of the Board on such 
terms and conditions as the Central Government may consider necessary, and in such case, any 
person who stand removed from their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
deemed disqu alified for appointment.  
49. Laying of report .—For any action or actions taken under sections 47 and 48 and any 
notification issued under section 48, the Central Government shall prepare and cause a full report of 
any such action or actions and notificatio n and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
50. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation to use port                       
assets .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, in the interest 
of security of the nation or on account of a grave emergency, by general or special order, from time to 
time, permit certain specified vessels or classes of vessels to discharge or ship goods or certain 
specified goods or cl asses of goods, at such place in a Major Port or within the Major Port 
approaches, in such manner, during such period and subject to such payments to the concerned Board 
in relation to such Major Port or such Major Port approaches and on such conditions as  the Central 
Government may think fit.  
51. Board not to sell, alienate or divest its assets, properties, rights, powers and 
authorisations without sanction of Central Government .—The Board shall not sell, alienate or 
divest its assets, properties, rights, powers and authorisations vested in it under this Act without the 
prior sanction of the Central Government.  
52. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Board .—(1) The Central Government 
or a State Government, from the date of commencement of thi s Act, shall have, in respect of loans 
made by it to the Board or of loans made to any other authority for the repayment of which the Board 
is legally liable on such commencement, the same remedies and priority as applicable under the Major 
Port Trusts Act , 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) as if this Act had not been passed.  
(2) For prospective loans by the Central or State Governments or of loans made by any other 
authority, the remedies would be the same as available to the holders of port securities issued by the 20 
 Board  unless priority or greater rights are granted by the Board in respect of such loans within the 
respective loan agreements.  
53. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Chapter, the Board shall in discharge of its functions under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on question of policy as the Central Government may give in writing from time to 
time:  
Provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is 
given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government on whether a question is one of the policy or not shall 
be final and binding on the Board.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
CONSTITUTION OF  ADJUDICATORY  BOARD  
54. Constitution of Adjudicatory Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, a Board to be known as the 
Adjudicatory Board to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority con ferred on such Adjudicatory 
Board by or under this Act:  
Provided that until the constitution of the Adjudicatory Board, the Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
constituted under  section 47A  of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963) shall discharge the 
functions of the Adjudicatory Board under this Act and shall cease to exist immediately after the 
constitution of the Adjudicatory Board under this Act:  
Provided further that on and from the date of constitu tion of the Adjudicatory Board — 
(a) all the assets  and liabilities of the Tariff Authority for Major Ports shall stand transferred to, 
and vested in, the Adjudicatory Board.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this clause, the assets of the Tariff Authority for Major 
Ports shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, all properties, whether movable or 
immovable, including, in particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or 
arising out of, such properties as may be in the possession of the Tariff Authority for Major Ports , 
and all books of account and other documents relating to the same, and liabilities, shall be deemed 
to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a), all debts, obligations and liab ilities 
incurred, all contracts entered into, and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for 
the Tariff Authority for Major Ports before that date, for or in  connection with the purpose of the 
said Tariff Authority for Major Ports, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into, or 
engaged to be done by, with or for, the Adjudicatory Board;  
(c) all sums of money due to the Tariff Authority for Major Ports immediately before that date 
shall be deemed to be due to the Adjudicatory Board;  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been instituted by or 
against the Tariff Authority for Major Ports immediately before that date may be continued or may 
be instituted by or against the Adjudicatory Board;  
(e) every em ployee serving under the Tariff Authority for Major Ports immediately before such 
date shall become an employee of the Adjudicatory Board and shall hold his office or service 
therein by the same tenure without any change or derogation of the terms and cond itions of service 
held with the Tariff Authority for Major Ports:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such 
employee shall not be altered to their disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central 
Govern ment;  21 
 (f) every person who was receiving any retirement benefits from the Tariff Authority for Major 
Ports immediately before such date, shall continue to receive the same benefit from the 
Adjudicatory Board:  
Provided that the retirement benefits of such p erson shall not be altered by the Adjudicatory 
Board to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(2) The head office of the Adjudicatory Board shall be at such a place as may be notified by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the Adjudicatory Board may hold its sittings at such other places as the Presiding 
Officer may decide from time to time, having taken into consideration the convenience to decide the 
disputes referred to it.  
55. Composition of Adjudicatory Board .—The Adjudicatory Board shall consist of a Presiding 
Officer and two other members, as may be appointed by the Central Government.  
56. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer and members of 
Adjudicatory Board .—(1) A person shall not  be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer 
of the Adjudicatory Board unless he is —retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India or a retired Chief 
Justice of a High Court.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the A djudicatory Board unless 
he is— 
(a) a retired Chief Secretary of a State Government or equivalent; or  
(b) a retired Secretary of the Government of India or equivalent,   
and has an experience of not less than twenty years in the field of finance, commerce, ad ministration, 
maritime, shipping or port related matters . 
(3) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be appointed by the 
Central Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice 
of India or his nominee, the Secretary of the Department dealing with Shipping and such other 
persons, and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board shall hold office for a term not 
exceeding five years fro m the date on which they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of 
seventy years, whichever is earlier.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Presiding Officer and members of the Adj udicatory Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowance nor other terms and conditions of service of the 
Presiding Officer or members of the Adjudicatory Board shall be varied to their disadvantage after 
their app ointment.  
57. Removal and suspension of Presiding Officer and members of Adjudicatory Board .—(1) 
The Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee, remove 
from office  of the Presiding Officer, who — 
(a) has been adju dged as an insolvent;  
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Presiding Officer or member;  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude;  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as such Presiding Officer or member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  22 
 (2) Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of sub -section ( 1), the Presiding Officer shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order made by the Central Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by the Chief Justice of India or his nominee on a 
reference made to him by the Central Government in which such Presiding Officer has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, with the concur rence of the Chief Justice of India suspend from 
office, the Presiding Officer in respect of whom reference has been made to the Chief Justice of India 
under sub -section ( 2) until the Central Government has passed orders on receipt of the report of the 
Chief Justice of India on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government shall, after consultation with the Supreme Court, make rules to 
regulate the procedure for the inquiry on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity referred to 
in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a member of the Adjudicatory Board 
shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the Central Government on the 
ground of his proved misbehaviour or incapacity, after an inquiry, held  in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion that the 
member ought to be removed on any such ground referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(6) The Central Government may suspend any member of the Ad judicatory Board in respect of 
whom an inquiry under sub -section ( 5) is being initiated or pending until the Central Government has 
passed an order on receipt of the report of the inquiry.  
58.  Powers and functions of Adjudicatory Board .—(1) The Adjudicato ry Board referred to in 
section 54 shall perform the following functions, other than tariff setting, namely: — 
(a) the functions envisaged to be carried out by the erstwhile Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
arising from the Tariff Guidelines of 2005, 2008, 2013, 2018 and 2019 and tariffs orders issued by 
the said Authority;  
(b) to receive and adjudicate reference on any dispute or differences or claims relating to rights 
and obligations of Major Ports and Public Private Partnership concessionaires or captive  users for 
dedicated berth within the framework of their concession agreements and to pass orders after 
considering and hearing all the parties involved in the dispute;  
(c) to appraise, review the stressed Public Private Partnership projects as referred by  the Central 
Government or the Board, and to suggest measures to revive such projects;  
(d) to look into the complaints received from port users against the services and terms of 
service rendered by the Major Ports or the private operators operating in the Major Ports and to 
pass necessary orders after hearing the parties concerned; and  
(e) to look into any other matter relating to the operations of the Major Port, as may be referred 
to it by the Central Government or the Board, and to pass orders or give su ggestions, as the case 
may be.  
(2) The procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board, while discharging its functions 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), as well as other matters related to funding, accounts and audit of such 
Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, while 
exercising the powers under sub -section ( 1), the Adjudicatory Board shall have the same powers as 
are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)  while trying a suit, in 
respect of the fol lowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other documents, at such place and at 
such time as may be specified by the Adjudicatory Board;  
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  23 
 (c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) Any proceeding before the Adjudicatory Board, shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of  section 193  and 228 and for the purposes of  section 196  of the Indian Penal 
Code ( 45 of 1860),  and the Adjudicatory Board shall be deemed to a civil court for all the purposes 
of section 195 and C hapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
59. Bar of jurisdiction of any court .—No other court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
for proceeding in respect of any matter falling within the scope of the Adjudicatory Board u nder this 
Act: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to matters stated in section 58 that are 
referred to arbitration by the concerned parties within the framework of their respective contracts or 
concession agreements.  
60. Review an d appeal .—(1) Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Adjudicatory 
Board under this Act, from which an appeal is allowed under sub -section ( 2), but from which no 
appeal has been preferred, may apply for a review of such decision before the Adjudicatory Board, in 
such form and manner and within such time, as may be prescribed, and the said Board may make such 
order thereon, as it thinks fit.  
(2) Any party aggrieved by any decision or order of the Adjudicatory Board, may file an appeal to 
the Supreme Court of India, within sixty days from the date of communication of such decision or 
order to him:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie from a decision or order passed by the Adjudicatory Board with 
the consent of parties:  
Provided further that the Su preme Court may, entertain any appeal after the expiry of sixty days, if 
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal.  
61. Officers and employees of Adjudicatory Board .—(1) The Adjudicatory Board may, with  the 
previous approval of the Central Government, appoint officers and such other employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the officers 
and employees of the Adjudicatory Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
62. General provision for punishment of offences .—Any person who contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
63. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothin g contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to such 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attr ibutable to any negligence on the part 
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, 24 
 or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against a nd punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the  expressions — 
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
64. Cognizance of offences .—No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act or any rule or regulation 
made thereunder.  
65. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Board or any Member or employee thereof or the Adjudicatory Board or the Presiding Officer or 
any member or employee thereof in respect of anything which is i n good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, or for any deficiency of service or any 
consequential losses on account of deficiency in services.  
66. Employees of Board or Adjudicatory Board to be public servants .—Every person 
employed by the Board or the Adjudicatory Board under this Act, shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of  section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
67. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions o f this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
68. Power to evict certain persons from premises of Board .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Board in exercise of the powers conferred 
on it by regulations made under this Act or by invoking the contractual remedies available to the 
Board may cancel the allotmen t of any premises made to any employee of the Board or any other 
person or evict an employee of the Board or any person in occupation of any port asset or premises or 
area in the port limits, by notice in writing, addressed to such allottee or employee or other person 
who may be in occupation or possession thereof in violation of the regulations specified or formulated 
by the Board:  
Provided that such notice shall indicate the reasons for cancellation of allotment or eviction or 
removal along with the perio d within which the removal or eviction is sought and recovery of the 
sums of dues in arrears and also for the extended unauthorised use of such premises.  
(2) If any allottee or employee or other person is aggrieved by the order made under sub -section 
(1), then the said allottee or employee or other person may appeal against the order with the 
compensation officer so appointed by the Board within thirty days from the receipt of the order under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) If any allottee or employee or other person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under 
sub-section ( 1), then any Magistrate of the First Class may, on application made by or on behalf of the 
Board, order any police officer, with proper assistance, to enter into the premises and evict any pe rson 
from, and take possession of, the premises and to deliver the same to the Board or a person appointed 
by the Board in that behalf and the police officer may, for the purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
(4) Any such notice as is referred to in  sub-section ( 1) may be served -- 
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or employee or any other person who may be in 
occupation or possession of the whole or any part of the premises; or  25 
 (b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing  it on the outer door or some other 
conspicuous part of the premises; or  
(c) by registered post; or  
(d) by publishing in the local newspaper having circulation in the area.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, the expression "premises" means any  land, 
building or part of a building which is part of port assets and includes — 
(i) areas such as canteens, gardens, grounds and out -houses, if any, appertaining to such 
building or part of a building;  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of  a building for the more beneficial enjoyment 
thereof; and  
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the Board and found in such building or 
part of a building.  
69. Alternate remedy by suit .—Without prejudice to any other action that may be t aken under 
this Act, the Board may recover by suit any rates, damages, expenses, costs, or in case of sale the 
balance thereof, when the proceeds of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or recoverable 
by, the Board under this Act or under an y regulations made in pursuance thereof.  
70. Corporate Social Responsibility and development of infrastructure by Board .—(1) The 
Board may use its funds for providing social benefits including development of infrastructure in areas 
of education, health, ho using, accommodation, skill development, training and recreational activities 
for its own employees, customers, business partners, Government and Non -Government Organisation, 
local communities, environment and society at large.  
(2) The manner of utilisatio n of funds for the Corporate Social Responsibility shall be such, as may 
be prescribed.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression "Corporate Social Responsibility" 
means the activities, to be undertaken by the concerned Major Port, as r eferred to in sub -section ( 1) 
and section 135  of the Companies Act, 2013 ( 18 of 2013 ). 
71. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the composition of the Selection Committee and the manner of appointment of the 
Chairperson and De puty Chairperson of the Board under sub -section (1) of section 4;  
(b) the manner of appointment of Members of the Board under sub -sections (2) and (3) of 
section 4;  
(c) the procedure for conducting any inquiry made under sub -section (2) of section 5;  
(d) the honorarium payable to the Independent Members under section 11;  
(e) the parameters for creation of Master Plan under section 25;  
(f) the norms for fixation and implementation of scales, fees, rates and conditions under sub -
section ( 1) of section 27;  
(g) the form, manner and fees for filing application before the Adjudicatory Board under 
section 32;  
(h) the manner of applying the sums under sub -section ( 3) of section 40;  
(i) the purposes for which the monies received by the Board shall be applied under su b-section 
(3) of section  43; 26 
 (j) the form in which the Board shall prepare an annual report under sub -section ( 1) of section 
44; 
(k) the manner of appointment of the Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 56; 
(l) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of services of the 
Presiding Officer and members of the Adjudicatory Board under sub -section (5) of section 56;  
(m) the procedure for conducting an inquiry under sub -section (5) of section 57;  
(n) the procedure to be adopted by the Adjudicatory Board under sub -section (2) of section 58;  
(o) other functions of the Adjudicatory Board under clause (d) of sub -section (3) of section 58;  
(p) the form and manner for applying of a review before the Adjudicatory Board under sub -
section (1) of section 60;  
(q) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of 
officers and employees of the Adjudicatory Board under sub -section (2) of section 61;  
(r) the man ner of utilisation of funds for Corporate Social Responsibility under sub -section (2) 
of section 70; and  
(s) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be made, by rules.  
72. Power of Board to ma ke regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and after previous publication, by notification, shall make regulations consistent 
with this Act and the rules made there under to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(b) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(c) the appointment of employees under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
(d) the use and development of the port assets under sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(e) the form and manner in which contracts shall be made by the Board under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 24;  
(f) the purposes of planning and development of Major Port under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(g) the form of port security under sub -section ( 3) of section 33;  
(h) the issuance of duplicate or new security under sub -section ( 1) of section 36; and  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by the regulations or in respect 
of which provision is to be made by the regulations.  
73. Laying of rules and regulations .—Every rule made by the Central Government, every 
regulation made by the Board and every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Pa rliament, while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session, immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, regulation or 
notification or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation or notification should not be made, the rule, 
regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modifie d form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to 
the validity of anything previously done under that rule, regulation or notification.  27 
 74. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
exped ient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made in respect of a Major Port after the expiry of a period of 
three years from the date on which this Act is made applicable to that Major Port.  
(2) Every order made under this sectio n shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
75. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) is here by repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) under sub -section 
(1),— 
(a) anything done primarily by the Board of Trustees and Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) in respect of any rule, notification, inspection, 
order or notice made or issued or any appointment or declaration made or any operation 
undertaken or any direction given or any proceeding taken or any penalty, punishment, forfeiture 
or fine imposed under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent with 
the p rovisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) any order, rule, notification, regulation, appointment, conveyance, mortgage, deed, trust, 
special purpose vehicle, joint venture, document or a greement made, fee directed, resolution 
passed, direction given, proceeding taken, instrument executed or issued, or thing done under or in 
pursuance of the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ), shall, if in force at the 
commencement of this A ct and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in 
force, and shall have effect as if made, directed, passed, given, taken, executed, issued or done 
under or in pursuance of this Act;  
(c) any principle or rule of law, or established  jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice 
or procedure or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction or exemption shall not be affected, 
notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or 
derived by, in, or from, the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ); 
(d) any person appointed to any office under or by virtue of the repealed Major Port Trusts Act, 
1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) shall be deemed to have been appointed to that office under or by vir tue of this 
Act; 
(e) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, 
practice, procedure or other matter or thing not in existence or in force shall not be revised or 
restored;  
(f) any documents and any funds co nstituted and established under the repealed enactments 
shall be deemed to be documents and funds constituted or established under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act;  
(g) any prosecution instituted under the repealed enactments and pending immediatel y before 
the commencement of this Act before any Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
continue to be heard and disposed of by the said Court;  
(h) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the repealed Major Port 
Trust s Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ) shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection, 
investigation or inquiry has been ordered under the corresponding provisions of this Act; and  
(i) the application of this Act to the port of Mumbai, the Bombay Port Trust A ct, 1879 ( 6 of 
1879 ) and the port of Kolkata, the Calcutta Port Act, 1890 ( 3 of 1890 ), in so far as the said Acts 
apply to municipal assessment of the properties of the port of Mumbai and port of Kolkata and 
matters connected therewith, shall continue to s o apply.  28 
 (3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice the general 
application of  section 6  of the General Clauses Act, 1897 ( 10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of 
repeal of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 ( 38 of 1963 ). 
76. Transitional provision .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board of 
Trustees functioning as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so 
function until the Board for each Major Port is constituted under this Act, but on the constitution of 
such Board, under this Act, the Members of the Board of Trustees holding office before such 
constitution shall cease to hold office.  
 
 
--------------------------The Marine Aids to Navigation Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE MARINE AIDS TO NAVIGATION ACT, 2021   
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
DESIGNATION OF GENERAL AID TO NAVIGATION  
3. Power to designate general  aid to navigation.  
CHAPTER III  
DIRECTOR GENERAL  OF AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
4. Appointment of Director General, Deputy Director Generals and Directors . 
5. Duties of Director General.  
6. Central Advisory Committee . 
7. Proceedings of Central Advisory Committee not to be invalidated . 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF GENERAL AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
8. Management of general aids to navigation . 
9. Powers of Central Government relating to aids to navigation . 
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT OF VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICES  
10. Management of vessel traffic services . 
11. Powers of Central Government relating to vessel traffic services . 
12. Competent Authority for Vessel Traffic Services.  
13. Standards for establishment and operation of vessel traffic services.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
14. Power to inspect local aids to navigation.  
15. Control of local aids to navigation by Central Government  
16. Management of local aids to navigation by Central Government.  
 
 
 2 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER VII  
OBSTRUCTION TO FUNCTIONING OF AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
17. Power of Central Government to remove or alter obstructions to aids to navigation.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION  
18. Power of Central Government to train and certify operators of aids to navigation and vessel traffic 
services.  
19. Certification.  
20. Accreditation of training organisations.  
CHAPTER IX  
MARKING OF WRECKS  
21. Marking of wrecks.  
22. Reimbursement for marking wrecks.  
CHAPTER X  
DEVELOPMENT OF HERITAGE LIGHTHOUSES  
23. Power of Central Government to designate any aid to navigation as heritage lighthouse.  
CHAPTER XI  
MARINE  AIDS TO NAVIGATION DUES  
24. Levy and collection of marine aids to navigation dues.  
25. Utilisation of marine aids to navigation dues.  
26. Receipts relating to marine aids to navigation dues and their verification.  
27. Assessment of marine aids to navigation dues and ascertainment of tonnage.  
28. Recovery of marine aids to navigation dues.  
29. Refusal of port clearance.  
30. Determination of disputes as to liability for payment.  
31. Marine aids to navigation dues payable at one port recoverable at another.  
32. Exemption.  
33. Refund of excess p ayments.  
34. Fees.  
CHAPTER XII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
35. Receipt and expenditure.  
36. Annual report.  
 
 3 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
37. Intentionally obstructing aids to navigation or vessel traffic services.  
38. Negligently obstructing aids to navigation or vessel traffic services.  
39. Intentionally destroying or damaging aids to navigation or vessel traffic services.  
40. Negligently destroying or damaging aids to navigation or vessel traffic services . 
41. Causing damage to heritage lighthouse.  
42. Evading paym ent of marine aids to navigation dues.  
43. Noncompliance with directions of vessel traffic service provider.  
44. Cognizance of offences.  
45. Place of trial and jurisdiction of court.  
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
47. Delegation of p owers by Central Government . 
48. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
50. Power to remove difficulties.  
51. Laying of rules and notifications before Parliament.  
52. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE MARINE AIDS TO NAVIGATION ACT, 2021   
ACT NO. 20 OF 2021  
 
[31st July, 2021 .] 
 
An Act to provide for the development, maintenance and management of aids to navigation in 
India; for training and certification of operator of aids to navigation, development of its 
historical,  educational and cultural value; to ensure compliance with the obligation under the 
maritime treaties and international instruments to which India is a party and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
 WHEREA S India is signatory to maritime  treaties and international instruments such as International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, as amended; and International Association of Marine Aids 
and Lighthouse Authorities Maritime Buoyage System;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessa ry to give effect to the said treaties and instruments which,  
inter alia , provide for aids to navigation, vessel traffic services and marking of wrecks;  
 AND WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for and create a framework for the development, 
maintenance an d management of vessel traffic services in India; training and certification of operators of 
aids to navigation; and the development of the historical educational and cultural value of aids to 
navigation;  
AND WHEREAS it is further necessary to create a fra mework for the levy and collection of marine aids 
to navigation dues to discharge the sovereign functions of development, maintenance and management of 
aids to navigation and vessel traffic services in India by Government, and for matters connected therewi th 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Marine Aids to 
Navigation Act, 2021.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India including the maritime zones of India as specified in the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976).  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1  as the Ce ntral Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates  may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
 
 
                                                           
1. 31ST March , 202 2, vide notification No. S.O. 1202(E), dated 17th March , 202 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3 (ii). 
 5 
 2. Definitions .— (1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “accredited training organisation” means any organisation which is accredited by the Central 
Government under  section 20 ;  
(b) “aid to navigation” means a device, system or service, external to vessels, designed and 
operated to enhance safe and efficient navigation of individual vessels and vessel traffic, but shall not 
be construed to include a reference to vessel traffic services, un less otherwise specified;  
(c) “Director General” means the Director General of Aids to Navigation appointed under       
section 4;  
(d) “district” means an area demarcated as a district for the purposes of this Act under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 ; 
(e) “general aid to navigation” means any aid to navigation, which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a general aid to navigation for the purposes of this 
Act; 
(f) “heritage lighthouse” means an ai d to navigation designated as such under  section 23 ; 
(g) “local aid to navigation” means any aid to navigation which is not a general aid to navigation;  
(h) “local authority” means a State Government or other person having superintendence and 
management ov er a local aid to navigation;  
(i) “marine aids to navigation dues” means the dues levied under  section 24;  
(j) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette of India and the expression 
“notify” with its grammatical variation and cog nate expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(k) “owner” means the owner of a vessel including its registered owner, a person to whom a share 
in the vessel belongs, bareboat charterer, manager and operator of the vessel;  
(l) “port” means any port as de fined in the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);  
(m) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “proper officer” in relation to any functions to be performed under this Act, means the officer of 
customs who is assigned those functions  by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue  Act, 1963 (54 of 1963), and includes any person 
appointed by the Central Government to discharge the functions of a proper officer under this Act;  
(o) “rule ” means rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(p) “ship” includes a sailing vessel;  
(q) “vessel” includes every description of water craft used or capable of being used in the marine 
environment, such as ship, boat, sailing vessel, fishing v essel, submersible, semi -submersible, 
hydrofoils, non -displacement crafts, amphibious crafts, wing -in-ground crafts, pleasure crafts, barges, 
lighters, mobile offshore drilling units or mobile offshore units;  
(r) “vessel traffic service” means a service im plemented under this Act to improve the safety and 
efficiency of vessel traffic and to protect the environment  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, and defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958  (44 of 1958), shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
 
 6 
 CHAPTER II  
DESIGNATION OF GENERAL AID TO NAVIGATION  
3. Power to designate general aid to navigation .— The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, designate any aid to navigation to be a general aid to navigation.   
CHAPTER III  
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
4. Appointment of Director General, Deputy Director Generals and Di rectors .— (1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, — 
(a) the Director General;  
(b) Deputy Director Generals; and  
(c) Directors for districts.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may demarcate such areas to be 
districts.  
(3) Every officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall discharge his functions under the general 
superintendence and control of the Director General.  
5. Duties of Director General. — The Director General shall advise t he Central Government on 
matters relating to aids to navigation and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government under this Act or in any other law for the time being in force.  
6. Central Advisory Committee. — (1) The Central Gov ernment shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint a Central Advisory Committee.  
(2) The Central Government shall consult the Central A dvisory Committee in regard to — 
(a) the establishment or position of aids to navigation or of any works appertaining thereto; or  
(b) additions to or the alteration or removal of, any aid to navigation; or  
(c) variations to any aid to navigation or of the mode of use thereof; or  
(d) the cost of any proposal relating to aids to navigation; or  
(e) appointment of any sub -committee under sub -section ( 3); or 
(f) the making or alteration of any rules or rates of marine aids to navigation dues under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, if it deems necessary, appoint sub -committees for the purposes of 
advising i t in regard to any of the matters specified under this Act.  
(4) The Central Advisory Committee and the sub -committees referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall 
consist of such persons representing the interests affected by this Act or having special knowledge o f the 
subject matter thereof.  
(5) The procedure and conduct of business of the Central Advisory Committee and the sub -committees 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Proceedings of Central Advisory Committee not to be inval idated.— No act or proceeding of 
the Central Advisory Committee shall be i nvalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in its constitution; or  
(b) any defect in appointment of a person acting as its member; or  7 
 (c) any irregularity in i ts procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF GENERAL AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
8. Management of general aids to navigation. — The development, maintenance and management of 
all general aids to navigation shall be vested in the Central Government.  
9. Powers of Central Government relating to aids to navigation. — (1) The Central Government, 
shall have the following powers relating to the development, maintenance and management of gener al 
aids to navigation, namely: — 
(a) establish and maintain aids to navigation;  
(b) add to, alter or remove any aid to navigation;  
(c) alter or vary any aid to navigation;  
(d) authorise to inspect any a id to navigation which may affect the safety of navigation;  
(e) authorise to enter any property, whether public or private, for the purposes of inspection of any 
aid to navigation;  
(f) transport, or cause to be transported, any goods through any property, whether public or private, 
for any purpose in connection with — 
(i) the maintenance of an aid to navigation; or  
(ii) the establishment of any aid to navigation;  
(g) acquire any land as  may be necessary for the purposes of this Ac t— 
(i) to exercise its powers; or  
(ii) for the maintenance of works.  
(2) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of exercising its powers under sub -section ( 1), 
authorise any of the officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4, by general or special order in 
writing.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT OF VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICES  
10. Management of vessel traffic services. — (1) The development, maintenance and management of 
vessel traffic services shall be vested in the Central Government.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, by order, authorise any person as 
vessel traffic service provider.  
11. Powers of Central Government relating to vessel traffic services .— The Central Government, 
shall have the following powers relating to the development, maintenance and management of vessel 
traffic services, namely: — 
(a) declare and authorise vessel traffic service provider to operate a vessel traffic service within an 
authorised area ; 
 (b) accredit and approve vessel traffic service training and certification;  
(c) establish and operate vessel traffic services, where it deems necessary;  
(d) add to or alter or require any person to add to or alter any aspect of a vessel traffic service.  8 
 12. Competent Authority for Vessel Traffic Services .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purposes of exercising its powers under section 11, appoint a Competent Authority for Vessel Traffic 
Services by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The m anner of appointment of the Competent Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Competent Authority shall discharge such functions in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
13. Standards for establishment and operation of vessel traffic services .— The standards for 
establishing and operating vessel traffic services in India shall be such, as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
 14. Power to inspect local aids to navigation .— (1) The Central Government may authorise any 
officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in writing, to enter upon at any time and inspect any 
local aid to navigation and make such inquiries in respect thereof or of the management thereof as such 
officer thinks fit.  
(2) Ever y person having the charge of, or concerned in the management of, any local aid to navigation 
shall furnish to the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) to inspect such aid to navigation, all such 
information as the officer may require.  
(3) Every local authority shall furnish to the Central Government all such returns and other 
information in respect of the aids to navigation under its supervision and management, or of any of them, 
as the Central Government may require.  
15. Control of local aids to navig ation by Central Government .— (1) If the Central Government is 
satisfied, after an inspection under section 14 or such other inquiry, that a direction under this sub -section 
is necessary or expedient for the safety, or otherwise, in the interests of vessel s, it may direct any local 
authority — 
(a) to remove or discontinue or to refrain from moving or discontinuing any aid to navigation under 
its superintendence and management or to make or refrain from making any variation in the character 
or mode of use of any such aid to navigation; or  
(b) to erect, place or maintain, or to refrain from erecting, placing or maintaining any aid to 
navigation within the local limits within which the local authority exercises its powers.  
(2) A local authority shall not erect, place, remove or discontinue any aid to navigation or vary the 
character or mode of use of any aid to navigation, unless it has given to the Central Government at least 
one month’s notice in writing of its intention so to do:  
Provided that, in cases of eme rgency, a local authority may take such action as it deems necessary and 
shall give immediate notice of the same to the Central Government and, so far as is possible, to all vessels 
approaching or in the vicinity of such aid to navigation.  
(3) If any local  authority — 
(a) fails to comply with any direction made under sub -section ( 1); or 
(b) fails to exercise or perform, or exercises or performs in an improper, inefficient or unsuitable 
manner, any power or duty relating to the superintendence or management of any aid to navigation 
conferred or imposed upon it by or under any law for the time being in force; or  
(c) fails to make adequate financial provision for the performance of any such duty,  
the Central Government may, by order in writing, require such loc al authority to comply with the 
direction, or to make arrangements to the satisfaction of that Government for the proper exercise of the 9 
 power or performance of the duty, or to make financial provision to the satisfaction of that Government 
for the perform ance of the duty, as the case may be, within such period as it may specify.  
(4) If the local authority fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 3) within the specified 
period or within such further time as the Central Government may allow, the  Central Government may 
exercise the power or perform the duty or make the requisite financial provision, as the case may be, and 
the local authority shall be liable to reimburse to the Central Government any expenditure incurred by it 
in so doing.  
16. Management of local aids to navigation by Central Government .— The Central Government 
may, at the request of a local authority, undertake the superintendence and management of any local aids 
to navigation on its behalf, and the local authority shall pay t o the Central Government such sums to 
defray the cost of superintendence and management, as may be agreed.  
CHAPTER VII  
OBSTRUCTION TO FUNCTIONING OF AIDS TO NAVIGATION  
17. Power of Central Government to remove or alter obstructions to aids to navigation .— (1) 
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify restrictions on activities that 
interfere with or obstruct the operation of any aid to navigation within the specified distance of such aid to 
navigation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where the 
functioning of any aid to navigation or vessel traffic service is being obstructed, directly or indirectly, the 
Central Government may, if it deems fit, issue such directions as may  be necessary for the removal or 
alteration of such obstruction.  
CHAPTER VII I 
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION  
18. Power of Central Government to train and certify operators of aids to navigation and vessel 
traffic services .—(1) No person shall be allowed to operate or work on, including any ancillary activities 
as may be prescribed, any aid to navigation in any place unless he holds a valid training certificate 
certifying that such person has been trained in the operation of such aid to navigation.  
(2) No per son shall be allowed to operate or work on, including any ancillary activities as may be 
prescribed, a vessel traffic service in any place unless he holds a valid training certificate certifying that 
such person has been trained in the operation of vessel traffic services.  
(3) A certificate of training issued under this Act shall be valid and effective throughout the territory of 
India.  
19. Certification .—A certificate mentioned in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 18 shall be issued by 
an accredited trai ning organisation referred to in section 20, in such form, subject to such conditions and 
in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
20. Accreditation of training organisations .—(1) The Central Government shall accredit training 
organisations  for imparting training to, or conduct assessments of, persons in the operation of aids to 
navigation and vessel traffic services.  
(2) The Central Government shall accredit such training organisations which meet the criteria, as may 
be prescribed, for impa rting training to trainees or conduct assessment of persons in the operation of aids 
to navigation and vessel traffic services.  
  10 
 CHAPTER IX  
MARKING OF WRECKS  
21. Marking of wrecks .—The Central Government may, if considers necessary, give directions to any  
officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4 to mark any wreck in such manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Reimbursement for marking wrecks .—The cost for marking the wreck shall be borne by or 
recovered from the owner or the operator of such vessel in  such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER X  
DEVELOPMENT OF HERITAGE LIGHTHOUSES  
23. Power of Central Government to designate any aid to navigation as heritage lighthouse .— (1) 
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, designate any aid to navigation 
under its control as a heritage lighthouse.  
(2) The Central Government shall develop the heritage lighthouses designated under sub -section ( 1), 
in addition to their function as aids to navigation or otherwise, for educational, cultura l and tourism 
purposes, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XI  
MARINE AIDS TO NAVIGATION DUES  
24.  Levy and collection of marine aids to navigation dues .—(1) There shall be levied and collected 
the marine aids to navigation dues, at such rates, as  the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify from time to time.  
(2) The marine aids to navigation dues levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected by the proper 
officer in respect of every ship arriving at or departing from any port in India, from such person, in such 
manner and at such time, as may be prescribed.  
(3) The proceeds of the marine aids to navigation dues collected shall be credited to the Consolidated 
Fund of India in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Every owner causing any ship to arrive at or depart from any port in India shall, self -assessing its 
liability to pay dues, file a return before the proper officer in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.  
25. Utilisation of marine aids to navigation d ues.—The marine aids to navigation dues levied under 
this Act shall be utilised for fulfilling the obligations and carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
26. Receipts relating to marine aids to navigation dues and their verification .—(1) The owner 
shall cr edit the marine aids to navigation dues into the account of the Central Government in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The payment of marine aids to navigation dues shall be verified by the pro per officer in respect 
of.— 
(a) the port at which the mari ne aids to navigation dues has been paid;  
(b) the amount of the payment;  
(c) the date on which the marine aids to navigation dues became payable; and  
(d) the name, tonnage and other proper description of the ship in respect of which the payment is 
made,   
for the purpose of granting clearance.  11 
 27. Assessment of marine aids to navigation dues and ascertainment of tonnage .—(1) The proper 
officer to whom the return has been furnished under sub -section ( 4) of section 24 shall, after making or 
causing to be made  such inquiry as he thinks fit and after satisfying himself that the particulars stated in 
the return are correct, by order, assess the amount of marine aids to navigation dues payable by the owner 
or the master of the ship.  
(2) If the return has not been furnished to the proper officer under sub -section ( 4) of section 24, he 
shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he thinks fit, by order, assess the amount of 
marine aids to navigation dues payable by the owner or the master of the ship.  
(3) For the purposes of levy of marine aids to navigation dues, the tonnage of a ship or sailing vessel 
shall be reckoned as under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), for such dues payable on a 
ship’s tonnage including the tonnage of any space add ed under the said Act to the tonnage of ships by 
reason of such space being utilised for carrying cargo.  
(4) In order to ascertain the tonnage of any ship for the purpose of levying marine aids to navigation 
dues, the proper officer may, if he deems it fit , require the production of any  documents, the appearance 
of any person and the inspection of any vessel, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
28. Recovery of marine aids to navigation dues .—(1) If the owner of any ship refuses or neglects to 
pay the amoun t of marine aids to navigation dues payable under this Act in respect of the ship, the proper 
officer may seize the ship along with its equipment or any part thereof, and detain the same until the 
amount of the marine aids to navigation dues, together with  the costs of the seizure and detention is paid.  
(2) If any part of such marine aids to navigation dues remains unpaid after the expiry of thirty days 
following the date of the seizure, the proper officer may cause the ship or other thing seized to be sold , 
and with the proceeds of the sale may satisfy the marine aids to navigation dues remaining unpaid, 
together with the costs of the sale and shall repay the surplus, if any, to the person by whom the same 
were payable.  
29. Refusal of port clearance .—The of ficer whose duty it is to grant a port clearance for any ship 
shall not grant the port clearance until the amount of marine aids to navigation dues payable in respect of 
the ship under this Act and of any fines imposed thereunder has been paid, or until se curity for the 
payment thereof has been given to his satisfaction.  
30. Determination of disputes as to liability for payment .—If any dispute arises as to whether 
marine aids to navigation dues, expenses or costs are payable in respect of any ship under thi s Act or as to 
the amount of such dues, expenses or costs, such dispute shall, on an application made in this behalf by 
either of the disputing parties, be heard and determined by a civil court having jurisdiction at the place 
where the dispute arose.  
31. Marine aids to navigation dues payable at one port recoverable at another .—(1) If the master 
of any ship in respect of which marine aids to navigation dues is payable at any port causes the ship to 
leave such port without having paid such dues, the proper  officer at that port may, by writing, require the 
proper officer at any other port in India to which the ship may proceed, to recover the marine aids to 
navigation dues remaining unpaid.  
(2) Any proper officer to whom such a requisition is directed, shall  proceed to levy such sum as if it 
were payable under this Act at the port at which he is the proper officer, and a certificate by the proper 
officer at the port at which the marine aids to navigation dues first became payable, stating the amount 
payable, shall be sufficient proof in any proceeding under this Act that such amount is payable.  
32. Exemption .—The Central Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, exempt. —  
(a) any ship belonging to the Central Government or any State Government, which is not carrying 
cargo or passengers for freight or fares; or  12 
 (b) any other ship, or classes of ships or ships performing specified voyages,   
from the payment of marine aids to navigation dues either wholly or to such extent as may be specified in 
that notification.  
33. Refund of excess payments .—Where the marine aids to navigation dues has been paid in respect 
of any ship in excess of the amount payable under this Act, no claim to refund of such excess payment 
shall be admissible, unless it is made wi thin six months from the date of such payment.  
34. Fees .—The fees to be charged for providing assistance to ships for rendering special services to 
vessels shall be at such rates as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
35. Receipt and expenditure .—The Central Government shall cause to be maintained a separate 
account of all amounts received by way of marine aids to navigation dues, expenses, costs and fines under 
this Act and of all expenditure incurred for the purposes of this Act, and shall cause such account to be 
laid before the Central Advisory Committee, as soon as possible after the close of each financial year.  
36. Annual report .—(1) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before the Central Advisory 
Committee before the close of each financial year a statement of the estimated receipts under,  and 
expenditure for the purposes of this Act, during the forthcoming year.  
(2) The statement of estimated receipts and expenditure shall be prepared in consultation with t he 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
37. Intentionally obstructing aids to navigation or vessel traffic services .—(1) Whoever, 
intentionally commits any act or omits to do any  act, which results in obstruction of, or reduction in, or 
limitation of, the effectiveness of, any aid to navigation or vessel traffic service, shall be liable to 
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to six months or with fine which may extend up t o one 
lakh rupees, or with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable for punishment, if 
that.— 
(a) act or omission was necessary to save a life or a vessel; and  
(b) such person took all reasonable steps to avoid the obstruction, reduction or limitation.  
38. Negligently obstructing aids to navigation or vessel traffic services .—(1) Whoever, negligently 
commits any act or omits to do any act, which results in obstruction of, or reduction in, or limitation of, 
the effectiveness of, any aid to navigation or vessel traffic service, shall be liable to imprisonment for a 
term which may extend up to three months or with fine which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable for punishment, if 
that.— 
(a) act or omission was necessary to save a life or a vessel; and  
(b) such person took all reasonable steps to avoid the obstruction, reduction or limitation.  
39. Intentionally d estroying or damaging aids to navigation or vessel traffic services .—(1) 
Whoever, intentionally commits any act or omits to do any act, which results in damage to or destruction 13 
 of any aid to navigation or vessel traffic service, shall be liable to impriso nment for a term which may 
extend up to twelve months or with fine which may extend up to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable for punishment, if 
that— 
(a) act or omission was  necessary to save a life or a vessel; and  
(b) such person took all reasonable steps to avoid the damage or destruction.  
40. Negligently destroying or damaging aids to navigation or vessel traffic services .—(1) 
Whoever, negligently commits any act or omits  to do any act, which results in damage to or destruction of 
any aid to navigation or vessel traffic service, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend up to six months or with fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable for punishment, if 
that— 
(a) act or omission was necessary to save a life or a vessel; and  
(b) such person took all reasonable steps to avoid the damage or destruction.  
41. Causing damage to heritage lighthouse .— (1) Whoever, commits any act or omits to do any act, 
which results in damage to or destruction of any heritage lighthouse, shall be liable to imprisonment for a 
term which may extend up to six months or with fine wh ich may extend up to one lakh rupees, or with 
both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable for punishment, if 
that.— 
(a) act or omission was necessary to save a life or a vessel; and  
(b) such person took all re asonable steps to avoid the destruction, fouling, damage, reduction or 
limitation.  
42. Evading payment of marine aids to navigation dues .— Every owner or master of a ship, who 
evades or attempts to evade the payment of marine aids to navigation dues, expenses or costs payable in 
respect of the ship under this Act, shall be liable for fine, which may extend up to five times the amount 
of the sum so payable.  
43. Non-compliance with directions of vessel traffic service provider .— Every owner or master of 
a ship, who fails to comply with any direction issued by a vessel traffic service provider relating to a 
vessel traffic service under this Act, shall be liable to fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees.  
 44. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, 
except upon a complaint in writing made by any officer authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first clas s shall 
try any offence under this Act.  
45. Place of trial and jurisdiction of court .—Whoever, commits any offence under this Act or any 
rules made thereunder, may ordinarily be inquired into and tried by a court within whose local 
jurisdiction — 
(a) such o ffence was committed; or  
(b) such person may be found; or  14 
 (c) in any court which the Central Government may, by notification, direct in this behalf; or  
(d) in any court in which he might be tried under any other law for time being in force.  
 
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after previous 
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) duties of the Director General under section 5;  
(b) procedure and conduct of business of Central Ad visory Committee and sub -committees 
constituted under sub -section ( 5) of section 6;  
(c) manner of appointment of the Competent Authority under sub -section ( 2) and its functions 
under sub -section ( 3), of section 12;  
(d) standards for establishment and opera tion of vessel traffic services under section 13;  
(e) ancillary activities relating to aids to navigation under sub -section ( 1) and ancillary activities 
relating to vessel traffic services under sub -section ( 2), of section 18;  
(f) form and manner of certif icate, to be issued and the conditions subject to which such certificate 
is to be issued by the accredited training organisation and validated by the Director General under 
section 19;  
(g) criteria for accreditation of training organisation under sub -section (2) of section 20;  
(h) manner of marking wrecks under section 21;  
(i) manner of recovering cost from the owner of the vessel for marking the wreck under section 22;  
(j) development of heritage lighthouses designated under sub -section ( 2) of section 23;  
(k) manner of, collection of marine aids to navigation dues by proper officer levied under sub -
section ( 2) and crediting the proceeds of the dues so collected under sub -section ( 3), of section 24;  
(l) form and manner of filing return under sub -section ( 4) of section 24;  
(m) manner of payment of marine aids to navigation dues to the Central Government under sub -
section ( 1) of section 26;  
(n) manner of production of documents, appearance of any person and inspection of any vessel by 
proper officer under sub -section ( 4) of section 27;  
(o) rates of fees for special services under section 34;  
(p) form and manner of statement of estimated receipts and expenditure to be prepared in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India under sub -section ( 2) of section 36;  
(q) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, for the purposes of carrying out 
the purposes of this Act.  
47. Delegation of powers by Central Government .— The Central Government may delegate to any 
of its officers all or any of the functions and powers conferred upon it under this Act.  15 
 48. Power of Central Government to issue directions .— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, the Director General shall, in the discharge of his functions and duties under th is Act, be bound 
by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give to him in writing from 
time to time.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith .— No suit, prosecution or other proceedings shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer appointed under this Act for anything done or in good faith 
purporting to be done under this Act or the rules made  thereunder.  
50. Power to remove difficulties .— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shal l be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
51. Laying of rules and notifications before Parliament .—Every rule made and every notification 
issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issue d, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in such rule, 
or notification or both Houses agree that the rule, should not be made or the notification should not be 
issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only  in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.  
52. Repeal and savings .— (1) The Lig hthouse Act, 1927 (17 of 1927) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Lighthouse Act, 1927 (17 of 1927) (herein referred to as the 
repealed Act),  — 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye -law, order or exemption issued, made or granted under the 
repealed Act shall, until revoked, have effect as if it had been issued, made or granted under the 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) any office established or created, officer appointed and anybody elected or constituted under the 
repealed Act shall continue and shall be deemed to have been established, created, appointed, elected, 
or constituted, as the case may be, under this Act;  
(c) any document referring to the repealed Act shall be construed as referring to this Act or to the 
provision of this Act;  
(d) any fine levied under the repealed Act may be recovered as if it had been levied under this Act;  
(e) any offence committed under the repealed Act may be prosecuted and punished as if it had been 
committed under this Act;  
(f) any proceeding pe nding before any court under the repealed Act may be tried or disposed of 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(g) the officers appointed under the provisions of the repealed Act and continuing during the 
commencement of this Act shall continue as if they have been appointed under this Act;  16 
 (h) any person appointed under or by virtue of the repealed Act shall be deemed to have been 
appointed to that office under or by virtue of this Act;  
(i) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the provisions of the repealed 
Act shall continue to be proceeded with as if such inspection, investigation or inquiry was ordered to 
be done under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Maritime AntiPiracy Act 2022.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE MARITIME ANTI -PIRACY ACT,  2022   
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , commencement  and application . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Punishment for piracy.  
4. Punishment for attempt to commit piracy, etc.  
5. Punishment for organising or directing others to participate in an act of piracy.  
6. Conferment of power of arrest, investigation, etc.  
7. Arrest of persons and seizure of ship and property.  
8. Designated Court.  
9. Jurisdiction of Designated Court.  
10. Trial of offences by Designated Court.  
11. Presumption.  
12. Provis ions as to bail.  
13. Application of Code in proceedings before Designated Court.  
14. Provision as to extradition.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
  
THE MARITIME ANTI -PIRACY ACT, 2022  
ACT NO. 3 OF 2023  
 [31st January , 2023.]  
An Act to give effect to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea  relating to 
repression of piracy on high seas and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  India is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea  adop ted by the United 
Nations on the 10th December, 1982 and has ratified the same on the  29th June, 1995;  
AND WHEREAS  the aforesaid Convention, among other things, states that all States  shall co -operate to the 
fullest possible extent in the repression of pir acy on high seas;  
AND WHEREAS  India, having ratified the said Convention, considers it necessary to  give effect to the 
aforesaid Convention relating to piracy.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -third Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
1. Short title, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Maritime                     
Anti-Piracy Act, 2022.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to the high seas.   
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “authorised personnel ” means the officers and sailors assigned to warships  or military aircraft 
of the Indian Navy or officers and enrolled persons of the Coast  Guard assigned to ships or aircraft of 
the Indian Coast Guard or officers of the Central  Government or the State Government authorised for 
any ship or aircraft clearly marked  and identifiable as being on Government service;  
(b) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ; 
(c) “Convention ” means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the  Sea, 1982;  
(d) “Designated Court ” means a Court of Session specified as such under  section 8;  
(e) “high seas” includes the Exclusive Economic Zone and all waters beyond the  jurisdiction of any 
other State.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “Exclusive Economic Zone ” means the Exclusive 
Economic Zone of any other State including the Exclusive  Economic Z one of India;  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “other State ” means any country other than India;  
(h) “piracy” means— 
 (i) any illegal act of violence or detention or any act of depredation committed for private  ends 
by any person or by the crew or any passenger of a private ship and directed on the high seas 
against another ship or any person or  property on board such ship;  
(ii) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship with knowledge of fact s, making 
it a pirate ship;  
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in sub -clause ( i) or  
sub-clause ( ii); or 
                                                           
1. 22nd day of February,  2023, vide notification No. S.O.  802(E), dated 22nd February, 2023, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec.  3(ii). 3 
 (iv) any act which is deemed piratical under the international law including  customary 
international law;  
(i) “pirate ship ” means a ship which —  
(i) is intended by the person in dominant control to be used for the purposes of committing any 
of the acts referred to in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv) of clause ( h); or 
(ii) has been used to commit any such act, referred to i n sub -clause ( i) of this clause, so long as 
it remains under the control of the person guilty of that act;  
(j) “ship” means— 
(i) vessel or water craft of every description, including non -displacement  craft;  
(ii) sea planes and other aircraft,  
used or capable of being used as means of transportation on water or engaged  in any operations at sea.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “aircraft” shall have the  same meaning as assigned 
to it in clause ( 1) of sect ion 2 of the Aircraft Act, 1934  (22 of 1934);  
(k) “stateless person ” means a person who is not considered as a national by  any country by virtue 
of its laws.  
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the  Convention, the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860),  the Code or the Territ orial Waters, Continental Shelf , Exclusive 
Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 1976) , shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in such Convention, the Codes or the Act.  
3. Punishment for piracy. —Whoever commits any act of piracy, shall be punished — 
(i) with imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life or with fine or with both; or  
(ii) with death or with imprisonment for life, if such person in committing the act of piracy causes 
death or an att empt thereof,  
and in addition shall also be subject to restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the  commission of 
such offence.  
4. Punishment for attempt to commit  piracy, etc. —Whoever attempts to commit the offence of 
piracy or aids or abets or conspires or  procures for the commission of such offence shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or with fine or with both.  
5. Punishment for organising  or directing others to  participate in an act of piracy. —Whoever   
participates or organises or directs other person to participate in an act of piracy shall be punished with  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or with fine or with both.  
6. Conferment of power of arrest,  investigation, etc. —Notw ithstanding anything contained in the 
Code, the Central Government may, for the purposes of this Act, by notification, confer the powers of 
arrest, investigation and  prosecution of any person exercisable by a police officer under the Code on any 
of its of ficer or such officer of a State Government.  
7. Arrest of persons and seizure of ship and property. —(1) The authorised personnel may, either 
generally or on suspicion that a ship is engaged in piracy on the high seas, board such ship and arrest the 
persons  or seize the pirate ship and property on board.  
(2) The ship or property seized under sub -section ( 1) shall be disposed of only by the  order of the 
court.  
8. Designated Court. —For the purposes of providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, the 
Cent ral Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by notification, 
specify— 
(i) one or more Courts of Sessions in a State, to be the Designated Court for the purposes of this 
Act; and  4 
 (ii) the territorial jurisdiction of  each such court:  
Provided that such territorial jurisdiction shall be determined on the basis of the port or place of 
disembarkation within India of the person suspected or accused of an offence under this Act.  
9. Jurisdiction of Designated Court. —The Des ignated Court shall have jurisdiction to try an offence 
punishable under this Act where such offence is committed — 
(i) by a person who is apprehended by, or is in the custody of, the authorized personnel or the 
police, regardless of the nationality or citi zenship of such person;  
(ii) by a person who is a citizen of India or a resident foreign national in India or  any stateless 
person:   
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a warship or its auxiliary ship or a Government 
owned ship employed fo r non -commercial service and is under  the control of Government authorities 
at the time of commission of the offence of piracy.  
10. Trial of offences by Designated Court. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, — 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be tried by the Designated Court notified as  such under           
clause ( i) of section 8;  
(b) where a person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of an offence under this Act is 
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of the Code, such 
Magistrate may authorise the detention of such person in such custody, as he thinks fit, for a period 
not exceeding fifteen days in the whole, where such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, and seven 
days in the whole where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate:  
Provided that where such Magistrate considers — 
(i) at the time when such person is forwarded to him under this  sub-section; or  
(ii) at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by hi m,  
that the detention of such person is not necessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded  to the 
Designated Court having jurisdiction.  
 (2) The Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to him under clause ( b) of 
sub-section (1), the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under 
section 167 of the Code, in relation to an accused person in such case who has been forwarded to him 
under that section.  
(3) A Designated Court may, upon a perus al of a complaint made by an officer of the  Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, authorised in this behalf,  take cognizance of 
that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.  
(4) While trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence  under any 
other law, other than an offence under this Act, with which the accused may be  charged at the same trial 
under the Code.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court s hall, as far  as practicable, 
hold the trial on a day -to-day basis.  
11. Presumption .—Where a person is accused of having committed an offence punishable under this 
Act and, if, —  
(a) the arms, ammunitions, explosives and other equipments are recovered from the possession of 
the accused, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that such arms, ammunitions, explosives or 
other equipments of similar nature were used or intended to be used in the commission of the offence;  
(b) there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any other form of intimidation caused to the 
crew or passengers of the ship in connection with the commission of the offence; or  5 
 (c) there is evidence of an intended threat of using bombs, arms, firearms, explosives or 
committing any form of violence against the crew, passengers or cargo of a ship,  
then, the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused person had 
committed such offence.  
12. Provisions as to bail. — (1) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in the Code, no person accused 
of an  offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond 
unless— 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given a reasonable opportunity to oppose the application for 
such release ; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail.   
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High Court 
regarding grant of bail under section 439 of the Code.  
13. Application of Code in proceedings  before  Designated  Court. —Save as otherwise provided 
in this Act, the p rovisions of the Code shall apply to the proceedings before a Designated Court and the 
person conducting a prosecution before a Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor 
appointed under the said Code.  
14. Provision as to extradition. —(1) The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been 
included as  extraditable offences and provided for in all extradition treaties made by India with any other 
State and which extend to and are binding on India on the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) In the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty, the offences under this Act shall be extraditable 
offences between India and other State on the basis of reciprocity.  
(3) For the purposes of application of the provisions of the Extradition Act, 1962  (34 of 1962)  to the 
offences under this Act, any ship registered in other State shall, at any time while that ship is operating, 
be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that other State whether or not it is for the time being also 
within the jurisdictio n of any other State.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedin gs 
shall lie against an authoris ed personnel for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of  the provisions  of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any  State 
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
 
 
————  
1   
--------------------------The Mediation Act 2023.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE MEDIATION ACT, 2023  
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________ 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS .   
      1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
 CHAPTER II  
APPLICATION  
 
2. Application.  
          3. Definitions . 
CHAPTER III  
MEDIATION  
 
4.  Mediation agreement . 
5.  Pre -litigation mediation . 
6. Disputes or matters not fit for mediation . 
7. Power of court or tribunal to refer parties to mediation .  
CHAPTER IV  
MEDIATORS  
 8. Appointment of mediators . 
9. Preference of parties.  
10. Conflict of interest and disclosure . 
11. Termination of mandate of mediator .  
12. Replacement of mediator . 
 CHAPTER V 
M
EDIATION  PROCEEDINGS  
 
 
13.  Territorial jurisdiction to undertake mediation . 
14. Commencement of mediation.  
     15. Conduct of mediation. 
16.  Role of mediator .  
17. Role of mediator in other proceedings . 
18. Time -limit for completion of mediation . 
19. Mediated settlement agreement . 
 
 2 
 SECTIONS.  
 
20. Registration of mediated settlement agreement . 
21. Non -settlement report.  
22. Confidentiality.  
23. Admissibility and privilege against disclosure.  
24. Termination of mediation. 
25. Cost of mediation.     
26. Proceedings of Lok Adalat and Permanent Lok Adalat not to be affected.  
CHAPTER VI  
ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT  
 
27. Enforcement of mediated settlement agreement.  
28. Challenge to mediated settlement agreement.     
29. Limitation.  
 CHAPTER VII  
ONLINE MEDIATION  
     30. Online mediation.  
 CHAPTER VIII 
MEDIATION COUNCIL OF  INDIA  
 
31. Establishment and incorporation of Mediation Council.  
32. Composition of Council.  
33. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council.  
34. Resignation.  
35.  Removal.  
36. Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees.  
37. Secretariat and Chief Executive Officer of Council. 
38.  Duties and functions of Council.  
39. Monitoring and reporting.  
CHAPTER IX  
MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDERS AND MEDIATION INSTITUTES  
 
 
40. Mediation service provider.  
41. Functions of mediation service providers.  
42. Mediation institutes.  
CHAPTER X 
COMMUNITY MEDIATION  
 
43. Community mediation.  
44.  Procedure for community mediation.  
 
 
 3 
  CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS.   
 
45. Mediation Fund.  
46. Accounts and audit.  
47.  Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
48.  Power to frame schemes or guidelines.  
49.  Mediated settlement agreement where Government or its, agency, etc., is a party.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
51.  Power to make rules.  
52.  Power to make regulations.  
53.  Laying.  
54.  Power to remove difficulties.  
55.  Provisions of A ct to have overriding effect on mediation or conciliation contained in other 
laws.  
56. Act not to apply to pending proceedings.  
57.  Transitory provision. 
58. Amendment of Act 9 of 1872.  
59. Amendment of Act 5 of 1908.  
60. Amendment of 39 of 1987. 61. Amendment of 26 of 1996.  62. Amendment of 27 of 2006.  63. Amendment of 18 of 2013.  
64. Amendment of 4 of 2016.  
65. Amendment of 35 of 2019. 
      THE FIRST SCHEDULE.   
     THE SECOND SCHEDULE .   
     THE THIRD SCHEDULE  . 
     THE FOURTH SCHEDULE .  
     THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.         
     THE SIXTH SCHEDULE .    
     THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.       THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE .         
     THE NINTH SCHEDULE .     
     THE TENTH SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 THE MEDIATION ACT, 2023   
 [ACT NO. 32 OF 2023] 
[14th  September , 2023.]  
An Act to promote and facilitate mediation, especially institutional mediatio n, for 
resolution of disputes, commercial or otherwise, enforce mediated settlement agreements, 
provide for a body for registration of mediators, to encourage community mediation and to 
make online mediation as acceptable and cost effective process and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Y ear of the Republic of India as f ollows: –– 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Mediation Act, 2023.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.         
(3) It shall come into force on such date1
                                                           
1. 9th day of October,  2023,  vide notification No. S.O. 4384( E), for Ss.1, 3, 26, Ss.31 to 38 (both inclusive), Ss. 45 to 47 (both 
inclusive), Ss. 50 to 54 (both inclusive), and Ss.56 to 57 (both inclusive) , dated 9th October, 2023 see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint 
and different dates  may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision.  
CHAPTER II  
APPLICATION  
2. Application .—This Act  shall apply where media tion is conducted in India, and –– 
(i)  all or both parties habitually reside in or are incorporated in or have their place of business 
in India; or  
(ii) the mediation agreement provides that any dispute shall be resolved in accordan ce with the 
provisions of this Act; or  
(iii) there is an international mediation; or  
(iv) wherein one of the parties to the dispute is the Central Government or a State Government 
or agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies, including entitie s controlled or owned by 
such Government and where the matter pertains to a commercial dispute; or  
(v) to any other kind of dispute if deemed appropriate and notified by the Central Government 
or a State Government from time to time, for resolution through mediation under this Act, wherein 
such Governments, or agencies, public bodies, corporations and local bodies including entities 
controlled or owned by them, is a party. 
3.  Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  –– 
(a) “commercial dispute” means a dispute defined in clause ( c) of sub- section ( 1) of  section 2 of 
the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (4 of 2016);  5 
 (b) “community mediator”  means a mediator for the purposes of conduct of community mediation 
under Chapter X;  
(c) “Co uncil”  means the Mediation Council of India established under section 31;  
(d) “court ” means the competent court in India having pecuniary and territorial jurisdiction and 
having jurisdiction to decide the disputes forming the subject matter of mediation, if the same had 
been the subject matter of a suit or proceeding;  
(e) “court -annexed me diation”  means mediation including pre -litigation mediation conducted at the 
mediation centres established by any court or tribunal;  
(f) “institutional mediation”  means mediation conducted under the aegis of a mediation service 
provider;  
(g) “internationa l mediation”  means mediation undertaken under this Act and relates to a 
commercial dispute arising out of a legal relationship, contractual or otherwise, under any law for the time being in force in India, and where at least one of the parties, is. — 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resides in, any country other than India; or  
(ii) a body corporate including a Limited Liability Partnership of any nature, with its place of 
business outside India; or  
(iii) an association or body of individuals whose place of business is outside India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country;  
(h) “mediation” includes a process, whether referred to by the expression mediation, pre -litigation 
mediation, online mediation, community mediation, concili ation or an expression of similar import, 
whereby parties attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a third 
person referred to as mediator, who does not have the authority to impose a settlement upon the parties 
to the  dispute;  
(i) “mediator”  means a person who is appointed to be a mediator, by the parties or by a mediation 
service provider, to undertake mediation, and includes a person registered as mediator with the 
Council.  
Explanation.— Where more than one mediator i s appointed for a mediation, reference to a mediator 
under this Act shall be a reference to all the mediators;  
(j) “mediation agreement” means a mediation agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1) of               
section 4;  
(k) “mediation communication”  means communication made, whether in electr onic form or 
otherwise, through—
 
(i) anything said or done;  
(ii) any document; or  
(iii) any information provided,  
 for the purposes of, or in relation to, or in the course of mediation, and includes a mediation 
agreement or a mediated settlement agreement;  
(l) “mediation institute”  means a body or organisation that provides training, continuous education 
and certification of mediators and carries out such other functions under this Act;  
(m) “mediation service pro vider”  means a mediation service provider referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
of section 40;  
(n) “mediated settlement agreement” means mediated settlement agreement referred to in           
sub-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(o) “Member” means a Full -Time or Part -Time Member of the Council and includes the 
Chairperson;  6 
 (p) “notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
‘‘notified’’ with its cognate meanings and grammatical variations shall be constr ued accordingly;  
(q) “online mediation”  means online mediation referred to in section 30;  
(r) “participants” means persons other than the parties who participate in the mediation and 
includes advisers, advocates, consultants and any technical experts and observers;  
(s) “party”  means a party to a mediation agreement or mediation proceeding whose agreement or 
consent is necessary to resolve the dispute and includes their successors;  
(t) “place of business” includes — 
 (a) a place from where the business is ord inarily carried on, and includes a warehouse, a 
godown or any other place where a party stores it's goods, supplies or receives goods or services or 
both; or  
(b) a place where a party maintains its books of account; or  
(c) a place where a party is engaged in business through an agent, by whatever name called ; 
(u) “pre -litigation mediation”  means a process of undertaking mediation, as provided under   
section 5, for settlement of disputes prior to the filing of a suit or proceeding of civil or commercial 
nature in respect thereof, before a court or notified tribunal under sub- section ( 2) of section 5;  
(v) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(w) “Schedule”  means the Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(x) “secure ele ctronic signature” with reference to online mediation means, electronic signatures 
referred to in  section 15 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); and 
(y) “specified”  means specified by regulations made by the Council under this Act.  
CHAPTE R III  
MEDIATION  
4. Mediation agreement .—(1) A mediation agreement shall be in writing, by or between parties 
and anyone claiming through them, to submit to mediation all or certain disputes which have arisen or 
which may arise between the parties.  
(2) A mediation agreement may be in the form of a mediation clause in a contract or in the form of 
a separate agreement.  
(3) A mediation agreement is in writing, if it is contained in or recorded as—  
(a) any document signed by the parties;  
(b) an exchange of co mmunications or letters including through electronic form as provided 
under the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);  
(c) any pleadings in a suit or any other proceedings in which existence of mediation agreement 
is alleged by one party and not de nied by the other.  
(4) A reference in any agreement containing a mediation clause shall constitute a mediation 
agreement if the agreement is in writing and the reference is such as to make the mediation clause as 
part of the agreement.  
(5) The parties may agree to submit to mediation any dispute arising between them under an 
agreement, whether entered prior to arising of the dispute or subsequent thereto.  
(6) A mediation agreement in case of international mediation shall refer to an agreement for 
resolution in matters of commercial disputes referred to in clause ( a) of section 3.   
5. Pre -litigation mediation .—(1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, whether any mediation 
agreement exists or not, the parties before filing any suit or proceedings of civil or commercial nature 7 
 in any court, may voluntarily and with mutual consent take steps to settle the dispute s by pre -litigation 
mediation in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that pre -litigation mediation in matters of commercial disputes of Specified Value shall 
be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of  section 12A  of the Commercial Courts Act,     
2015 (4 of 2016), and the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The provisions of sub- section ( 1) shall be applicable to the tribunals notified by the Central 
Government or a State Government, as the case may be.  
(3) For the purposes of sub- sections ( 1) and ( 2), unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a 
mediator, — 
(i) registered with the Council; or  
(ii) empanelled by a court -annexed mediation centre; or  
(iii) empanelled by an Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act,         
1987 (39 of 1987); or  
(iv) empanelled by a mediation service provider recognised under this Act,  
shall conduct pre -litigation mediation.  
 (4) For conducting pre -litigation mediation under clauses ( ii) and (iii)  of sub- section ( 3), a party 
may request any person designated for this purpose by the High Courts, or an Authority constituted 
under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), as the case may be. 
(5) The court -annexed mediation centre and an Authority constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), shall maintain a panel of mediators for the purposes of               
pre-litigation mediation.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in sub- sections ( 1) and ( 2) and the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988 (59 of 1988), when an application for compensation arising out of an accident is made before the 
Claims Tribunal, if the settlement as provided for in  section 149 of that Act is not arrived  at between 
the parties, the Claims Tribunal shall refer the parties for mediation to a mediator or mediation service 
provider under this Act.  
(7) Where the parties arrive at a settlement agreement under sub -section ( 6), it shall be placed 
before the Claim s Tribunal for its consideration.  
(8) If the parties do not reach to settlement agreement under sub -section ( 6), a non- settlement 
report prepared by the mediator shall be forwarded to the Claims Tribunal, which has referred the matter for mediation, for ad judication.  
6. Disputes or matters not fit for mediation
.—(1) A mediation under this Act shall not be 
conducted for resolution of any dispute or matter contained in the indicative list under the First 
Schedule:  
Provided that nothing contained herein shall prevent any court, if deemed appropriate, from 
referring any dispute relating to compoundable offences including the matrimonial offences which are 
compoundable and pending between the parties, to mediation:  
Provided further that the outcome of such mediation shall not be deemed to be a judgment or 
decree of court referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 27, and shall be further considered by the court 
in accordance with the law for the time being in force.  
(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification, amend the First Schedule.   
7. Power of court or tribunal to refer parties to mediation .—(1) Notwithstanding the non -
settlement of dispute under sub- section ( 1) of section 5, the court or tribunal may, at any stage of 
proceeding, refer the parties to undertake mediation.  
(2) If the court or tribunal refers the parties to undertake mediation, it may pass suitable interim 
order to protect the interest of any party if deemed appropriate.  8 
 (3) The parties shall not be under obligation to come to a settlement in the mediation pursuant to a 
reference under sub -section ( 1).  
CHAPTER IV  
MEDIATORS  
8. Appointment of mediators .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties, a person of any 
nationality may be appointed as a mediator:  
Provided that mediator of any foreign nationality shall possess such qualification, experience and 
accreditation as may be specified.  
(2) The parties shall be free to agree upon the name of mediator and the procedure for their 
appointment.  
(3) If the parties do not reach any agreement on a matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), then the 
party seeking initiation of mediation shall make an application to a mediation service provider for the 
appointment of a mediator.  
(4) Upon receiving an application under sub- section ( 3), the mediation service provider shall, 
within a period of seven days, appoint,  — 
 (i) the mediator as agreed by the parties; or  
(ii) in case the parties are unable to reach agreement as to the appointment of mediator or 
mediator agreed by them refuses to act as mediator, a mediator from the panel maintained by it, 
with his consent.  
(5) The person appointed under clause ( i) of sub -sectio n (4) shall communicate his willingness or 
otherwise within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of communication of such 
appointment.    
9. Preference of parties .—The mediation service provider shall, while appointing any person from 
the panel  of mediators maintained by it, consider his suitability and the preference of the parties for 
resolving the dispute. 
10. Conflict of interest and disclosure .—(1) The person appointed as a mediator shall, prior to the 
conduct of mediation, disclose in writing to the parties regarding any circumstance or potential 
circumstance, personal, professional, financial, or otherwise, that may constitute any conflict of 
interest or that is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impart iality as a 
mediator.  
(2) During the mediation, the mediator shall, without delay, disclose to the parties in writing any 
conflict of interest, referred to in sub- section ( 1), that has newly arisen or has come to his knowledge. 
(3) Upon disclosure under sub- section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the parties shall have the option to 
waive any objection if all of them express in writing, which shall be construed as the consent of 
parties.  
(4) Upon disclosure under sub- section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), if either party desires to replace the 
mediator, then, in case of — 
 (i) institutional mediation, such party shall apply to the mediation service provider for 
termination of the mandate of mediator;  
(ii) mediation other than institutional mediation, such party shall terminate the mandate of 
mediator .   
11. Termination of mandate of mediator .—A mediation service provider may terminate the 
mandate of a mediator upon— 
(i) the receipt of application from a party under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 4) of section 10; or  
(ii) the receipt of information about the mediator being involved in a matter of conflict of 
interest from participants or any other person; or  9 
 (iii) his withdrawal from mediation for any reason:  
Provided that termination under clause ( ii) shall be effected if , after giving a hearing to the 
mediator, mediation service provider finds that there is justifiable doubt as to the independence or 
impartiality of the mediator and that the same has been brought to the notice of parties and that 
either party desires to r eplace the mediator.   
12. Replacement of mediator .—Upon termination of the mandate of mediator — 
(i) in case of mediation other than institutional mediation under clause ( ii) of sub- section ( 4) of 
section 10, the parties may, appoint another mediator within a period of seven days from such 
termination; and  
(ii) under section 11, the mediation service provider shall appoint another mediator from the panel 
maintained by it within a period of seven days from such termination.   
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION  PROCEEDINGS  
13.Territorial jurisdiction to undertake mediation .—Every mediation under this Act shall be 
undertaken within the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction to decide 
the subject matter of dispute:  
Provided th at on the mutual consent of the parties, mediation may be conducted at any place 
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal, or by way of online mediation.  
Explanation.—  For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that where the parties agree to conduct the 
mediation at any place outside the territorial jurisdiction or online, for the purpose of enforcement, challenge and registration of the mediated settlement agreement, the same shall be deemed to have 
been undertaken within the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.  
14. Commencement of mediation
.—The mediation proceedings with respect to a particular 
dispute shall be deemed to have commenced — 
(a) where there is an existing agreement between the parties to settle the dispute through 
mediation, the date on which a party or parties receives notice from the party initiating the mediation, to refer such dispute to mediation; or  
(b) in other cases — 
(i) where the parties have agreed to appoint a mediato r of their choice for mediation and 
settlement of disputes between them on the date the mediator provides his consent to 
appointment; or  
(ii) where one of the parties applies to a mediation service provider for settlement of disputes 
through mediation, the  date of appointment of a mediator.
   
15. Conduct of mediation .—(1) The mediation process shall be conducted in the manner as may 
be specified.  
(2) The mediator shall assist the parties in an independent, neutral and impartial manner in their 
attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute.  
(3) The mediator shall at all times be guided by the principles of objectivity and fairness and 
protect the voluntariness, confidentiality and self -determination of the parties, and the standards for 
professional and ethical conduct as may be specified.  
(4) The mediation process may include the mediator taking such measures as may be considered 
appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, including meeting with parties or 
participant s, jointly or separately, as frequently as deemed fit by the mediator, both in order to 
convene the mediation, and during the mediation for the orderly and timely conduct of the process and to maintain its integrity.  
(5) The mediator shall not be bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  10 
 (6) The mediator with the consent of the parties shall determine the language or languages to be 
used in the mediation process.   
16. Role of mediator .—(1) The me diator shall attempt to facilitate voluntary resolution of the 
dispute by the parties and communicate the view of each party to the other to the extent agreed to by 
them, assist them in identifying issues, advancing better understanding, clarifying priorit ies, exploring 
areas of the responsibility of the parties to take decision regarding their claims.  
 (2) The parties shall be informed expressly by the mediator that he only facilitates in arriving at a 
decision to resolve a dispute and that he shall not im pose any settlement nor give any assurance that 
the mediation may result in a settlement.    
17. Role of mediator in other proceedings .—The mediator shall not — 
(a) act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of a party in any arbitral or judicial 
proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the subject matter of the mediation proceedings;  
(b) be presented by the parties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial proceeding.   
18. Time -limit for completion of mediation .—(1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, mediation under this Act shall be completed within a period of 
one hundred and twenty days from the date fixed for the first appearance before the mediator.  
(2) The period for mediation mentione d under sub- section ( 1) may be extended for a further period 
as agreed by the parties, but not exceeding sixty days.  
19. Mediated settlement agreement .—(1) A mediated settlement agreement includes an 
agreement in writing between some or all of the parties resulting from mediation, settling some or all 
of the disputes between such parties, and authenticated by the mediator:  
Provided that the terms of the mediated settlement agreement may extend beyond the disputes 
referred to mediation.  
Explanation. — A mediated settlement agreement which is void under the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to be lawful settlement agreement within the meaning of 
mediated settlement agreement.  
(2) Where a mediated settlement agreement is reache d between the parties with regard to all or 
some of the disputes, the same shall be reduced in to writing and signed by the parties.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 26, the mediated settlement agreement signed,—  
(i) in case of institutional mediat ion, shall be submitted to the mediator, who shall, after 
authenticating the same, forward it with a covering letter signed by him, to the mediation service 
provider and also provide a copy to the parties;  
(ii) in all other cases, shall be submitted to the  mediator who shall, after authenticating the 
mediated settlement agreement, provide a copy to all the parties.  
(4) The parties, may, at any time during the mediation process, make an agreement with respect to 
any of the disputes which is the subject matte r of mediation.  
(5) Any mediated settlement agreement under this section includes a settlement agreement resulting 
from online mediation.   
20. Registration of mediated settlement agreement .—(1) For the purposes of record, mediated 
settlement agreement ar rived at between the parties, other than those arrived in a court or tribunal 
referred mediation or award of Lok Adalat or final award of the Permanent Lok Adalat under      
section 21 or section 22E of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) , may, at the option 
of parties, be registered with an Authority constituted under the said Act, or any other body as may be 
notified by the Central Government, in such manner as may be specified and such Authority or body 
shall issue a unique registration  number to such settlement agreements:  11 
 Provided that the mediated settlement agreement under this section may be registered with such 
Authority or the body situated within the territorial jurisdiction of the court or tribunal of competent 
jurisdiction to d ecide the subject matter of dispute.  
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that nothing contained in this sub- section 
shall affect the rights of parties to enforce the mediated settlement agreement under section 27 or 
challenge the same under section 28.  
(2) The registration referred to in sub- section ( 1) may be made by the parties or mediation service 
provider within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of authenticated copy 
of mediated settlement agreement:  
Provided that mediated settlement agreement may be allowed to be registered after the expiry of 
period of one hundred and eighty days on payment of such fee as may be specified in consultation with the Authority or any other body referred to in sub -section (1).
  
21. Non -settlement report .—Subject to the provisions of section 26, where no agreement is 
arrived at between the parties, within the time period as provided under section 18, or where, the 
mediator is of the view that no settlement is possible, he shall,  — 
(i) in the case of institutional mediation, submit a non -settlement report to the mediation service 
provider in writing;  
(ii) in all other cases, prepare a non- settlement report and provide a signed copy to all the parties:  
Provided that the repor t referred to in this section shall not disclose the cause of non-  settlement, or 
any other matter or thing referring to their conduct, during mediation.  
22. Confidentiality .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the mediator, mediation 
service provider, the parties and participants in the mediation shall keep confidential all the following 
matters relating to the mediation proceedings, namely:  — 
(i) acknowledgements, opinions, suggestions, promises, proposals, apologies and admissions ma de 
during the mediation;  
(ii) acceptance of, or willingness to, accept proposals made or exchanged in the mediation;  
(iii) documents prepared solely for the conduct of mediation or in relation thereto;  
(iv) any other mediation communication.  
(2) No audio o r video recording of the mediation proceedings shall be made or maintained by the 
parties or the participants including the mediator and mediation service provider, whether conducted in 
person or online to ensure confidentiality of the conduct of mediation proceedings.  
(3) No party to the mediation shall in any proceeding before a court or tribunal including arbitral 
tribunal, rely on or introduce as evidence any information or communication set forth in clauses ( i) to 
(iv) of sub- section ( 1), including any  information in electronic form, or verbal communication and the 
court or tribunal including arbitral tribunal shall not take cognizance of such information or evidence.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not prevent the mediator from compiling or di sclosing 
general information concerning matters that have been subject of mediation, for research, reporting or training purposes, if the information does not expressly or indirectly identify a party or participants or 
the specific disputes in the mediatio n. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained in this 
section shall apply to the mediated settlement agreement where its disclosure is necessary for the 
purpose of registration, enforcement and challenge.  
23. Admi ssibility and privilege against disclosure
.—(1) No mediator or participant in the 
mediation, including experts and advisers engaged for the purpose of the mediation and persons 
involved in the administration of the mediation, shall at any time be permitted, or compelled to 
disclose to any court or tri bunal, or in any adjudicatory proceedings, by whatever description, any 
communication in mediation, or to state the contents or conditions of any document or nature or 12 
 conduct of parties during mediation including the content of negotiations or offers or c ounter offers 
with which they have become acquainted during the mediation:  
Provided that nothing in this section and section 22 shall protect from disclosure, information 
sought or provided to prove or dispute a claim or complaint of professional misconduc t of mediator or 
malpractice based on conduct occurring during the mediation.  
(2) There shall be no privilege or confidentiality that will attach to — 
(a) a threat or statement of a plan to commit an offence punishable under any law for the 
time being in fo rce; 
(b) information relating to domestic violence or child abuse; and  
(c) statements made during a mediation showing a significant imminent threat to public 
health or safety.  
24. Termination of mediation .—The mediation proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to 
terminate — 
(a) on the date of signing and authentication of the mediated settlement agreement; or  
(b) on the date of the written declaration of the mediator, after consultation with the parties or 
otherwise, to the effect that further efforts at mediation are no longer justified; or  
(c) on the date of the communication by a party or parties in writing, addressed to the mediator 
and the other parties to the effect that the party wishes to opt out of mediation;  
(d) on the expiry of time limit und er section 18.   
25. Cost of mediation .—(1) The cost of mediation, other than community mediation shall be 
such as may be specified.  
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, all costs of mediation, including the fees of the 
mediator and the charges of the mediation service provider shall be borne equally by the parties.   
26. Proceedings of Lok Adalat and Permanent Lok Adalat not to be affected .—The 
provisions of this Act shall not apply to the proceedings conducted by Lok Adalat and Permanent Lok 
Adal at under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987).   
CHAPTER VI  
ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATED SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT  
27. Enforcement of mediated settlement agreement .—(1) A mediated settlement agreement 
resulting from a mediation signed by the partie s and authenticated by the mediator shall be final and 
binding on the parties and persons claiming under them respectively and enforceable as per the provisions of sub- section ( 2). 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 28, the mediated settlement agreement shall be enforced in 
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the same manner as if it were a judgment or decree passed by a court, and may, accordingly, be relied on by any of the 
parties or persons cla iming through them, by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceeding. 
28.
 Challenge to mediated settlement agreement .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, in any case in which the mediated settlement agreement is 
arrived at between the parties and is sought to be challenged by either of the parties, such party may 
file an application before the court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction.  
(2) A mediated settlement agreement may be challenged o nly on all or any of the following 
grounds, namely: — 
(i) fraud;  
(ii) corruption;  13 
 (iii) impersonation;  
(iv) where the mediation was conducted in disputes or matters not fit for mediation under 
section 6.  
(3) An application for challenging the mediated settlement agreement shall not be made after ninety 
days have elapsed from the date on which the party making that application has received the copy of 
mediated settlement agreement under sub -section (3 ) of section 19:  
Provided that if the court or tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within the said period of ninety days, it may 
entertain the application within a further period of ninety days.   
29. Limitation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) or 
in any other law for the time being in force, in computing the period of limitation fixed for any 
proceeding relating to disputes in respect of which a mediation has been underta ken under this Act, the 
period from the date of commencement of mediation under section 14, and up to, — 
(i) submission of report under section 21; or  
(ii) termination of mediation under section 24, shall be excluded.  
CHAPTER VII  
ONLINE MEDIATION  
30. Online  mediation .—(1) Online mediation including pre -litigation mediation may be conducted 
at any stage of mediation under this Act, with the written consent of the parties including by the use of electronic form or computer networks but not limited to an encr ypted electronic mail service, secure 
chat rooms or conferencing by video or audio mode or both.  
(2) The process of online mediation shall be in such manner as may be specified.  
(3) The conduct of online mediation shall be in the circumstances, which ensure that the essential 
elements of integrity of proceedings and confidentiality are maintained at all times and the mediator 
may take such appropriate steps in this regard as he deems fit.  
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the mediation c ommunications in the case of online 
mediation shall, ensure confidentiality of mediation.  
CHAPTER VIII 
M
EDIATION COUNCIL OF  INDIA  
31. Establishment and incorporation of Mediation Council. —(1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, establish for the  purposes of this Act, a Council to be known as the Mediation 
Council of India to perform the duties and discharge the functions under this Act.  
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to enter into contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or 
be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi or at such other place as may be notified by 
the Central Government.  
(4) The Council may, in consultation with the Central Government, establish offices at other 
places in India and abroad.   
32. Composition of Council. —(1) The Council shall consist of the following members, 
namely: — 
(a) a person of ability, integrity and standing having adequate knowledge and professional 
experience or shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to law, alternative dispute resolution preferably mediation, public affair s or administration to be appointed by the Central Government —
Chairperson;  14 
 (b) a person having knowledge and experience in law related to mediation or alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms, to be appointed by the Central Government —Member;  
(c) an emin ent person having experience in research or teaching in the field of mediation and 
alternative dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central Government —Member;  
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry  of Law 
and Justice or his representative not bel ow the rank of Joint Secretary —Member, ex officio ;  
(e) Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance 
or his representative not bel ow the rank of Joint Secretary —Member, ex officio;  
 (f) Chief Executive Officer —Member -Secretary, ex officio ; and  
 (g) one representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen by the Central 
Government —Part -Time Member.  
 (2) The Members of the Council, other than ex offi cio members, shall hold office as such, for a 
term of four years from the date on which they enter upon their office and shall be eligible for           
re-appointment:  
 Provided that no Member other than ex officio  Member shall hold office after he has at tained the 
age of seventy years, in the case of Chairperson, and sixty -seven years, in the case of other Members:  
Provided further that if the Chairperson is appointed on Part -Time basis, then, at least one of the 
Members appointed under clauses ( b) or ( c) shall be a Full -Time Member.  
(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of Members other than ex officio  
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The 1
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Notification N o. S.O. 4506(E),  for “ Member” (w.e.f. 13 -10-2023).  [Part -Time Member] shall be entitled to such travelling and other allowances as may be 
prescribed.  
33. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council. —No act or proceeding of the 
Council  shall be invalid merely by reason of —     
(a) any vacancy or any defect, in the constitution of the Council;  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Council; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.  
34. Resignation.— The Member may, by notice in writing, under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his 
office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such 
notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his 
term of office, whichever is earlier.   
35.Removal .—The Central Government may, remove any Member from his office, if he — 
(a) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(b) has engaged at any t ime, during his term of office, in any paid employment without the 
permission of the Central Government; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial  or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a 
Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public                 
interest; or  15 
 (f) has become physically or mentally incapab le of acting as a Member:  
 Provided that where a Member is proposed to be removed on any ground, he shall be informed of 
charges against him and given an opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.   
36. Appointment of experts and constitution o f Committees. —The Council may, appoint such 
experts and constitute such committees of experts as it may consider necessary to discharge its 
functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified.  
37. Secretariat and Chief Executive Officer of Council. —(1) There  shall be a Chief Executive 
Officer of the Council, who shall be responsible for the day to day administration and implementation 
of the decisions of the Council.   
(2) The qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of service of the  Chief Executive 
Officer shall be such as may be specified.  
(3) There shall be a Secretariat to the Council consisting of such number of officers and employees 
as may be specified.  
 (4) The qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the employees 
and other officers of the Council shall be such as may be specified.  
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and employees as may be 
necessary for the functioning of the Council till regulations are made under this section.  
38.  D uties and functions of Council. —The Council shall — 
(a) endeavour to promote domestic and international mediation in India through appropriate 
guidelines;  
 (b) endeavour to develop India to be a robust centre for domestic and international mediation;  
(c) lay down the guidelines for the continuous education, certification and assessment of 
mediators by the recognised mediation institutes;  
(d) provide for the ma nner of conduct of mediation proceedings, under sub- section ( 1) of                          
section 15;  
(e) provide for manner of registration of mediators and renew, withdraw, suspend or cancel 
registration on the basis of conditions as may be specified;   
(f) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of mediators under sub- section ( 3) of 
section 15;  
(g) hold trainings, workshops and courses in the area of mediation in collaboration with 
mediation service providers, law firms and universities and other stakeholders, both Indian and 
international, and any other mediation institutes;  
 (h) enter into memoranda of understanding or agreements with domestic and international 
bodies or organisations or institutions;  
 (i) recognise mediati on institutes and mediation service providers and renew, withdraw, 
suspend or cancel such recognition;  
 (j) specify the criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers;  
 (k) call for any information or record of mediation i nstitutes and mediation service providers;  
 (l) lay down standards for professional and ethical conduct of the mediation institutes and 
mediation service providers;  
(m) publish such information, data, research studies and such other information as may be 
required;  
(n) maintain an electronic depository of the mediated settlement agreements made in India and 
for such other records related thereto in such manner as may be specified; and  
 (o) perform any other function as may be assigned to it by the Central Government.   16 
 39. Monitoring and reporting. —(1) The Council shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each 
year or at such other intervals as directed by the Central Government, prepare a report on the 
implementation of the provisions of this Act durin g the year or such interval and forward a copy 
thereof to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may take such additional measures as it deems necessary to 
supplement the functioning of the Council and for the effective implementation of the p rovisions of 
the Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
MEDIATION SERVICE PROVIDERS AND MEDIATION INSTITUTES  
40. Mediation service provider. —(1) “mediation service provider” includes — 
(a) a body or an organisation that provides for the conduct of mediation under this Act and the  
rules and regulations made thereunder and is recognised by the Council; or  
(b) an Authority constituted under the Lega l Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987); or  
(c) a court -annexed mediation centre; or  
(d) any other body as may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided that the bodies referred to in clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) shall be deemed to be mediation 
service providers recognised by the Council.   
(2) The mediation service provider shall be recognised by the Council in the manner as 
may b e specified.  
41. Functions of mediation service providers. —The mediation service providers shall perform 
the following functions, namely: —  
(a) accredit mediators and maintain panel of mediators;  
(b) provide the services of mediator for conduct of mediation;  
(c) provide all facilities, secretarial assistance and infrastructure for the efficient conduct of 
mediation;  
(d) promote professional and ethical conduct amongst mediators;  
(e) facilitate reg istration of mediated settlement agreements in accordance with the provisions of 
section 20; and  
(f) such other functions as may be specified.   
42. Mediation institutes. —The Council shall recognize  mediation institutes to perform such 
duties and exercise  such functions as may be specified.  
CHAPTER X 
COMMUNITY MEDIATION  
43. Community mediation.—( 1) Any dispute likely to affect peace, harmony and tranquillity 
amongst the residents or families of any area or locality may be settled through community mediati on 
with prior mutual consent of the parties to the dispute.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), any of the parties shall make an application before the 
concerned Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987)  or 
District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate in areas where no such Authority has been 
constituted, for referring the dispute to mediation.  
(3) In order to facilitate settlement of a dispute for which an application has been received under 
sub-section (2), the concerned Authority constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987                   
(39 of 1987)  or the District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate, as the case may be, shall 
constitute panel of three community mediators.  17 
 (4) For th e purposes of this section, the Authority or District Magistrate or the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall notify a permanent panel of community mediators, which may be 
revised from time to time .  
(5) The following persons may be included in the panel referred to in sub -section ( 4)— 
 (a) person of standing and integrity who are respectable in the community;  
 (b) any local person whose contribution to the society has been recognised;  
 (c) representative of area or resident welfare associations;  
(d) person having experience in the field of mediation; and  
(e) any other person deemed appropriate.  
(6) While making panel referred to in sub- section ( 4) the representation of women or any othe r 
class or category of persons may be considered.   
44. Procedure for community mediation.— (1) Any community mediation shall be conducted by 
the panel of three community mediators referred to in sub- section ( 3) of section 43 who shall devise 
suitable proced ure for the purpose of resolving the dispute.  
(2) The community mediators shall endeavour to resolve disputes through community mediation 
and provide assistance to parties for resolving disputes amicably.  
(3) In every case where a settlement agreement is arrived at through community mediation under 
this Act, the same may be reduced into writing with the signature of the parties and authenticated by 
the community mediators, a copy of which be provided to the parties and in cases where no settlement 
agreement is arrived at, a non- settlement report may be submitted by the community mediators to the 
Authority or the District Magistrate or the Sub -Divisional Magistrate, as the case may be, and to the 
parties.  
(4) Any settlement agreement arrived at under this Chapter shall be for the purpose of maintaining 
the peace, harmony and tranquillity amongst the residents or families of any area or locality but shall 
not be enforceable as a judgment or decree of a civil court.  
(5) The provisions of section 20 shall, mu tatis mutandis  apply, in relation to the registration of 
mediated settlement agreement under this section.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
45. Mediation Fund. —(1) Ther e shall be a fund to be called “Mediation Fund”  (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Fund” ) for the purposes of promotion, facilitation and encouragement of mediation 
under this Act, which shall be administered by the Council.  
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund the following, namely: — 
(a) all monies provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received from mediation service provider, mediation institutes or 
bodies or persons;  
(c) all monies received by the Council in the form of donations, grants, contributions and 
income from other sources;  
(d) grants made by the Central Gove rnment or the State Government for the purposes of the 
Fund;  
(e) amounts  deposited by persons as contributions to the Fund;  
(f) amounts  received in the Fund from any other source; and  
(g) interest on the above or other income received out of the investme nt made from the Fund.   18 
 (3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the salaries and other allowances of Member, Chief 
Executive Officer, Officers and employees and the expenses of the Council including expenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.   
46. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance sheet, in such form and 
manner as may be prescrib ed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the  Council to 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Council shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other docum ents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
Council.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be for warded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
47.  Power of Central Government to issue directions. —(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Council shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may 
give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the views of the Council shall be taken into consideration before any direction is 
given under this sub- section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be 
final.   
48. Power to frame schemes or guidelines. —Subject to the provisions of th is Act, the Central 
Government or the State Government or any of its entity or agency, as the case may be, may frame any 
schemes or guidelines, for resolution of any dispute through mediation or conciliation in cases where 
the Central Government or the Sta te Government or any of its entity or agency is one of the parties 
and in such cases mediation or conciliation may be conducted in accordance with such schemes or guidelines.  
49. Mediated settlement agreement where Government or  its, agency, etc., is a    
                           
party. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no dispute including a commercial dispute, 
wherein the Central Government or State Government or any of its agencies, public bodies, 
corporations and local bodies including entities controlled or owned by the m is a party, the settlement 
agreement arrived at shall be signed only after obtaining the prior written consent of the competent authority of such Government or any of its entity or agencies, public bodies, corporations and local 
bodies, as the case may b e.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or a State Government or any officer of such Government, or the 
Member or Officer or employee of the Council or a medi ator, mediation institutes, mediation service 
providers, which is done or is intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
51. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
make provision for — 19 
  (a) the salaries and allowances and the terms and conditions of the Members under               
sub-section ( 3) of section 32;  
(b) the travelling and other allowances payable to the 1
53. Laying.—Every notification issued under sub- section ( 2) of section 6, sub- section ( 2) of                  
section 55, rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which [Part -Time Member] under                  
sub-section ( 4) of section 32;  
(c) the form and manner of annu al statement of accounts, including the balance sheet under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 46; and  
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed.   
52. Power to make  regulations. —(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Gove rnment, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder 
to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may make provision for — 
(a) qualification, experience and accreditation for mediators of foreign nationality under the 
proviso to sub- section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) manner of conducting mediation proceeding under sub- section ( 1) of section15;  
(c) standards for pro fessional and ethical conduct of mediators under sub- section ( 3) of     
section 15;  
(d) manner of registration of mediated settlement agreement under sub- section (1 ) of section 20;  
(e) fees for registration of mediated settlement agreement under the provi so to sub- section ( 2) of 
section 20;  
 (f) cost of mediation under sub- section ( 1) of section 2 5; 
 (g) manner of process of conducting online mediation under sub- section ( 2) of section 30;  
(h) the terms and conditions of experts and committees of experts under section 36;  
(i) qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive 
Officer under sub- section ( 2) of section 37;  
(j) the number of officers and employees of the Secretariat of the Council under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 37;  
(k) the qualification, appointment and other terms and conditions of the employees and other 
officers of the Council under sub- section ( 4) of section 37;  
(l) conditions for  registration of mediators and renewal, withdrawal, suspension or cancellations 
of such registrations under clause ( e) of section 38;  
(m) criteria for recognition of mediation institutes and mediation service providers under                    
clause ( j) of section 38;  
(n) manner of maintenance of electronic depository of mediated settlement agreement under                
clause ( n) of section 38;  
 (o) manner for recognition of mediation service provider under sub- section ( 2) of section 40;  
 (p) such ot her functions of mediation service provider under clause ( f) of section 41;  
(q) duties and functions to be performed by mediation institutes under section 42; and  
 (r) any other matter in respect of which provision is necessary for the performance of func tions 
of the Council under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification N o. S.O. 4506(E) , for “Member” (w.e.f. 13 -10-2023).  20 
 may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the su ccessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the notification, rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the 
notification, rule or regulation should not be issued or made, the notification, rule or regulation shall 
therea fter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification, rule or regulation.
  
54. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of five 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub- section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.     
55. Provisions of Act to have overriding effect on mediation or conciliation contained in other 
laws .—(1) Subject to the enactments mentioned in the Second Schedule, the  provisions of this Act 
shall have overriding effect for conduct of mediation or conciliation notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, and any instrument 
having force of law.  
 (2) If the Centra l Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification, amend the Second Schedule and thereupon it shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly . 
56. Act not to apply to pending proceedings. —This Act shall not appl y to, or in relation to, any 
mediation or conciliation commenced before the coming into force of this Act.   
57. Transitory provision. —The rules in force governing the conduct of court -annexed mediation 
shall continue to apply until regulations are made under sub -section ( 1) of section 15:  
Provided that the rules shall continue to apply in all court -annexed mediation pending as on the 
date of coming into force of the regulations.   
58. Amendment of Act 9 of 1872.— The Indian Contract Act, 1872 , shall be amend ed in the 
manner specified in the Third Schedule.   
59. Amendment of Act 5 of 1908 .—The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
60. Amendment of 39 of 1987.— The Legal Service s Authorities Act, 1987 ,shall be amended in 
the manner specified in the Fifth Schedule.  
61. Amendment of 26 of 1996 .—The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, shall be amended in 
the manner specified in the Sixth Schedule.  
62.Amendment of 27 of 2006 .—The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 
2006, shall be amended in the manner specified in the Seventh Schedule.  
63.Amendment of 18 of 2013.— The Companies Act, 2013, shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the Eighth Schedule.  
64. Ame ndment of 4 of 2016.— The Commercial Courts Act, 2015, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Ninth Schedule.  
65.Amendment of 35 of 2019.— The Consumer Protection Act, 2019, shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the Tenth Schedule.  
 
 21 
 THE FIR ST SCHEDULE 
(See section 6)  
DISPUTES OR MATTERS NOT FIT FOR MEDIATION  
1. Disputes which by virtue of any law for the time being in force may not be submitted for 
mediation.   
2. Disputes relating to claims against minors, deities; persons with intellectual disabilities under 
paragraph 2 of the Schedule and person with disability having high support needs as defined in    
clause ( t) of section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Dis abilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016); persons with 
mental illness as defined in clause ( s) of sub- section ( 1) of section 2 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 
2017 (10 of 2017); persons of unsound mind, in relation to whom proceedings are to be conducted 
under Order  XXXII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908); and suits for declaration of title 
against Government; declaration having effect of right in rem .  
3. Disputes involving prosecution for criminal offences.   
4. Complaints or proceedings, initiated be fore any statutory authority or body in relation to 
registration, discipline, misconduct of any practitioner, or other registered professional, such as legal practitioner, medical practitioner, dentist, architect, chartered accountant, or in relation to an y other 
profession of whatever description, which is regulated under any law for the time being in force.  
5. Disputes which have the effect on rights of a third party who are not a party to the mediation 
proceedings except only in matrimonial disputes whe re the interest of a child is involved.  
 6. Any proceeding in relation to any subject matter, falling within any enactment, over which the 
Tribunal constituted under the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 (19 of 2010), has jurisdiction.  
7. Any dispute rela ting to levy, collection, penalties or offences, in relation to any direct or indirect 
tax or refunds, enacted by any State legislature or the Parliament.  
8. Any investigation, inquiry or proceeding, under the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003), 
including  proceedings before the Director General, under the Act; proceedings before the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India, under the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 
1997) or the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal establis hed under section 14 of that 
Act.  
9. Proceedings before appropriate Commissions, and the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity, under 
the Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003).
  
10. Proceedings before the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board, and appeals therefrom 
before the Appellate Tribunal under the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 (19 of 
2006).  
11. Proceedings before the Securities and Exchange Board of India, and the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal, under the Securities and Exchang e Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992). 
 12. Land acquisition and determination of compensation under land acquisition laws, or any 
provision of law providing for land acquisition.  
13. Any other subject matter of dispute which may be notified by the Cent ral Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 55)  
 
1. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
2. The Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 (46 of 1980).  
3. The Cine -workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981 (50 of 
1981).  
 4. The Family Courts Act, 1984 (66 of 1984).  
5. The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987).  
6. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizen s Act, 2007 (56 of 2007).  
7. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Preventi on, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 
2013 (14 of 2013).  
8. The Finance Act, 20l6 (28 of 2016).  
9. The Industrial Relations Code, 2020 (35 of 2020).  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
  THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 58)  
In section 28 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), for Exception  1 and Exception 2, the 
following  shall be substituted, namely: —  
“Exception 1.—Saving of contract to refer to arbitration or mediation dispute that may 
arise. —This section shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more persons agree that any 
dispute which may arise between them in respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be referred to 
resolution through arbitration or mediation.  
Exception 2.—Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen. —Nor shall this 
section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more persons agree to refer to 
arbitration or mediation any question between them which has already arisen, or affect any provision 
of any law in force for the time being as to references to arbitration or mediation.”. 
  24 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
 (See section 59)  
 In the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),—  
  (i) under Part V, under the heading SPECIA L PROCEEDINGS, the sub -heading “ARBITRATION”  
shall be omitted;  
(ii) for section 89, the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
 89. Settlement of disputes outside the Court .—Where it appears to the Court that the dispute 
between the parties may be settled and there exists elem ents of settlement which may be acceptable 
to the parties, the Court may — 
(a) refer the dispute to arbitration, and thereafter, the provisions of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply as if the proceedings for arbitration were  
referred for settlement under the provisions of that Act; or  
(b) refer the parties to mediation, to the court -annexed mediation centre or any other 
mediation service provider or any mediator, as per the option of the parties, and thereafter the 
provisions  of the Mediation Act, 2023 shall apply as if the proceedings for mediation were 
referred for settlement under the provisions of that Act; or  
(c) refer the dispute to Lok Adalat, in accordance with the provisions of sub- section ( 1) of 
section 20 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and thereafter, all other 
provisions of that Act shall apply in respect of the dispute;  
(d) effect compromise between the parties and shall follow such procedure as deem ed fit for 
judicial settlement.  
  25 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 60)  
 In the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), in section 4, for clause ( f), the following 
clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(f) encourage the settlement of disputes, including online by way of negotiations, arbitrati on, 
mediation and conciliation;” . 
  26 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 61)  
In the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996),—  
(a) in section 43D,—  
(i) in sub- section ( 1), the words “ mediation, conciliation”  shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), in clauses ( e), (f) and ( i), the words "and conciliation" wherever they 
occur shall be omitted;  
(b) for sections 61 to 81, the following sections shall be substituted, namely: —  
61. Reference of conciliation in enactments.— (1) Any provision, in any other enactment for the 
time being in force, providing for resolution of disputes through conciliation in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, shall be construed as reference to mediation as provided under the Mediation 
Act, 2023.  
 (2) Conciliation as provided under this Act and the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
shall be construed as mediation referred to in clause ( h) of section 3 of the Mediation Act, 2023.  
62. Saving.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 61, any conciliation proceeding 
initiated in pursuance of sections 61 to 81 of this Act as in force before the commencement of the 
Mediation Act, 2023, shall be continued as such, as if the Mediation Ac t, 2023, had not been enacted.  
  27 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 62)  
 In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (27 of 2006), for section 18, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
 "18. Reference to Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation Council. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any party to a dispute may, with 
regard to any amount due under section 17, make a reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises 
Facilitation Council.  
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub- section (1), the Council shall either conduct mediation itself 
or refer the matter to any mediation service provider as provided under the Mediation Act, 2023.  
(3) The conduct of mediation under this section shall be as per the provisions of the Mediation         
Act, 2023.  
(4) Where the mediation initiated under sub- section ( 3) is not successful and stands terminated 
without any settlement between the parties, the Council shall either itself take up the dispute for 
arbitration or refer it to any institution o r centre providing alternative dispute resolution services for 
such arbitration and the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), shall, then apply to the dispute as if the arbitration was in pursuance of an arbitration agreement referred to 
in sub- section ( 1) of section 7 of that Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Micro and 
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council or the centre providing alternative dispute resolution se rvices 
shall have jurisdiction to act as an Arbitrator or mediator under this section in a dispute between the 
supplier located within its jurisdiction and a buyer located anywhere in India.".  
  28 
 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 63)  
 In the Companies Act, 20l3 (18 of 2013), for section 442, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: —  
“442. Reference to mediation. —(1) Any of the parties to a proceedings before the Central 
Government, Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal may, at  any time apply to the Central Government, 
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, in such form along with such fees, if any, as 
may be prescribed, for referring the matter pertaining to such proceedings for mediation and the 
Central Govern ment, Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, shall refer the matter to 
mediation to be conducted under the provisions of the Mediation Act, 2023.  
 (2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government, Tribunal or the Appellate 
Tribunal before which any proceeding is pending from referring any matter pertaining to such 
proceeding suo motu to mediation to be conducted under the provisions of the Mediation Act, 2023 as 
the Central Government, Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal, dee ms fit.  
(3) The mediator or mediation service provider shall file the mediated settlement agreement arrived 
at between the parties with the Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal under 
the Act.  
(4) The Central Government or the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal shall pass an order or 
judgment making the said mediated settlement agreement as part thereof.  
 (5) The fee of the mediator shall  be such as may be prescribed.”  
  29 
 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 64)  
In the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (4 of 2016),—  
(a) for Chapter IIIA, the following Chapter shall be substituted, namely: —  
"CHAPTER IIIA  
PRE-LITIGATION MEDIATION AND SETTLEMENT 
12A. Pre -litigation Mediation and Settlement .—(1) A suit, which does not contemplate any 
urgent interim relief under this Act, shall not be instituted unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of 
pre-litigation mediation in accordance with such manner and procedure as may be prescribed by rules 
made by t he Central Government.  
(2) For the purposes of pre -litigation mediation, the Central Government may, by notification, 
authorise — 
(i) the Authority, constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987); or  
(ii) a mediation service provider as defined under clause ( m) of section 3 of the Mediation                      
Act, 2023.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987), 
the Authority or mediation service provider authorised by t he Central Government under                
sub-section ( 2) shall complete the process of mediation within a period of one hundred and twenty 
days from the date of application made by the plaintiff under sub- section ( 1): 
Provided that the period of mediation may be extended for a further period of sixty days with the 
consent of the parties:  
Provided further that, the period during which the parties spent for pre -litigation mediation shall 
not be computed for the purposes of limitation under the Limitation Ac t, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
 (4) If the parties to the commercial dispute arrive at a settlement, the same shall be reduced into 
writing and shall be signed by the parties and the mediator.  
 (5) The mediated settlement agreement arrived at under this section shall be dealt with in accordance 
with the provisions of sections 27 and 28 of the Mediation Act, 2023.” ; 
 (b) in section 21A, in sub- section ( 2), for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
 “(a) the manner and procedure of pre -litiga tion mediation under sub- section ( 1) of            
section 12A;”.  
  30 
 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 65)  
In the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), — 
(a) in section 2, clauses ( 25) and ( 26) shall be omitted;  
(b) for section 37, the following sections shall be substituted, namely: —  
“37. Reference to mediation.— The District Commission or State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, 1
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification no. S.O. 4506(E) for “shall either on an application by the parties” (w.e.f. 13 -10-2023).  [may] at any stage of proceedings refer the disputes for 
settlement by mediation under the Mediation Act, 2023.  
37A. Settlement through mediation. —(1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached 
between the parties with respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with 
respect to only some of the issues, the terms of suc h agreement shall be reduced to writing 
accordingly, and signed by the parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives.   
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the signed 
agreement along with such repor t to the concerned Commission.  
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the mediator 
is of the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report accordingly and submit 
the same to the concerned Commission.   
37B. Recording settlement and passing of order.— (1) The District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of the settlement report, pass suitable order recording  such settlement of consumer dispute 
and dispose of the matter accordingly. 
 (2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of the issues 
which have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such consumer dispute.  
 (3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District Commission or 
the State Commission or the National Commission, as the  case may be, shall continue to hear all 
the issues involved in such consumer dispute.";  
(c) in section 38, in sub -section ( 1), the words “or in respect of cases referred for mediation on 
failure of settlement by mediation, ” shall be omitted;  
(d) in section 41, the third proviso shall be omitted;  
(e) Chapter V shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 101, in sub- section ( 2),— 
 (i) clause ( r) shall be omitted;  
 (ii) clause (zf) shall be omitted;  
 (g) in section 102, in sub- section ( 2), clause ( p) shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 103, in sub- section ( 2), clauses ( c) to ( h) shall be omitted.  
————  
 
 
           
--------------------------The National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL BANK FOR FINANCING INFRASTRUCTURE AND  
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF INSTITUTION  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Institution.  
4. Purposes and objectives of Institution.  
5. Authorised share capital.  
CHAPTER III  
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND MANAGEMENT  
6. Board of Directors.  
7. Management  
8. Delegation of powers.  
9. Term of office and other te rms and conditions of service of Chairperson and other directors 
of Board.  
10.  Disqualification and removal of directors from office.  
11.  Removal of Chairperson and other directors in certain cases.  
12. Vacation and resignation of office by directors.  
13.  Meetings of B oard.  
14.  Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc.  
15. Committees of Board.  
16.  Disclosure of interest by members of Board or of committees.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACTIVITIES OF INSTITUTION  
17.  Functions and powers of Institution.  
18.  Prohibited business.  
19.  Related party transactions.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
20.  Performance review of Institution.  
CHAPTER V  
GOVERNMENT GRANTS, GUARANTEES AND OTHER CONCESSIONS  
21. Grants and contribution.  
22.  Concessional rate of Government guarantee.  
23.  Hedging costs.  
CHAPTER VI  
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORT  
24.  Disposal of profit accruing to Institution, to reserve fund.  
25.  Preparation of balance sheet and accounts.  
26.  Audit.  
27.  Returns and report.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28.  Receivables to be held in trust.  
29.  Setting up of other development financial institution.  
30.  Officers and employees.  
31.  Powers of Central Government to make rules.  
32.  Powers of Board to make regulations.  
33.  Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
34.  Protection of action taken in good fai th. 
35.  Sanction for enquiry, inquiry, investigation and prosecution.  
36.  Appointment of directors by Institution to prevail.  
37.  Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned.  
38.  Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.  
39.  Adjudication.  
40.  Indemnity of directors.  
41.  Bankers’ Books of Evidence Act, 1891 to apply in relation to the Institution.  
42.  Section 34A and 36AD of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 to apply to Institution.  
43. Liquidation of Institutions.  
44. Powers of Central Government to issue directions.  
45.  Overriding effect  of this Act.  
46.  Power to remove difficulties.  
47.  Amendment of Act 2 of 1934.  
48.  Amendment of Act 10 of 1949.  
The F IRST SCHEDULE  
The S ECOND SCHEDULE  
The T HIRD  SCHEDULE  3 
 THE NATIONAL BANK FOR FINANCING INFRASTRUCTURE AND  
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 17 OF 2021  
[28th March , 2021.]  
 
An Act to establish the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and  Development to support 
the development of longterm non -recourse  infrastructure financing in India including development 
of the bonds and  derivatives markets necessa ry for infrastructure financing and to carry on  the 
business of financing infrastructure and for matters connected therewith  or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Bank for 
Financing Infrastructure and  Development Act, 2021.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the Official 
Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act and any reference 
in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be  construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Audit Committee ” means the Audit Committee of the Board constituted  under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 15;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Directors constituted under section 6;  
(c) “Bureau ” means a body which the Central Government may notify, for the  purpose of 
recommending candidates for appointment of Managing Director and  Deputy Managing Directors 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and for removal of a  director under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 11;  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under  clause ( a) of sub -section 
(1) of section 6;  
(e) “committee ” means a committee of the Board  constituted under section 15;  
(f) “Deputy Managing Director ” means the Deputy Managing Director appointed  under clause ( c) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(g) “director ” includes a Chairperson, Managing Director, Deputy Managing  Directors and other 
directors of the Board appointed or nominated under section 6;  
                                                           
1. 19th April, 2021 - Sections 2, sub -sections (1), (2) and (4) of section 3, 4 to 14, sub -section (3) of section 15, 16 to 23 and 25 to 
48 vide notification No. S.O. 1657(E), dated 16th April, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
19th April 2021 -clause ( 2) of sub -section (1) of section 11, vide notification No. S.O. 1658(E), dated 19th April, 2021 , see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
30th November 2021 -Sub-section (1), (2), (4) and (5) of section 15; and section (24) , vide notification No. S.O. 4911(E), dated 
30th November, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii).     4 
 (h) “Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee of the Board  constituted under sub -
section ( 2) of section 15;  
(i) “financial institution ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause  (m) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial  Assets and Enforcement of Security 
Interest Act, 2002  (54 of 2002) ; 
(j) “independent director ” means the independent director of the Board appointed  under clause ( f) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(k) “infrastructure ” means the sectors covered in the list of infrastructure sector  notified by the 
Central Government from time to time;  
(l) “Institution ” means the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and  Development established 
under section 3;  
(m) “insurer ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub -section ( 9) of section 2 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938  (4 of 1938) ; 
(n) “Managing Director ” means the director appointed under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
6; 
(o) “Nomination and Remuneration Committee ” means the Nomination and  Remuneration 
Committee of the Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(p) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the  expressi on “notify ” 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(q) “pension fund ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( l) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
2 of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority  Act, 2013  (23 of 2013) ; 
(r) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central  Government;  
(s) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Board under this Act and includes  the regulations 
made by the Reserve Bank under section 29;  
(t) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India established under the  Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(u) “Risk Management Committee ” means the Risk Management Committee of  the Board 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(v) “Schedule ” means a Schedule appended to this Act.  
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian  Contract Act, 
1872  (9 of 1872) , the Indian Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,  
1956  (42 o f 1956) , the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 1992) , the Recovery of 
Debts Due to  Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993  (51 of 1993) , the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008  (6 of 2009)  and the  Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 201 3), shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF INSTITUTION  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Institution. —(1) There shall be established, for the purposes 
of this Act, an Institution to be  called the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development as 
a development  financial institution.  
(2) The Institution shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual  succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,  hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by  the said name, sue or be sued.  5 
 (3) The head office of the Institution shall be in Mumbai.  
(4) The Institution may es tablish offices, branches or agencies at any place within or  outside India.  
4. Purposes and objectives of Institution. —(1) The Institution shall have developmental and financial 
objectives as set out in  sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3). 
(2) The developmental objective of the Institution shall be to co -ordinate with the  Central and State 
Governments, regulators, financial institutions, institutional investors and  such other relevant stakeholders, 
in India or outside India, to facilitate building and improving  the relevant institutions to support the 
development of long term non -recourse infrastructure  financing in India including the domestic bonds and 
derivatives markets.  
(3) The financial objective of the Institution shall be to lend or invest, directly or  indirectly, and seek 
to attract investment from private sector investors and institutional  investors, in infrastructure projects 
located in India, or partly in India and partly outside  India, with a view to foster sustainable economic 
development in India.  
5. Authorised share capital .—(1) The authorised share capital of the Institution shall be one hundred 
thousand  crore rupees divided into ten thousand crores of fully paid -up shares of ten rupees each:  
Provided that the Board may increase or reduce the nomina l or face value of the shares,  and divide the 
authorised capital into such denomination as it may decide:  
Provided further that the Board may, in consultation with the Central Government,  increase or reduce 
the authorised capital subject to the shares in a ll cases being fully paid -up shares.  
(2) The issued share capital of the Institution shall, on such date as may be notified by  the Central 
Government, stand allotted to the Central Government.  
(3) Shares of the Institution may be held by the Central Government, multilateral  institutions, sovereign 
wealth funds, pension funds, insurers, financial institutions, banks,  and any such institution as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government shall hold at least twenty -six per cent. of the  share s of the 
Institution at all times.  
(4) The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, reduce its share  capital, 
including by way of buy -back of shares.  
CHAPTER III  
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND MANAGEMENT  
6. Board of Directors. —(1) The Board of  Directors of the Institution shall consist of the following, 
namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation  with the Reserve 
Bank;  
(b) a Managing Director, to be appointed by the Board, on the recommendations  of the Bureau and 
subject to such procedure and clearances from such agencies, as  may be determined by the Central 
Government;  
(c) not more than three Deputy Managing Directors, each of whom shall be  appointed by the Board, 
on the recommendations of the Bureau and subject to such  procedure and clearances from such 
agencies, as may be determined by the Central  Government;  
(d) two directors, to be nominated by the Central Government, who shall be the  officials of the 
Central Government;  6 
 (e) such number of director s not exceeding three, elected by shareholders in  such manner as may 
be prescribed, such that a shareholder, other than the Central  Government, holding ten per cent. or more 
of the total issued equity share capital may  nominate one director;  
(f) such numbe r of independent directors not exceeding three or one -third of the  total number of 
directors on the Board, whichever is higher, to be appointed by the  Board on the recommendations of 
the Nomination and Remuneration Committee:  
Provided that if the percentag e of holding of issued equity share capital with the  shareholders does not 
permit election of three directors or until the assumption of  charge by the directors elected by the 
shareholders, the Board may at any time co -opt such number of independent direct ors, not exceeding three, 
to be appointed by the  Board on the recommendations of the Nomination and Remuneration Committee, 
who shall hold office until the assumption of charge by the directors elected by the  shareholders and an 
equal number of such co -opted independent directors shall retire  in the order of co -option:  
Provided further that at least one of the directors specified in clause ( e) or in  clause ( f) shall be a woman.  
(2) The Managing Director and Deputy Managing Directors shall be whole -time directors of the Board.  
(3) No person who is a salaried officer or other employee of the Institution shall be  appointed as a 
director of the Board except to the post of a Managing Director or a Deputy  Managing Director.  
(4) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board.  
(5) The terms and conditions of induction of independent directors to the Board under  clause ( f) of sub -
section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The directors appointed under clauses ( d) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed  to be 
independent directors under the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , for the purpose of immunities  available 
to independent directors.  
7. Management. —(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and  
business of the Institution shall vest in the Board which shall exercise all powers and do all  acts and things 
which may be exercised or be done by the Institution.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions shall  act on busin ess 
principles.  
8. Delegation of powers .—The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any director or 
committee  constituted under this Act or to any officer or other employee of the Institution, subject to  such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers  and functions under 
this Act as it may deem necessary.  
9. Term of office and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and other directors of 
Board. —(1) The Chairperson, Managing Director , Deputy Managing Directors and other  directors of the 
Board other than the directors nominated by the Central Government under  clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6, shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five  years, and shall be eligible for  re-appointment 
subject to an overall term not exceeding ten  years:  
Provided that the Managing Director and Deputy Managing Directors shall not hold  office as such after 
they have attained the age of sixty -five years and sixty -two years,  respectively.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson and  directors nominated or 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 shall hold office during  the pleasure of the authority nominating 
or appointing them.  
(3) The Chairperson and dir ectors nominated by the Central Government or shareholders  and 
independent directors shall receive such fees and reimbursements as may be prescribed:  
Provided that any fees and reimbursements payable under this sub -section shall not  be linked with the 
profits of the Institution.  7 
 (4) The salaries and allowances payable to the Managing Director and Deputy  Managing Directors shall 
be specified by regulations on the recommendations of the  Nomination and Remuneration Committee 
guided by market standards.  
(5) The  term of office and other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson,  Managing Director, 
Deputy Managing Directors and other directors of the Board other than  the directors nominated by the 
Central Government under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no fees shall be payable to any  director who is an 
officer of the Central Government.  
10. Disqualification and removal of directors from office. —(1) The Central Government may 
remove from office any director who — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as insolvent; or  
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a director; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of  the Central  Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially  his functions as a 
director; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to  render his 
continuance in office detrimental to the public interest; or  
(f) has, for any reason, been removed or dismissed from the service of — 
(i) the Government; or  
(ii) any bank including the Reserve Bank or the State Bank of India; or  
(iii) any public fin ancial institution or State financial corporation; or  
(iv) any other corporation owned or controlled by the Government.  
(2) No such director shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has 
been given a reasonable opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
(3) Any director who is elected or nominated as a Member of Parliament or of any State  legislature, 
shall cease to be a director from the date of such election or nomination, as the  case may be.  
(4) The disqualifications or removal under this section shall not take effect — 
(a) for thirty days from the date of the adjudication, sentence or order; or  
(b) where any appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days against the  adjudication, sentence 
or conviction resulting in the sentence or order, until the expiry  of seven days from the date on which 
such appeal or petition is disposed of.  
11.Removal of Chairperson and other directors in certain cases. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 10, — 
(i) the Central Gove rnment may, after consulting the Reserve Bank, remove from  office the 
Chairperson and appoint in his place another person to fill the vacancy;  
(ii) the Board may, after consulting the Bureau, remove from office any director  appointed under 
clause ( b) or cl ause ( c) or clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and  appoint in his place another 
person to fill the vacancy;  
(iii) the shareholders, other than the Central Government, may, by a resolution  passed by majority, 
of the votes of such shareholders holdin g in the aggregate not  less than one -half of the share capital 8 
 held by all such shareholders, remove any  director elected under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
6 and elect in his place  another person to fill the vacancy:  
Provided that no person shall be removed from office under this sub -section  unless such person has 
been given an opportunity of showing cause against such  removal.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government  shall, in 
consultation with the Re serve Bank, have the right to terminate the term of office of  the Chairperson, 
Managing Director, Deputy Managing Directors or directors, as the case  may be, at any time before the 
expiry of the term prescribed under sub -section ( 5) of section 9, by giving  notice of not less than three 
months in writing or three months' salary  and allowances in lieu of such notice.  
12.  Vacation and resignation of office by directors. —(1) If a director — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in sectio n 10 or is  removed under 
section 11; or  
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for three or more consecutive meetings  thereof,  his seat 
shall thereupon become vacant.  
(2) Any director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Board  and on such 
resignation being accepted by the Board, or, if such resignation is not accepted  sooner, on the expiry of 
three months from the receipt thereof by the Board, such director  shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
13. Meeting of Board. —(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be specified by  regulations.  
(2) A meeting of the Board shall be held at least once in every calendar q uarter and at  least four such 
meetings shall be held every year.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Board, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any  meeting, the Managing 
Director, or, in the event of both the Chairperson and the Managing  Director being una ble to attend a 
meeting, any other director nominated by the Chairperson  in this behalf and in the absence of such 
nomination, any director elected by the directors  present from among themselves at the meeting, shall 
preside at the meeting of the Board.  
(4) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by  a majority of 
votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of  votes, the Chairperson, or, in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a sec ond or  casting vote.  
(5) Save as provided in sub -section ( 4), every director shall have one vote.  
14. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc. —(1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of 
any of its committee shall be questioned  on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect 
in the constitution of, the  Board or the committee, as the case may be.  
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director of the Board or as a  member of its 
committee shall become invalid merely on the ground that he was disqualified  to be a director or that there 
was any other defect in his appointment.  
15. Committees of Board. —(1) The Board shall constitute a Nomination and Remuneration 
Committee, a Risk  Management Committee and an Audit Committee, each consisting of a minimum of 
three  directors with independent directors forming a majority.  
(2) The Board shall constitute an Executive Committee consisting of such number of  directors as it may 
consider necessary.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Institution shall not be a member of the Executive Committee  and after the 
first year not be Chairperson of Audit Committee or the Nomination and  Remuneration Committee.  
(4) The Board may constitute such other committees as it may deem fit.  9 
 (5) The Executive Committee or any other committees constituted under this section  shall meet at such 
times and places, observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction  of business at its meetings and 
shall perform such functions, as may be specified by re gulations.  
16. Disclosure of interest by members of Board or of committees. —(1) Every director shall at the 
first meeting of the Board in which he participates as  a director and thereafter at the first meeting of the 
Board in every financial year, or whene ver there is any change in the disclosures already made, then at the 
first Board meeting held after  such change, disclose his concern or interest in any body corporate, which 
shall include  shareholding, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every direct or who is in any way, whether directly or indirectly, concerned or  interested in a contract 
or arrangement or proposed contract or arrangement entered into or  to be entered into by the Institution — 
(a) with a body corporate in which such director or such d irector in association  with any other 
director, holds more than two per cent. shareholding of that body  corporate, or is a promoter, manager, 
chief executive officer or trustee of that body  corporate; or  
(b) with a firm or other entity in which such direct or is a partner, owner or  member, as the case 
may be,  
shall not participate in any meeting of the Board or of its committee in which such contract or  arrangement 
is deliberated upon, or in any other deliberations or discussions regarding such  contract or a rrangement, 
and shall, in the case of such deliberations in a meeting of the Board  or its committee, disclose the nature 
of his concern or interest to the Board or the committee,  as the case may be:  
Provided that where any director who is not so concerned or interested at the time of  entering into such 
contract or arrangement, shall, if he becomes concerned or interested after  the contract or arrangement is 
entered into, disclose his concern or interest forthwith when  he becomes concerned or interested, or at the 
first meeting of the Board held after he becomes  so concerned or interested.  
(3) A contract or arrangement entered into by the Institution without disclosure under  sub-section ( 2) 
or with participation by a director who is concerned or interested in  any way,  whether directly or indirectly, 
in such contract or arrangement, shall be voidable at the option  of the Institution.  
(4) Such employees as the Board may specify as constituting the senior management  of the Institution 
shall make disclosures to th e Board relating to all material, financial and  commercial transactions, in which 
they have personal interest that may have a potential  conflict with the interest of the Institution, and the 
Board shall formulate a policy on such  transactions, including an y materiality threshold therefor, and shall 
review such policy at  least once every three years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, conflict of interest relates to  dealing in the shares 
of the Institution or any of its subsidiaries or associ ate companies,  commercial dealings with bodies in 
which the senior management individual or his relatives  have shareholding, etc.  
(5) If an individual who is a director contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), 
or an employee referr ed to in sub -section ( 4) contravenes such provisions,  such an individual or employee 
shall be liable to pay penalty of a sum of up to one lakh  rupees.  
(6) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub -section ( 5), it shall be open to the  Institution to 
proceed against a director or any other employee who had entered into such  contract or arrangement in 
contravention of the provisions of this section for recovery of  any loss sustained by it as a result of such 
contract or arrangement.  
Explanation .—For the p urposes of this section and section 19, the expression  “body corporate ” shall 
include a company, a body corporate as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 
of 2013) , a firm, a financial institution or a scheduled bank or a  public sector enterprise established or 
constituted by or under any Central Act or State Act,  and any other incorporated association of persons or 
body of individuals.  10 
 CHAPTER IV  
ACTIVITIES OF INSTITUTION  
17. Functions and powers of Institution. —(1) The Institution shall perform the following functions 
and exercise the following  powers, namely: — 
(i) form subsidiaries or joint ventures or branches, in India or outside India, for  carrying out its 
functions; and enter into any arrangement with such subsidiar y company or joint venture or branch 
including for financing any such subsidiary company  or joint venture or branch or guaranteeing any of 
their liabilities or make any other  arrangement which may seem desirable to the Board;  
(ii) co-ordinate its operations and the operations of various institutions engaged  in the field of 
infrastructure finance and maintain expert staff to study problems relating  to infrastructure finance and 
be available for consultation to the Central Government,  the Reserve Ban k and the other institutions 
engaged in the field of infrastructure  finance;  
(iii) set up trusts under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882  (2 of 1882)  for establishment of funds  for such 
nature as would assist in financing of infrastructure projects located in Ind ia, or partly in India and partly 
outside India, including real estate investment trusts and  infrastructure investment trusts;  
(iv) support the development of a deep and liquid market for bonds, loans and  derivatives for 
infrastructure financing including facilitating electronic and negotiated  markets infrastructure, investor 
protection, adjudication infrastructure, etc.;  
(v) lend and invest in infrastructure projects located in India, or partly in India  and partly outside 
India, including by underwriting c redit, securitisation of its  receivables, including by way of any pass 
through certificate or direct assignment,  transfer or novation, or by means of innovative financial tools 
including transactions  secured by receivables from project;  
(vi) extend loans a nd advances to any company or statutory corporation or trust  or any financial 
institution funding infrastructure, for the purposes of providing  financial assistance for infrastructure 
projects located in India, or partly in India and  partly outside India;  
(vii) take over or refinance existing loans extended by a lender for infrastructure  projects located in 
India, or partly in India and partly outside India;  
(viii) transfer loans and advances granted by it, with or without the securities, to  trusts, for 
consideration;  
(ix) set aside loans or advances held by the Institution and issue and sell securities  based upon such 
loans or advances so set aside in the form of debt obligations, trust  certificates of beneficial interest or 
other instruments, by whatever name called, and  act as a trustee for the holders of such securities;  
(x) assign securities issued to the Institution;  
(xi) subscribe to or purchase, underwrite, acquire, hold or sell stocks, shares,  bonds, debenture 
stocks, debt securities, obligations and securities, commercial papers,  certificates of deposit or 
debentures issued or guaranteed by any company or trust or  registered society or co -operative society 
or association or the Central Government or  any State Government or any financial institutio n funding 
infrastructure, to facilitate  financing of infrastructure projects in India, or partly in India and partly 
outside India,  or to facilitate deepening of bond market for infrastructure financing;  
(xii) borrow or raise money by way of loans or other wise both in rupees and  foreign currencies or 
secure the payment of money by the issue and sale of debentures,  debenture stocks, bonds, obligations, 
mortgages and securities of all kinds, either  perpetual or terminable and either redeemable or otherwise 
and charge or secure the  same by trust deed, or otherwise on the undertaking of the Institution including 
its authorised or issued capital, or upon any specific property and rights, present or  future, of the 
Institution or otherwise, howsoever;  11 
 (xiii) borrow  money from the Central Government, scheduled banks, financial  institutions, mutual 
funds, any class of persons, and from any other institution or  authority or organisation notified by the 
Central Government, on such terms and  conditions as may be agreed u pon and accept short term loans 
only for managing  asset liability mismatches and not for any other business purpose;  
(xiv) buy or sell, or enter into such other dealings in foreign exchange as may be  necessary for the 
discharge of its functions;  
(xv) issue  participation certificates or debt securities, and promote and facilitate  securitisation of 
loan portfolio of companies and other entities engaged in the  development and financing of 
infrastructure and create and develop a secondary  market for the securit ised receivables including by 
way of acting as an intermediary;  
(xvi) lend money with or without security and make advances upon, hold in  trust, issue, buy, sell 
or otherwise acquire or dispose of on commission or otherwise  any of the securities or investments or 
act as an agent for any of the like purpose;  
(xvii) lend to or invest in or acquire professional or technical services of  companies operating in 
the infrastructure domain across the life cycle of projects;  
(xviii) act as an intermediary in r espect of transactions or services relating to  debt securities issued 
by infrastructure companies and financial institutions for financing  infrastructure projects located in 
India, or partly in India and partly outside India,  including by way of extension of credit enhancement 
facilities;  
(xix) take an active role in negotiations and discussions with various Government  authorities and 
stakeholders for effective dispute resolution in the field of infrastructure  financing;  
(xx) apply for, receive, accept, adm inister and manage grants, aids, subsidies,  funds or donations, 
etc., from national and international sources including World  Bank, New Development Bank, Japan 
International Cooperation Agency, United States  Agency for International Development, Kreditanst alt 
für Wiederaufbau, European  Investment Bank, Asian Development Bank, International Finance 
Corporation and  other organisations and agencies, and organise and facilitate foreign participation in  
infrastructure development projects;  
(xxi) issue guarantee,  letters of comfort, or letters of credit for loans or credit  arrangements made, 
or, debentures or bonds issued, by any financial institution funding  infrastructure projects in India, or 
partly in India and partly outside India;  
(xxii) borrow money from th e Reserve Bank repayable on demand or on the  expiry of fixed periods 
not exceeding ninety days from the date on which the money is  so borrowed against the security of 
stocks, funds or securities (other than immovable  property) in which a trustee is authori sed to invest 
trust money by any law for the time  being in force in India;  
(xxiii) borrow money from the Reserve Bank against bills of exchange or  promissory notes arising 
out of bona fide commercial or trade transactions maturing  within five years from th e date of the 
borrowing;  
(xxiv) convert any debt it has extended to a borrower into equity; and  
(xxv) any other kind of business or undertake any other kind of activity which  the Central 
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank may authorise.  
(2) In furtherance of sub -section ( 1), the Institution, either by itself or through its  subsidiaries or joint 
ventures or in association with others, may carry out the following  functions, namely: — 
(a) organise and facilitate participation from the Central Gov ernment, public  sector, private sector 
and institutional investors from India or overseas in infrastructure  development projects located in 
India, or partly in India and partly outside India;  12 
 (b) provide facilities for training, for dissemination of inform ation and the  promotion of research 
including the undertaking of studies, researches,  techno -economic and other surveys in the field of 
infrastructure development and it  may for the said purposes make loans or advances or grants including 
grants by way  of provision for fellowships and chairs to any institution;  
(c) provide technical, legal, marketing and administrative assistance to any person  engaged in 
infrastructure development activities;  
(d) provide consultancy services in the field of infrastructure development,  project structuring, 
capital structuring or operations subsequent to commissioning  and other related matters in or outside 
India;  
(e) act as trustees of any deeds constituting or securing any debentures,  debenture stocks, or other 
securities o r obligation and undertake and execute any  other trusts, and also undertake the office of or 
exercise the powers of executor,  administrator, receiver, treasurer, custodian and trust corporation;  
(f) acquire an undertaking including the business, assets and  liabilities of any  institution the 
principal object of which is the promotion or development of infrastructure  financing for projects 
located in India, or partly in India and partly outside India;  
(g) act as a financial intermediary for the purpose of pro motion, financing and  development of 
infrastructure projects and facilities located in India, or partly in India  and partly outside India, through 
developing and disseminating appropriate financial  instruments, negotiating loans and advances of all 
nature,  and formulating schemes  for mobilisation of resources;  
(h) structure proposals and negotiate agreements, with the proponents of  infrastructure projects and 
with investors in infrastructure projects located in India, or  partly in India and partly outside India;  
(i) open any account in any bank in or outside India or make any agency  arrangement with, or act 
as an agent or correspondent of, any bank or other institution  in or outside India; and  
(j) do such other acts and things as may be incidental to, or co nsequential upon,  the exercise of its 
powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act or any other law  for the time being in force, including 
sale or transfer of any of its assets.  
(3) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the I nstitution,  guarantee the bonds, 
debentures and loans issued by the Institution as to the repayment of  principal and the payment of interest 
at such rate, terms and conditions as may be agreed by  the Central Government.  
18. Prohibited business.  —(1) The Institution shall not make any loan or advance on the security of 
its own  bonds or debentures.  
(2) The Institution shall not make loans or advances to any person or body of persons  of which any of 
the directors of the Institution is a proprietor, partner, director, employee or  guarantor, or in which one or 
more directors of the Institution hold substantial interest.  
(3) Sub -section ( 2) shall not apply to any borrower if any director of the Institution is  nominated by the 
Institution or the Central Governmen t as director on the Board of such  borrower or is elected on the Board 
of such borrower by virtue of shares held in the borrower  by the Institution.  
Explanation .— For the purpose of this section, “substantial interest ” in relation to a  borrower, means 
the beneficial interest held by one or more of the directors of the Institution  or by any relative of such 
director as defined in clause ( 77) of section 2 of the Companies  Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  whether singly or 
taken together, in the shares of the borrower, and the aggregate  amount paid -up on which either exceeds 
fifty lakhs rupees or two per cent. of the paid -up share capital of the borrower, whichever is lesser or such 
other threshold as may be prescribed.  
19.  Related party transactions .—(1) Except with the consent of the Board and subject to such 
conditions as may be  prescribed, the Institution shall not enter into any contract or arrangement with a 
related  party with respect to — 13 
 (a) sale, p urchase or supply of any goods or materials;  
(b) selling or otherwise disposing of, or buying, property of any kind;  
(c) leasing of property of any kind;  
(d) availing or rendering of any services;  
(e) appointment of any agent for purchase or sale of goods,  materials, services  or property;  
(f) such related party's appointment to any office or place of profit in the Institution,  its subsidiaries 
or joint ventures or associate companies;  
(g) underwriting the subscription of any securities, or derivatives thereof, of the  Institution:  
Provided that no contract or arrangement involving transactions exceeding such  sums as may be 
specified by regulations, shall be entered into except with the prior  approval in the general meeting of the 
shareholders:  
Provided f urther that no shareholder shall vote in such general meeting to approve  any contract or 
arrangement which may be entered into by the Institution, if such  shareholder is a related party:  
Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any tra nsactions  entered into by the 
Institution in its ordinary course of business, other than transactions  which are not on an arm's length basis:  
Provided also that the requirement of approval under the first proviso shall not  be applicable for 
transactions en tered into between the Institution and its wholly  owned subsidiary, if any, whose financial 
statements are consolidated with the  Institution and placed before the shareholders at the general meeting 
for adoption.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, — 
(a) the expression “office or place of profit ” means any office or place — 
(i) where such office or place is held by a director, if the director holding it  receives from the 
Institution anything by way of remuneration over and above  the remuneration to which he is entitled as 
director, by way of salary, fee,  commission, perquisites, any rent -free accommodation, or otherwise;  
(ii) where such office or place is held by an individual other than a director  or by any firm, private 
company or other body corporate, if the individual, firm,  private company or body corporate holding it 
receives from the Institution  anything by way of remuneration, salary, fee, commission, perquisites, 
any rent-free accommodation, or otherwise;  
(b) the expression “arm's length transaction ” means a transaction between two  related parties that 
is conducted as if they were unrelated, so that there is no conflict  of interest.  
(2) Every contract or arrangement entered into under sub -section ( 1) shall be referred  to in a report 
made by the Board to the shareholders, along with the justification for entering  into such contract or 
arrangement.  
(3) Where any contract or arrangement is entered into by a director or any employee,  without obtaining 
the consent of the Board or approval by a resolution in th e general  meeting of the shareholders under sub -
section ( 1) and if it is not ratified by the Board or, as  the case may be, by the shareholders at a meeting 
within three months from the date on  which such contract or arrangement was entered into, such contr act 
or arrangement shall be  voidable at the option of the Board or, as the case may be, of the shareholders and 
if the  contract or arrangement is with a related party to any director, or is authorised by any  other director, 
the directors concerned shall in demnify the Institution against any loss  incurred by it.  
(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub -section ( 3), it shall be open to the  Institution to 
proceed against a director or any other employee who had entered into such  contract or arrangement in 14 
 contravention of the provisions of this section for recovery of  any loss sustained by it as a result of such 
contract or arrangement.  
(5) Any director or employee of the Institution who had entered into or authorised a  contract or 
arrangemen t in violation of the provisions of this section, shall be liable to pay  penalty of a sum of up to 
twenty -five lakh rupees.  
20. Performance review of Institution. —(1) The performance of the Institution shall, once in every 
five years, be reviewed  by an external agency to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The external agency shall review the performance of the Institution for the last five  years with 
respect to the purpose and objectives of the Institution as set out in section 4 and  shall take into account 
such key performance indicators as may be prescribed.  
(3) The external agency shall submit a report of its findings to the Board which shall  forward a copy 
thereof along with action taken, if any, pursuant to such report to the Central  Governm ent within a period 
of three months from the date of receipt of the report.  
CHAPTER V  
GOVERNMENT GRANTS, GUARANTEES AND OTHER CONCESSIONS  
21. Grants and contribution. — (1) The Central Government may support the Institution through 
grants or  contribution, as and when necessary, in the form of cash or marketable Government securities.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Central Government shall,  by the end of 
the first financial year from the establishment of Institution, grant or c ontribute  an amount of five thousand 
crore rupees to the Institution in the form of cash or marketable  Government securities.  
22. Concessional rate of Government guarantee. —The Government shall prescribe a concessional 
rate of fees, not exceeding 0.1 per  cent. at which Government guarantee may be extended to the Institution 
for borrowings from  multilateral institutions, sovereign wealth funds, and such other foreign institutions as 
may be prescribed.  
23. Hedging costs. —Hedging costs in connection with any borrowing of foreign currency by the  
Institution for the purposes of granting loans and advances or its repayment, to insulate the  Institution from 
any fluctuations in the rates of exchange, may be reimbursed by the Central  Government in part or in full.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI  
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORT  
24. Disposal of profits accruing to Institution, to reserve fund. —(1) The Institution shall establish 
a reserve fund to which may be transferred such  sums as the Board may deem fit out of the annual profits 
accruing to the Institution:  
Provided that the sums to be transferred under this sub -section shall not be less than  twenty per cent. 
of the annual profits accruing to the Institution.  
(2) After making provisions for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of assets an d for  all other matters 
for which provision is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided  for by bankers and for the reserve 
fund referred to in sub -section ( 1), and after transferring  a part of the profit to such other reserves or funds 
as may be  considered appropriate, the  Board may out of its net profits propose a dividend.  
25. Preparation of balance -sheet and accounts. —(1) The balance -sheet and accounts of the 
Institution shall be prepared in such  form and manner as may be prescribed.  15 
 (2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Institution to be closed and  balanced as on the 
31st day of March each year or such other date as the Board may  determine.  
26. Audit. —(1) The accounts of the Institution shall be audited by auditors duly qual ified to  act as 
auditors under sub -section ( 1) of section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , who shall be  
appointed by the Institution in general meeting of the shareholders out of the panel of auditors approved by 
the Reserve Bank for such term and on such remuneration as the  Reserve Bank may fix.  
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet of the  Institution and it shall 
be their duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers  relating thereto and they s hall have a 
list delivered to them of all books kept by the Institution  and shall at all reasonable times have access to the 
books, accounts, vouchers and other  documents of the Institution.  
(3) The auditors may, in relation to such accounts, examine any d irector or any officer  or other 
employee of the Institution and shall be entitled to require from the Board or officers  or other employees 
of the Institution such information and explanation as they may think  necessary for the performance of their 
duties.  
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the Institution upon the annual balance -sheet  and accounts 
examined by them and in every such report they shall state whether in their  opinion the balance -sheet is a 
full and fair balance -sheet containing all necessa ry particulars  and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true 
and fair view of the state of affairs of the  Institution and in case they had called for any explanation or 
information from the Board or  any officer or other employee of the Institution, whether  it has been given 
and whether it is  satisfactory.  
(5) The Institution shall furnish to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank  within four months 
from the date on which its accounts are closed and balanced, a copy of  its balance -sheet and accounts 
together with a copy of the auditor's report and a report of  the working of the Institution during the relevant 
year, and the Central Government shall, as  soon as may be after they are received by it, cause the same to 
be laid before each House of  Parliament.  
27. Returns and report. —The Institution shall furnish, from time to time, to the Central Government 
and to  the Reserve Bank, such returns as the Central Government or the Reserve Bank may require.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Receivables to be held in trust. —(1) Any sums received by a financial institution for refinancing 
from the Institution  shall, to the extent of the accommodation granted by the Institution and remaining  
outstanding, be deemed to have been received by the financial institution in trust for the  Institution and 
shall accordingly be paid by such financial institution to the Institution.  
(2) Where any accommodation has been granted by the Institution to a financial  institution, all securities 
held, or which may be held, by such financi al institution on account  of any transaction in respect of which 
such accommodation has been granted, shall be held  by such financial institution in trust for the Institution.  
29. Setting up of other development financial institution .—(1) Any person who in tends to set up a 
development financial institution, in  addition to the Institution established under this Act, shall make an 
application to the Reserve  Bank for licence.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may in consultation with the Central Government, grant licence  subject to such 
criteria, terms and conditions as may be specified by the Reserve Bank by  regulations.  
(3) Any institution to which licence is granted under sub -section ( 2) shall be subject to  the provisions 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 193 4) or the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , as 
the case may be.  
(4) The regulations made by the Reserve Bank shall apply to the Institution established  under this Act 
to such extent as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.  16 
 30. Officers and employees. —(1) The Institution may appoint such number of officers and other 
employees as it  considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions and determine  
the terms and conditions of their appointment of service.  
(2) The duties and conduct, terms and other conditions of service including their  salaries and allowances 
and the establishment and maintenance of provident fund or any  other fund for the benefit of the officers 
and other employees of the Institution appoint ed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be specified by 
regulations:  
Provided that the salaries and allowances payable to the officers and employees shall  be determined by 
the Nomination and Remuneration Committee guided by the market  standards.  
(3) The Institution may depute any officer or any member of its staff for such period  and on such terms 
and conditions as it may determine, to any other institution including an  infrastructure finance or 
development institution.  
(4) The Institution may receive  or take on deputation any officer or other employee  from any institution 
including an infrastructure finance or development institution, for such  period and on such terms and 
conditions as may be specified by regulations.  
(5) Nothing contained in this sec tion shall empower the Institution to depute any  officer or member of 
its staff to any institution on any salary, emoluments or other terms and  conditions which is or are less 
favourable to him than that or those to which he is entitled to  immediately befo re such deputation.  
31. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) institutions that may hold shares of the Institution under sub -section ( 3) of section 5;  
(b) the manner of election of directors by shareholders under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
6; 
(c) the terms and conditions of induction of independent directors to the Board  under sub -section 
(5) of section 6;  
(d) the fees and reimbursements in respect of independent directors under  sub-section ( 3), and the 
term of office and other terms  and conditions of service of, the  Chairperson, Managing Director, Deputy 
Managing Directors and other directors of  Board under sub -section ( 5), of section 9;  
(e) manner of disclosure of interest by members of Board and of committees  under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 16;  
(f) the threshold for determination of beneficial interest by directors of the  Institution or any relative 
of such director under the Explanation to sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
(g) conditions subject to which the Institution may enter into a contract or an  arrangement under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(h) the parameters on the basis of which the external agency shall review the  performance of the 
Institution under sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(i) the rate of fees for Government und er section 22;  
(j) the form and manner in which the balance -sheet and accounts of the Institution  shall be prepared 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  17 
 32. Power of Board to make regulations. —(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and in  consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification, make regulations not 
inconsistent with  the provisions of this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary o r 
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries a nd allowances payable to the Managing Director and Deputy  Managing Directors 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 9;  
(b) the times, places and rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of  business of the Board 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(c) the times, places and rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business  of the committees 
and their functions under sub -section ( 5) of section 15;  
(d) amount for transactions under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(e) the terms and othe r conditions of service of the officers and employees of the  Institution under 
sub-section ( 2) and the terms and conditions of deputation under  sub-section ( 4), of section 30;  
(f) the mechanism under sub -section ( 1) of section 39 for the purpose of  determining the penalties 
specified under sub -section ( 5) of section 16 and sub -section ( 5) of section 19;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and ever y regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is 
in session, for a total period of  thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or  
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rul e or regulation shall  thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,  however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done under that 
rule or r egulation.  
34. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Institution or  its Chairperson or other directors, employees or officers for anything which is 
done in good  faith or intended to be done under this Act, or the rules or the regulations made thereunder,  
including in respect of assets created or transferred to the Institution.  
35. Sanction for enquiry, inquiry investigation and prosecution. —(1) No investigation agency, 
including but n ot limited to Police, Central Bureau of  Investigation, Serious Fraud Investigation Office, 
Directorate of Enforcement and such other  agencies, shall conduct any enquiry or inquiry or investigation 
into any offence alleged to  have been committed under any l aw, in relation to any recommendation made 
or decision  taken by the Chairperson or other directors, employees or officers of the Institution in  discharge 
of his official functions or duties, without the previous approval of — 
(a) the Central Government, where the offence is alleged have to been committed  by the 
Chairperson or other directors; or  
(b) the Managing Director, where the offence is alleged to have been committed  by an employee 
or officer of the Institution:  
Provided th at no such approval shall be necessary for cases involving arrest of  a person on the spot on 
the charge of accepting or attempting to accept any undue  advantage for himself or for any other person:  
Provided further that the Central Government or the Managi ng Director, as the  case may be, shall 
convey its decision within a period of three months, and such  period may, for reasons to be recorded in 18 
 writing by the Central Government or the  Managing Director, as the case may be, be extended by a further 
period of one month:  
Provided also that failure of the Central Government or the Managing Director to  convey its decision 
under this sub -section within the time specified under the second  proviso shall not be considered as deemed 
approval for initiation of any en quiry or  inquiry or investigation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “undue  advantage ” shall have the 
meaning as assigned to it under the Prevention of Corruption  Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) . 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of  an offence punishable under any law alleged to  have been 
committed by the Chairperson or other directors, employees or officers of the  Institution for which a 
sanction to conduct any enquiry or inquiry or investigation was  granted under sub -section ( 1), except with 
the previous sanction of — 
(a) the Central Government, where the offence is alleged to be committed by the  Chairperson or 
other directors; or  
(b) of the Managing Director, where the offence is alleged to be committed by an  employee or 
officer of the Institution:  
Provided that the Central Government or the Managing Director shall, after the  receipt of the proposal 
requiring sanction for prosecution under this sub -section,  endeavour to convey the decision on such 
proposal within a period of three mo nths from the date of its receipt:  
Provided further that in case where, for the purpose of grant of sanction for  prosecution, legal 
consultation is required, such period may, for the reasons to be  recorded in writing, be extended by a further 
period of one  month:  
Provided also that failure of the Central Government or the Managing Director to  convey its decision 
under this sub -section within the time specified shall not be  considered as deemed approval for the initiation 
of prosecution.  
36. Appointment of directors by Institution to prevail. —(1) Where any arrangement entered into by 
the Institution with a borrowing entity  while granting loans and advances provides for the appointment or 
nomination by the  Institution of one or more directors of such entity, such provision and any appointment 
of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to  the contrary 
contained in the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , or in any other law for the time being in  force or in the 
memorandum and articles of association or any other instrument relating to the  entity, and any provision 
regarding share qualification, age limit, number of directorships,  removal from office of directors and such 
like conditions contained in any such law or  instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed 
by the Institution in pursuance  of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) be deemed to be an independent director under the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  for the 
purpose of immunities available to independent directors;  
(b) hold office during the pleasure of the Institution and may be removed or  substituted by any 
person by order in writing of the Institution;  
(c) not incur any obliga tion or liability by reason only of his being a director or  for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as  a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(d) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be tak en into account for  computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement.  
37. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned. —(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law for the  time being in force, the validity of any loan or advance granted by the 19 
 Institution in pursuance  of the provisions of this Act shall not be called in question merely on the ground 
of non-compliance with the requirements of such other law as aforesaid or of any resolution,  contract, 
memorandum, articles of association or other instrument.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall enable any company to obtain any loan or advance  where the instrument 
relating to the constitution of such company does not empower such  company to do so.  
38. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy. —(1) The Institution shall not, except as otherwise required 
by this Act or by any  other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents 
except in  circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the la w or practice and usage customary  among 
bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Institution to divulge such information.  
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor, officer or other employee of the  Institution or of 
the Reserve Bank, whose servic es are utilised by the Institution under the  provisions of this Act shall, before 
entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity  and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule.  
39. Adjudication. —(1) The Board shall make regulations for setting up a mechanism for the purpose 
of determining the penalties specified under sub -section ( 5) of section 16 and sub -section ( 5) of section 19.  
(2) The regulations shall provide for a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the  director or an 
employe e against whom a complaint is made for violating the provisions of  section 16 or section 19, as the 
case may be, and a right to prefer an appeal against any order  imposing the penalty.  
40. Indemnity of directors. —(1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Institution against all 
losses and  expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are  
caused by his own wilful act or default.  
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for any officer or other  employee of the 
Institution or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Institution from the  insufficiency or deficiency of the 
value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or  taken on behalf of the Institution or the insolven cy 
or wrongful act of any debtor or any  person under obligation to the Institution or anything done in good 
faith in the execution of  the duties of his office or in relation thereto.  
41. Bankers’ Books of Evidence Act, 1891 to apply in relation to the Inst itution. —The Bankers' 
Books Evidence Act, 1891  (18 of 1891) , shall apply in relation to the Institution as  if it were a bank as 
defined in section 2 of that Act.  
42. Sections 34A and 36AD of the Banking Regulation Act, 19 49 (10 of 1949)  to apply to 
Institu tion. —The provisions of sections 34A and 36AD of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949)  
shall apply to the Institution.  
43. Liquidation of Institution. —No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies shall 
apply to the  Institution and the Institution shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central  
Government and in such manner as it may direct.  
44. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Institution shall, in  the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by 
such directions on questions  of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to 
time.  
45. Overriding effect of this Act. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having  effect by virtue of any such law.  
46. Power to remove difficulties. — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to th e provisions of this 
Act, the Central  Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give  
such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be  necessary or expedient 
for removing the  difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date  of 
commencement of this Act.  20 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament.  
47. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934. —The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 shall be amended in the 
manner specified in  the Second Schedule.  
48. Amendment of Act 10 of 1949 .—The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 shall be amended in the 
manner specified in the  Third Schedule.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 38( 2)] 
Declaration of Fidelity and Secrecy  
I do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability  execute and perform 
the duties required of me as director, auditor, officer or other employee,  as the case may be, of the National 
Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development and  which properly relate to the office or position held 
by me in the said Institution.  
2. I further declare that I will not communica te or allow to be communicated to any  person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the said Institution  or to the affairs of any person 
having any dealing with the said Institution or will I allow any  such person to inspec t or have access to any 
books or documents belonging to or in the  possession of the said Institution and relating to the business of 
the said Institution or the  business of any person having any dealing with the said Institution.  
 
Signed before me                                                                                                                           (Signature ) 
 
 21 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 47)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934  
1. Amendment of Section 2. —In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934)  (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act),  in section 2, after clause ( ccc), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 
'(ccci) “National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development ” means  the Institution 
established under section 3 of the National Bank for Financing  Infrastructure and Development Act, 
2021;  
(cccii ) “other development financial institution ” means a development financial  institution licensed 
under section 29 of the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure  and Development Act, 2021;'.  
2.  Amendment of section 17. —In section 17 of the principal Act, — 
(a) in clause ( 4G), after the words “or the Small Industries Bank ”, the words “or the National Bank 
for Financing Infrastructure and Development or other development  financial institution ” shall be 
inserted;  
(b) in clause ( 4-I), after the words “the Industrial Finance Corporation ”, the words “, the National 
Bank for Financing Infrastructur e and Development or other  development financial institution ” shall 
be inserted;  22 
 (c) after clause ( 4K), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(4L) the making to the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and  Development or other 
development  financial institution of loans and advances — 
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed period not  exceeding ninety days, from 
the date of such loan or advance against the  security of stocks, funds and securities (other than 
immovable property)  in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any law for the  
time being in force in India; or  
(b) against the security of bills of exchange or promissory notes,  arising out of bona fide 
commercial or trade transactions bearing two or  more good signatures and maturing within five 
years from the date of such  loan or advance; ”; 
(d) in clause ( 12B), after the words “the Industrial Finance Corporation, ”, the words “the National 
Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development or other  development fi nancial institution, ” shall 
be inserted.  
3. Ame ndment of section 42. —In section 42 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), in the Explanation , 
in clause ( c), in sub -clause ( ii), after the words “or from the Small Industries Bank ”, the words  “or from the 
National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development or from the other  development financial 
institution ” shall be inserted.  
4. Amendment of section 46C. —In section 46C of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) in clause ( c), after the words “or the Small Industries Bank, ” at both the  places, the words “or 
the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development  or the other development financial 
institution, ” shall be inserted;  
(b) in clause ( d), after the words “or the Small Industries Ba nk,”, the words “or the National Bank 
for Financing Infrastructure and Development or the other  development financial institution, ” shall be 
inserted.  
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 48)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949  
1. Amendment of section 5. —In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949)  (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), in  section 5, after clause ( ha), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: — 
'(hb) “National Bank for Financing Infrastructure a nd Development ” means the  Institution 
established under section 3 of the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure  and Development Act, 
2021;  
(hc) “other development financial institution ” means a development financial  institution licensed 
under section 29 of the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure  and Development Act, 2021;'.  
2. Amendment of section 18. —In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), in the Explanation , 
in clause ( a), in sub -clause ( ii), after the words “or from the Small Industries Bank ”, the words  “or from the 
National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development or from the other  development financial 
institution ” shall be inserted.  
3. Amendment of section 34A. —In section 34A of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 3), after the words 
“the Small  Industries Bank ”, the words “,the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development  
or the other development financial institution, ” shall be inserted.  23 
 4. Amendment of section 36AD. —In section 36AD, in sub -section ( 3), after the words “the Small 
Industries Bank ”, the words “, the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development or the other  
development financial institution, ” shall be inserted.  
--------------------------The National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE  NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR  ALLIED  AND  HEALTHCARE   PROFESSIONS  
ACT,  2021  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short  title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE  PROFESSION  
3. Constitution and composition of Commission . 
4. Term of office and conditions of service of Members . 
5. Resignation and removal of Members . 
6. Cessation of membership and filling up of casual vacancy of Member . 
7. Meetings of Commission . 
8. Vacancies, etc., not t o invalidate proceedings of Commission . 
9. Officers and other employees of Commission . 
10. Professional Councils . 
11. Functions of Commission . 
12. National Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council . 
13. Central Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register.  
14. Privileges for enrol ment on Central Register.  
15. Rights of persons who are enrolled on Central Register.  
16. Registration in Central Register.  
17. Issue of certificate of registration.  
18. Registration of additional qualifications.  
19. Removal of name from Central Register.  
20. Interim Commission.  
21. Search -cum-Selection Committee.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE  COUNCIL  
22. Constitution and composition of State Council.  
23. Terms and conditions of service of Member.  
24. Resignation and removal of Member.  
25. Cessation of membership and filling up of casual va cancy of Member.  2 
  
SECTIONS  
26. Meetings of State Council . 
27. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Council.  
28. Officers and other employees of State Council.  
29. Constitution and functions of Autonomous Boards.  
30. Functions of State Council.  
31. Constitution of Advisory Board.  
32. State Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register . 
33. Registration in State Register.  
34. Issue of duplicate certificates . 
35. Renewal of name of Allied and Healthcare professionals in the State Register . 
36. Removal of name of a person from State Re gister.  
37. Restoration of name of a person in the State Register.  
38. Recognition of persons offering services prior to commencement of Act . 
CHAPTER IV  
RECOGNITION AND RECIPROCITY  
39. Recognition of allied and healthcare institutions and reciprocity . 
CHAPTER V  
ESTATB LISHMENT OF NEW ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE INSTITUTION  
40. Permission for establishment of new allied and healthcare institutions, new courses of study, etc.  
41. Power to require information from allied and healthcare institutions.  
42. Recognition of allied and healthcare qualifications by State Council . 
43. Withdrawal of recognition . 
44. Failure to maintain minimum essential standards by allied and healthcare institutions.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
45. Grants by Central Government.  
46. National Allied and Healthcare Fund.  
47. Accounts and audit of Commission . 
48. Annual  report of Commission . 
49. Returns and information . 
50. Grants by State Government . 
51. State Allied and Healthcare Council Fund . 
52. Accounts and audit of State Council.  
53. Annual report of State Council . 
54. Authentication of orders, etc.  
55. Practice by allied and healthcare professionals.  3 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENAL TIES  
56. Penalty for falsely claiming to be entered in Central Register and State Register.  
57. Misuse of titles . 
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration.  
59. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act.  
60. Cognizance of offences.  
CHA PTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
61. Bar of jurisdiction.  
62. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
63. Direction by Central Government.  
64. Act to have overriding effect.  
65. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
66. Power to make regulations.  
67. Laying of rules and regulations.  
68. Power of State Government to make rules.  
69. Power to remove difficulties . 
70. Power to amend Schedule . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  4 
 THE  NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR  ALLIED  AND  HEALTHCARE   PROFESSIONS  
ACT,  2021  
ACT NO. 14 OF 2021  
[28th March , 2021.]  
An Act to provide  for regulation  and maintenance  of standards  of education  and services  by allied  
and healthcare  professionals,  assessment  of institutions,     maintenance  of a Central  Register  and State Register  
and creation  of a system  to improve  access,  research  and development  and adoption of latest  scientific  
advancement  and for matters  connected  therewith  or incidental  thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the National  Commission  for Allied  
and Healthcare        Professions  Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act and any reference in any provision to 
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Advisory Council ” means the National Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 ; 
(b) “allied and healthcare institution ” means an educational or research institution which grants 
diploma or undergraduate, postgraduate or doctoral degree  or any other post degree certification in any 
allied and healthcare professional under this Act;  
(c) “allied and healthcare professional ” means any allied health professional or healthcare 
professional under this Act;  
(d) “allied health professional ” includes an associate, technician or technologist who is trained to 
perform any technical and practical task to support diagnosis and treatment of illness, disease, injury 
or impairment, and to support implementation of any healthcare treatment and referral pl an 
recommended by a medical, nursing or any other healthcare professional, and who has obtained any 
qualification of diploma or degree under this Act, the duration of which shall not be less than two 
thousand hours spread over a period of two years to four  years divided into specific semesters;  
(e) “allied and healthcare qualification ” means a recognised diploma or degree possessed by an 
allied and healthcare professional through regular learning mode under this Act or any additional 
recognised course obtai ned thereafter;  
(f) “Autonomous Board ” means the Autonomous Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 
29; 
(g) “Central Register ” means the Central Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register maintained 
by the Commission under  section 13 ; 
(h) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission appointed under clause ( a) of           
sub-section ( 3) of section 3 ; 
(i) “Commission ” means the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 ; 
                                                      
1. 25th May, 2021, vide notification No. S.O. 2012(E), dated 25th May, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                      
sec. 3(ii).  5 
 (j) “healthcare professional ” includes a scientist, therapist or other professional who studies, 
advises, researches, supervises or provides preventive, curative, rehabilitative, therapeutic or 
promotional health services and who has obtained any qualificatio n of degree under this Act, the 
duration of which shall not be less than three thousand six hundred hours spread over a period of three 
years to six years divided into specific semesters;  
(k) “Interim Commission ” means the Interim Commission constituted un der sub -section ( 1) 
of section 20 ; 
(l) “Member” means a Member of the Commission or, as the case may be, the State Council, 
including the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Part -time Member;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(n) “Part-time Member ” means the Part -time Member of the Commission nominated by the State 
Government under sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( d), and nominated by the Central Governmen t 
under sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( d) of section  3; 
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “Professional Council ” means the Allied and Healthcare Professional Council constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 10 ; 
(q) “recog nised categories ” means any category of the allied and healthcare professionals specified 
in the Schedule;  
(r) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Commission;  
(s) “Schedule” means the Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(t) “State Council ” means a St ate Allied and Healthcare Council constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 22 ; 
(u) “State Government ” includes Union territory Administration;  
(v) “State Register ” means the State Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register maintained 
under  section 3 2; 
(w) “Task shifting ” means the process whereby specific tasks are moved, where appropriate to 
related allied and healthcare professionals specialised in those tasks, by reorganising the health 
workforce efficiently for improved healthcare;  
(x) “Universit y” means a University defined under clause ( f) of section 2  of the University Grants 
Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) and includes an institution declared to be a deemed University 
under   section 3  of that Act;  
(y) “Vice -Chairperson ” means the Vice -Chairpe rson of the Commission appointed under clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 . 
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE  PROFESSION  
3. Constitution and composition of Commission .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government m ay, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted a Commission to be 
called the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Profession for exercising such powers and 
discharging such duties as may be laid down under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the same name sue or be sued.  
  6 
 (3) The Commission shall consist of the following, namely: — 
(a) a person having an outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity and 
possessing a postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied and healthcare 
sciences from any University with experience of not less than twenty -five years in the field of allied 
and healthcare sciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of allied and 
healthcare professions to be appointed by the Central Gove rnment --Chairperson;  
(b) a person having an outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing 
a postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied and healthcare sciences from 
any University with experience o f not less than twenty years in the field of allied and healthcare 
sciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of allied and healthcare 
professions —Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) the following persons shall be the ex officio  Members o f the Commission, namely: — 
(i) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of 
Law and Justice --ex officio  Member;  
(ii) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Health and Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Health  and Family Welfare --ex officio  Member;  
(iii) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education --ex 
officio  Member;  
(iv) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Empowerment of Persons 
with Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment --ex officio  Member;  
(v) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship --ex officio Member;  
(vi) one person representing the Directorate Gener al of Health Services not below the rank of 
Deputy Director General --ex officio  Member;  
(vii) one person representing the Indian Council of Medical Research not below the rank of 
Deputy Director General --ex officio  Member;  
(viii) one person representing ou t of the following, on biennial rotation basis, not below the 
rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India --ex officio  Member -- 
(a) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board;  
(b) National Medical Commission; and  
(c) Rehabilitation Council of India;  
(ix) three persons not below the rank of Deputy Director or Medical Superintendent 
representing the following, on biennial rotation basis, to be nominated by the Central Government -
-ex officio  Members, -- 
(a) All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi;  
(b) All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai;  
(c) Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry;  
(d) North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, 
Shillong;  
(e) Pt. Deen dayal Upadhyaya National Institute for Persons with Physical Disabilities, 
Delhi;  
(f) National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, Bengaluru;  
(g) National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad;  7 
 (h) National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and R esearch, Cuttack;  
(i) National Institute of Orthopedically Handicapped, Kolkata;  
(j) All India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore, Karnataka;  
(k) Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala; and  
(l) Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai;  
(d) the following persons shall be the Part -time Members of the Commission, namely: -- 
(i) two persons from each of the six zones representing the State Councils on biennial 
rotation in the alphabetical order as per the zonal d istribution having such qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government to be nominated by the 
concerned State Government;  
(ii) The President of the Professional Council and one person representing each of the 
Professional Coun cils to be selected in such a manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government on biennial rotation of professions by a committee comprising of Chairperson, 
Vice -Chairperson and the ex officio  Member under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c); and  
(iii) two persons, representing charitable institutions engaged in education or services 
in connection with any recognised category, having such qualifications and experience as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be nominated by the Central 
Government.  
4.Term of office and conditions of service of Members .—(1) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson of 
the Commission and the Part -time Member nominated under sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 3 shall hold office for a te rm not exceeding two years from the date on which 
they enter upon their office and shall be eligible for re -nomination for a maximum period of two terms.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chairperson and 
Vice-Chairperson of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Part -time Member nominated under sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) 
of section 3 shall receive such travelling and other al lowances as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
5. Resignation and removal of Members .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section 
(1) of section 4, the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson of the Commission and the Part -time Member 
nominated u nder sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 may - 
(i) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of not less than three 
months; or  
(ii) be removed from his office if he — 
(a) has been ad judged insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other inter est as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as a Part -time Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) No Part -time Member shall be removed from his office under clause  (d) or clause ( e) of sub -section 
(1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  8 
 6. Cessation of membership and filling up of casual vacancy of Member .—(1) The ex officio  
Member under clauses ( i) to ( ix) of sub -section (3) of section 3, shall cease to be a Member of the 
Commission on his cessation to the service by virtue of which he was appointed as a Member of the 
Commission.  
(2) A Member nominated under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3, sha ll cease 
to be Member of the Commission on removal of his name from the register of the State Council.  
(3) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or any other Member appointed under any casual vacancy in 
the Commission under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall h old office only for the remainder of the term of 
the Member in whose place he has been appointed.  
7. Meetings of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall meet at least once in every quarter at such 
time and place as may be decided by the Chairperson, and shall  observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Commission and if, for any reason, he is 
unabl e to attend the meeting of the Commission, the Vice -Chairperson shall preside over the meeting.  
(3) One -half of the total number of Members of the Commission including the Chairperson or Vice -
Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all decisions of the  Commission shall be taken by a majority 
of the Members, present and voting; and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, 
the Vice -Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
 8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedi ngs of Commission .—No act or proceeding of the 
Commission shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Commiss ion; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case.  
9. Officers and other employees of Commission .—(1) Subject to such rules made by the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central Government shall provi de a Secretariat to the Commission which 
shall consist of a Secretary and other officers as it may think necessary for the efficient performance of its 
functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of , the Secretary and other 
officers of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Secretariat of the Commission shall also provide Secretarial assistance to the Professional 
Council and the Advisory Council.  
10. Professional Councils .—(1) The Commission shall, by notification, constitute Professional 
Council for every recognised category and shall consist of a president and members, not less than four and 
not exceeding twenty -four, representing each profession in the  recognised category having such 
qualifications and experiences as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that where there is more than one profession represented in a Professional Council, the 
president shall rotate biennially amongst the p rofessions in the recognised category.  
(2) Where there is no person from a particular recognised profession represented in the Commission, if 
the Commission is of opinion that the decision taken by it affects that profession, it may, before taking any 
decision, give an opportunity of being heard to that profession through the related Professional Council.  
(3) The president and the member of the Professional Council shall be a registered professional of the 
respective category.  
11. Functions of Commission .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to take all such steps as it 
may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of the 
standards of delivery of services under this Act and for the purposes of performing  its functions, the 
Commission may — 9 
 (a) frame policies and standards for the governance of allied and healthcare related education and 
professional services;  
(b) regulate the professional conduct, code of ethics and etiquette to be observed by the allied a nd 
healthcare professionals by or under this Act;  
(c) create and maintain an up -to-date online and live Central Register with details of academic 
qualifications institutions, training, skill and competencies of allied and healthcare professionals related 
to their profession as specified in the Schedule;  
(d) provide scope of practice of each profession keeping in view, inter alia , need for task shifting;  
(e) provide basic standards of education, courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, 
staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment, examination, training, research, 
continuing professional education, maximum tuition fee payable in respect of various categories, 
proportionate distribution of seats and promote innovations  in categories in the manner as may be 
specified by regulations;  
(f) provide the allied and healthcare qualifications to be obtained by allied and healthcare 
professionals, including the name of the course, entry criteria, duration and such other particula rs as 
may be specified by regulations;  
(g) provide for uniform entry examination with common counselling for admission into the allied 
and healthcare institutions at the diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level in the manner 
as may be specif ied by regulations;  
(h) provide for exit or licensing examinations for allied and healthcare professionals for 
professional practice or entrance into postgraduate or doctoral level and National Teachers Eligibility 
Test for academicians in the manner as ma y be specified by regulations;  
(i) provide strategic framework for rational deployment of skilled manpower, performance 
management systems, task shifting and associated career development pathways for allied and 
healthcare professionals;  
(j) provide minimu m standards framework for machineries, materials and services;  
(k) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance of the guidelines for their 
effective functioning by the State Councils under this Act in the manner as may be specified by 
regulations;  
(l) constitute committees or engage independent experts for technical advice related to any of the 
professions as listed in the Schedule for the efficient discharge of the functions of the Commission;  
(m) hold an Annual Meeting of the Commission with the National Medical Commission constituted 
under  section 3  of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (30 of 2019) and the Central Council 
constituted under section 3 of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (59 of 1973);  
(n) perform such other  functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be 
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Commission may delegate such of its functions to the Professional Council as it think necessary.  
12. National Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute 
an Advisory Council to be known as National Allied and Healthcare Advisory Council to advise the 
Commission on the issues relating to allied and healthcare professionals.  
(2) The Advi sory Council shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
(i) Chairperson of the Commission --Chairperson;  
(ii) all Members of the Commission --ex officio  member;  
(iii) Principal Secretary dealing with medical education or his nominee from each State --member;  
(iv) Chairperson of the State Council --member; and  10 
 (v) Principal Secretary dealing with medical education or his nominee representing each Union 
territory --member.  
(3) The Advisory Council shall meet once in a year at Delhi as may be decided by the C hairperson of 
the Advisory Council.  
13. Central Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register .—(1) The Commission shall maintain 
online and live Register of persons in separate parts in each of the recognised categories to be known as the 
Central Allied an d Healthcare Professionals' Register which shall contain information including the name 
of persons and qualifications relating to any of their respective recognised categories in the manner as may 
be specified by regulations.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Commission may adopt standardised format for populating 
and maintaining the Central Register in the manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Central Register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) and may be proved by a certified copy provided by the Commission.  
14. Privileges for enrolment on Central Register .—Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid 
down in this Act regarding practice by person possessing cert ain recognised allied and healthcare 
qualifications, every person whose name is for the time being borne on the Central Register shall be entitled 
according to his qualifications to provide any service within the defined scope of practice as an allied and 
healthcare professional under this Act and to receive in respect of such service, any expenses, charges or 
any fees to which he may be entitled.  
15. Rights of persons who are enrolled on Central Register .—No person, other than a registered 
allied and healt hcare professional, shall — 
(a) hold office as an allied and healthcare professional (by whatever name called) in Government 
or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) provide service in any of the recognised categories in any State ; and  
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate any certificate required by any law for the time being in force 
to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified allied and healthcare professional.  
16. Registration in Central Register .—The Commission may, on  receipt of the report of registration 
of a person in a State Register or on an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government, enter his name in the Central Register.  
17. Issue of certificate of registration .—(1) Any person whose name has been entered in the Central 
Register shall, on an application made by the person in this behalf in such form and in such manner and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, be entitled to get a cer tificate of 
registration.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall grant to the applicant a 
certificate of registration in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) Where it is shown to the satisfacti on of the Commission that a certificate of registration has been 
lost or destroyed, the commission may, on payment of such fees, issue a duplicate certificate in such form 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
18. Registration of additional quali fications .—(1) If any person whose name is entered in the Central 
Register obtains any other recognised qualification in addition to any allied and healthcare qualification, he 
shall, on an application made in this behalf in such form and in such manner an d on payment of such fees 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, be entitled to have an entry stating such degree or diploma 
or such other qualifications made against his name in such register in addition to any entry previously made.  
(2) The entr ies in respect of any such person in a State Register shall be altered in accordance with the 
alterations made in the Central Register.  
19. Removal of name from Central Register .—If the name of any person enrolled on a State Register 
is removed therefrom i n pursuance of any power conferred under this Act, the Commission shall direct the 11 
 removal of the name of such person from the Central Register in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations:  
Provided that on the removal of his name from the Central Reg ister or State Register, as the case may 
be, such certificate shall cease to be valid.  
20. Interim Commission .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be but within sixty days 
from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, c onstitute an Interim Commission, for 
three years or until a regular Commission is constituted under section 3, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The Interim Commission constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of the following, namely: -
- 
(a) Additional Secre tary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare -
-Chairperson;  
(b) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare --
member;  
(c) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department  of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law 
and Justice --member;  
(d) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher Education --member;  
(e) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment -
-member;  
(f) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship --member;  
(g) One representative of the Directorate General of Health Services not below the rank of Deputy 
Director General --member;  
(h) One representa tive of the National Medical Commission constituted under section 3 of the 
National Medical Commission Act, 2019 (30 of 2019) not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India --member;  
(i) One representative of the Rehabilitation Council of  India not below the rank of Deputy Secretary 
to the Government of India --member;  
(j) One representative of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary to the Government of India --member;  
(k) two persons representing each of t he recognised categories having such qualifications and 
experiences as may be prescribed by the Central Government --member:  
Provided that the Interim Commission may engage experts from unrepresented professions 
specified in the Schedule as necessary.  
(3) The Interim Commission shall discharge the functions assigned to the Commission under this Act 
and shall follow its own procedures in discharging its duties.  
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Interim Commission.  
21. Search -cum-Selection Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, on the recommendation 
of a Search -cum-Selection Committee, appoint the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and the Secretary of the 
Commission.  
(2) The Search -cum-Selection Committee shall consist of the followi ng persons, namely: -- 
(a) the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare --Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary or his nominee, not below the rank of Additional Secretary of Department of 
Higher Education, Ministry of Education --member;  12 
 (c) four experts, po ssessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years in the field of allied and healthcare education, public health education and health research to be 
nominated by the Central Government --members;  
(d) one person, possessin g outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years in the field of management or law or economics or science and technology to be nominated by 
the Central Government --member; and  
(e) Additional Secretary to the Government of Ind ia in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Convener --member.  
(3) The Central Government shall, within a period of three months from the date of occurrence of any 
vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson or 
Secretary of the Commission or within three months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Vice -
Chairperson or Secretary of the Commission, make a reference to the Search -cum-Selection Committee for 
selection of Chairperson, Vice -Chai rperson or Secretary.  
(4) The Search -cum-Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of at least three names for each 
vacancy.  
(5) The Search -cum-Selection Committee shall, before recommending any person for appointment of 
the Chairperson or Vice -Chairpers on or Secretary, satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial 
or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson 
or Secretary.  
(6) No appointment of the Chairperson or Vice -Chairpers on or Secretary of the Commission shall be 
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a member in the Search -cum-Selection Committee.  
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) to ( 6), the Search -cum-Selection Committee may 
regulate its o wn procedure.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE  COUNCIL  
22. Constitution and composition of State Council .—(1) Every State Government shall, by 
notification, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, constitute a State Council to 
be called the State Allied and Healthcare Council for exercising such powers and discharging such duties 
as may be laid down under this Act.  
(2) The State Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal , with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the same name sue or be sued.  
(3) The State Council shall consist of the following, namely: — 
(a) a person of outstanding ability, proven adminis trative capacity and integrity, possessing a 
postgraduate degree in any profession of recognised category of allied and healthcare sciences from 
any University and having experience of not less than twenty -five years in the field of allied and 
healthcare s ciences, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of allied and healthcare 
professions to be nominated by the State Government --Chairperson;  
(b) one Director or Additional Director or Joint Director representing medical or health sc iences in 
the State Government --ex officio  Member;  
(c) two persons not below the rank of Dean or Head of the Department from any medical colleges 
of the State Government --ex officio  Members;  
(d) president of the Autonomous Boards constituted by the State C ouncil under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 29 --ex officio  Member;  
(e) two persons representing each of the recognised categories specified in the Schedule to be 
nominated by the State Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed 
by the State Government --Members; and  13 
 (f) two persons, representing charitable institutions engaged in education or services in connection 
with any recognised category, to be nominated by the State Government having such qualifications and 
experience as may  be prescribed by the State Government --Members.  
23. Terms and conditions of service of Member .—(1) The Chairperson of the State Council and 
Member nominated under clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of section 22 shall hold office for a term not 
exceed ing two years from the date on which they enter upon their office and shall be eligible for re -
nomination for a maximum period of two terms.  
(2) The Members nominated to the State Council under clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of section 
22 shall rec eive such travelling and other allowances as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
24. Resignation and removal of Member .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section 
(1) of section 23, the Chairperson of the State Council and Member nominate d under clauses ( e) and ( f) of 
sub-section (3) of section 22 may — 
(i) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the State Government notice of not less than three 
months; or  
(ii) be removed from his office if he — 
(a) has been adjudged insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect  prejudicially his functions 
as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) No such Member shall be removed from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) 
unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
25. Cessation of membership and filling up of casual vacancy of Member .—(1) A Member under 
clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 22, shall cease to be a Member of  the State Council on 
his cessation to the service by virtue of which he was appointed as a Member of the State Council.  
(2) The Chairperson or any other Member appointed under any casual vacancy in the State Council 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 22, sh all hold office only for the remainder of the term of the member in 
whose place he has been appointed.  
26. Meetings of State Council .—(1) The State Council shall meet at such times and places, and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the tran saction of business at its meetings (including quorum 
of such meetings) in the manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(2) The Chairperson of the State Council, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the State 
Council, any othe r member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall 
preside over the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the State Council shall be decided by a majority 
of the members present and voting, and in t he event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson of the State 
Council or in his absence, the member of the State Council presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
27. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Council .—No act or proceed ing of the 
State Council shall be invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State Council; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the State Council; or  
(c) any irregularity  in the procedure of the State Council not affecting the merits of the case.  14 
 28.  Officers and other employees of State Council .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made by 
the State Government in this behalf, the State Council may appoint a Secretary and such other employees 
as it may think necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Secretary, other 
officers and employees of the State Council a ppointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
29.  Constitution and functions of Autonomous Boards .—(1) The State Council shall, by 
notification, constitute the following Autonomous Boards for regulating the all ied and healthcare 
professionals, namely, -- 
(a) Under -graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board,  
(b) Post -graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board,  
(c) Allied and Healthcare Professions Assessment and Rating Board, and  
(d) Allied and Healthcare Professions Ethics and Registration Board.  
(2) The Autonomous Boards constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of a president and such 
number of members from each recognised category as may be specified by the regulations and shall be 
appointed by th e State Government.  
(3) The Under -graduate Allied and Healthcare Education Board and Post -graduate Allied and 
Healthcare Education Board shall determine standards of allied and healthcare education at the graduate, 
postgraduate level and super -speciality l evel, develop competency based on dynamic curriculum content, 
reviewing institutional standards against norms, faculty development, approval of courses of recognised 
qualification and other functions as entrusted by the State Council for Under Graduate Edu cation and Post 
Graduate Education.  
(4) The Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating Board shall determine the procedure 
for the assessment and rating of allied and healthcare institutions by providing for inspection of institutions, 
grant pe rmission for establishment of new allied and healthcare institutions and seat capacity, empanelling 
assessors, imposing warnings or fines, recommend for withdrawal of recognition of institutions and any 
other function as entrusted by the State Council to e nsure maintenance of minimum essential standards.  
(5) The Allied and Healthcare Profession Ethics and Registration Board shall maintain online and live 
State Registers of all licensed allied and healthcare practitioners in the State, regulate the professio nal 
conduct and promotion of ethics and undertake any other function as entrusted by the State Council.  
(6) The Under -graduate Allied and Healthcare education or Post -graduate Allied and Healthcare 
education or Allied and Healthcare Professions Assessment and Rating or Allied and Healthcare 
Professions Ethics and Registration shall perform such other functions as may be specified by regulations.  
30. Functions of State Council .—It shall be the duty of the State Council to take all such steps as it 
may think fit for ensuring the co -ordinated and integrated development of education and maintenance of 
the standards of delivery of services under this Act and, for the purposes of performing its functions, the 
State Council shall — 
(a) enter the name of the recognis ed categories, enforce the professional conduct, code of ethics 
and etiquette to be observed by the allied and healthcare professionals  in the State and take disciplinary 
action, including the removal of a professionals' name from the State Register;  
(b) ensure minimum standards of education, courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, 
staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment, examination, training, research, 
continuing professional education;  
(c) ensure uniform e ntry examination with common counselling for admission into the allied and 
healthcare institutions at the diploma, undergraduate, postgraduate and doctoral level under this Act;  
(d) ensure uniform exit or licensing examination for the allied and healthcare  professionals under 
this Act;  15 
 (e) inspect allied and healthcare institutions and register allied and healthcare professionals in the 
State;  
(f) ensure compliance of all the directives issued by the Commission;  
(g) provide minimum standards framework for m achineries, materials and services;  
(h) approve or recognise courses and intake capacity for courses;  
(i) impose fine upon institutions in order to maintain standards; and  
(j) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the State Government f or 
implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
31. Constitution of Advisory Board .—The State Council may constitute as many professional 
Advisory Boards as may be necessary to examine the issues relating to one or more recognised categories 
and to recomm end the State Council and also to undertake any other activity as may be authorised by the 
State Council.  
32. State Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register .—(1) The State Council shall maintain 
online and live State Register of persons in separate pa rts for each of the recognised categories to be known 
as the State Allied and Healthcare Professionals' Register which shall contain information including the 
name of person and qualifications relating to any of their respective recognised categories in su ch manner 
as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The State Register shall contain the details of academic qualification institutions, training, skill and 
competencies of Allied and Healthcare Professionals related to their profession in the manner as may be 
specified by regulations.  
(3) The State Register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and may be proved by a certified copy provided by the State Council.  
33. Registration in State Regi ster.—(1) A person shall be entitled, on an application and on payment 
of such fees as may be prescribed by the State Government, to have his name entered in the State Register 
if he resides in the State and holds a recognised allied and healthcare qualifi cation.  
(2) Upon the application to the State Council, if the State Council is of the opinion that the applicant is 
entitled to have his name entered on the State Register, the State Council shall enter thereon the name of 
the applicant.  
(3) Upon entry of a name in the State Register under this section, the Secretary of the State Council 
shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration in such form as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
(4) The certificate of registration of Allied and Heal thcare Profession shall be valid for a period of five 
years, and renewal of such registration shall be in such form and in such manner as specified by regulations 
for the respective profession.  
(5) Any person whose application for registration is rejected by the State Council may, within one 
month from the date of such rejection, appeal to the Commission.  
34. Issue of duplicate certificates .—Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the State 
Council that a certificate of registration or a c ertificate of renewal has been lost or destroyed, the State 
Council may, on payment of such fee, issue a duplicate certificate in such form as may be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
35. Renewal of name of Allied and Healthcare professionals in the Stat e Register .—(1) There shall 
be paid in every five years to the State Council, such fee in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government for renewal of name of allied and healthcare professionals in the State Register.  
(2) Where the fee under sub -section ( 1) is not paid within the specified period, the Secretary of the State 
Council shall remove the name of the defaulter from the State Register:  16 
 Provided that a name so removed may be restored to the said register on payment of such fee as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) On payment of the fee under sub -section ( 1), the Secretary of the State Council shall issue a 
certificate of renewal and such certificate shall be proof of renewal of registration.  
36. Removal of name of a person from  State Register .—(1) The State Council may, by order, after 
giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after such further inquiry, if any, as it may 
think fit— 
(a) that his name has been entered in the State Register by error or on acco unt of mis -representation 
or suppression of a material fact; or  
(b) that he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment or has been guilty of any infamous conduct in any professional respect or has violated 
the standards of professional conduct and etiquette or the code of ethics which in the opinion of the 
State Council renders him unfit to be kept in the said register,  remove the name of the person from the 
State Register.  
(2) Any person whose name has been removed from the State Register under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
ineligible for registration under this Act, either permanently or for such period as may be specified by 
regulations.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 1) shall not take effect until the expiry o f three months from the date 
thereof or until an appeal, if any, on such order is finally disposed of, whichever date is later.  
(4) A person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 1) may, within thirty days from the 
communication of such order, prefer an  appeal to the Commission and, after giving an opportunity of being 
heard, the Commission shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of filing of such appeal, pass 
such order as it thinks fit.  
(5) A person whose name has been removed from the Stat e Register under this section or under sub -
section ( 2) of section 35 shall forthwith surrender his certificate of registration or certificate of renewal, if 
any, to the State Council and the name so removed shall be published on the website of the State Co uncil, 
and in one daily local newspaper in vernacular language.  
(6) A person whose name has been removed from the State Register under this section shall not be 
entitled to have his name registered in the State Register or in any other State Register excep t with the 
approval of the State Council from whose register his name has been removed.  
37.  Restoration of name of a person in the State Register .—The State Council may, at any time for 
reasons appearing to it as sufficient and upon payment of such fee as  may be prescribed by the State 
Government, order that the name of a person removed from a State Register shall be restored and the name 
shall be uploaded on the website of the State Council, and in one daily local newspaper in vernacular 
language.  
38. Recognition of persons offering services prior to commencement of Act .—Every person who 
offers his services in any of the recognised categories on or before the commencement of this Act shall be 
allowed to be provisionally registered under the provisions of t his Act within such period from such 
commencement in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
CHAPTER IV  
RECOGNITION AND RECIPROCITY  
39. Recognition of allied and healthcare institutions and reciprocity .—(1) Subject to the provisions 
of this Act, an y corresponding qualification granted by the institutions outside India shall be the recognised 
allied and healthcare qualifications as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) A citizen of India who holds the corresponding qualifications under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled 
for registration under this Act in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  17 
 (3) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission, by notification, direct that 
the corresponding qualifications under sub -section ( 1) in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity is not in 
force shall be recognised for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a specified date:  
Provided that the foreign nationals possessing such qualification — 
(a) shall be permitte d only if such persons are enrolled as allied and healthcare professionals in 
accordance with the law regulating the registration of allied and healthcare professionals for the time 
being in force in that country; and  
(b) shall be limited to the period spe cified in this behalf by the Central Government by general or 
special order.  
(4) In respect of any such qualifications the corresponding qualifications under sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Government may, after consultation with the Commission, by notificati on, direct that it shall be 
recognised allied and healthcare qualification only when granted before a specified date.  
(5) The Commission may enter into negotiations with an authority in any country outside India, which 
by the law of such country is entrust ed with the recognition of corresponding qualifications, for the setting 
up of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of allied and healthcare qualification, and in pursuance of 
any such scheme, the corresponding qualification which the Commission has  decided to grant should be 
recognised by notification by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER V  
ESTATBLISHMENT OF NEW ALLIED AND HEALTHCARE INSTITUTION  
40. Permission for establishment of new allied and healthcare institutions, new courses of study, 
etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, on 
and from the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) no person shall establish an allied and healthcare institution; or  
(b) no allied and healthcare institution s hall— 
(i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including post -graduate course of study or 
training) which would enable students of each course of study or training to qualify himself for the 
award of any recognised allied and healthcare qualif ication; or  
(ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including post -graduate 
course of study or training); or  
(iii) admit a new batch of students in any unrecognised course of study or training (including 
post-graduate cours e of study or training),  except with the previous permission of the State Council 
obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the allied and healthcare qualification granted to a person in respect of a new or 
higher course of stud y or new batch without previous permission of the State Council shall not be 
a recognised allied and healthcare qualification for the purposes of this Act:  
Provided further that where there is no State Council constituted by a State Government, the 
Commiss ion shall give the previous permission for the purposes of this section.  
(2)     (a) Every person or allied and healthcare institution shall, for the purpose of obtaining 
permission under sub -section ( 1), submit to the State Council a scheme in accordance with the 
provisions of clause ( b). 
(b) The scheme referred to in clause ( a) shall be in such form and contain such particulars 
and be preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
(3) On receipt o f a scheme under sub -section ( 2), the State Council may obtain such other particulars 
as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the allied and healthcare institution concerned, and 
thereafter, it may,  — 18 
 (a) if the scheme is defective and does  not contain any necessary particulars, give a reasonable 
opportunity to the person or allied and healthcare institution concerned for making a written 
representation and it shall be open to such person or allied and healthcare institution to rectify the 
defects, if any, specified by the State Council;  
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub -section ( 5). 
(4) The State Council may, after considering the scheme and after obtaining, where necessary, such 
other particulars under  sub-section ( 2) as may be considered necessary by it from the person or allied and 
healthcare institution concerned, and having regard to the factors referred to in sub -section ( 5), either 
approve with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary  or disapprove the scheme and any such 
approval shall constitute as a permission under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that no such scheme shall be disapproved by the State Council except after giving the person 
or allied and healthcare institution concerned a r easonable opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent any person or allied and healthcare 
institution whose scheme has not been approved by the State Council to submit a fresh scheme and the 
provisions of thi s section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme had been submitted for the first 
time under sub -section ( 2). 
(5) The State Council shall, while passing an order under sub -section ( 4), have due regard to the 
following factors, namely: -- 
(a) whether the proposed allied and healthcare institution or the existing allied and healthcare 
institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer 
the basic standards of education as specified by regulations;  
(b) whether the person seeking to establish an allied and healthcare institution or the existing allied 
and healthcare institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its 
admission capacity has adequate financial resource s; 
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training, hospital 
and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the allied and healthcare institution or conducting 
the new course of study or training or accommodat ing the increased admission capacity have been 
provided or would be provided as may be specified in the scheme;  
(d) whether adequate facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend such allied 
and healthcare institution or course of st udy or training or as a result of the increased admission 
capacity, have been provided or would be provided as may be specified in the scheme;  
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to 
students likely to atte nd such allied and healthcare institution or the course of study or training by the 
persons having the recognised allied and healthcare qualifications;  
(f) the requirement of manpower in the allied and healthcare institution; and  
(g) any other factors as m ay be specified by regulation.  
(6) Where the State Council passes an order under sub -section ( 4), a copy of the order shall be 
communicated to the person or allied and healthcare institution as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) "person" includes any University, institution or a trust, but does not include the Central 
Government or State Government;  
(b) "admission capacity", in relation to any course of study or training (including post -graduate 
course of study or training)  in an allied and healthcare institution, means the maximum number of 
students as may be decided by the State Council from time to time for being admitted to such course 
of study or training.  
41. Power to require information from allied and healthcare inst itutions .—(1) Any University or 
college or institution imparting education in any recognised category shall furnish information to the State 19 
 Council regarding course of study, duration of course, scheme of assessment and examinations and other 
eligibility conditions in order to obtain the requisite qualifications as an allied and healthcare institution 
under this Act as the State Council may from time to time require.  
(2) Any University or college or institution imparting education in any recognised categor y as on the 
date of commencement of this Act shall furnish to the State Council such information in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations.  
42. Recognition of allied and healthcare qualifications by State Council .—(1) The State Council 
shall cause to verify the standards of any allied and healthcare institution where education in the recognised 
category is given, or to attend any examination held by any educational or research institution for the 
purpose of recognition of allied and healthcare quali fications by that allied and healthcare institution in 
such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The verification made under sub -section ( 1) shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or 
examination, but shall be for the purpose of repo rting to the State Council on the adequacy of the standards 
of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for giving education 
in the recognised categories, as the case may be, or on the sufficiency of every examinat ion which they 
attend.  
(3) The State Council shall forward a copy of the report of verification of standards to the allied and 
healthcare institution concerned and a copy with remarks of the institution hereon to the Commission.  
43. Withdrawal of recogniti on.—(1) On receipt of a report from the State Council, if the Commission 
is of the opinion that — 
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from 
candidates at any examination held by a University or any allied and healthcare institution do not 
conform to the standards specified by the Commission for the respective courses, as the case may be; 
or 
(b) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education in allied and 
healthcare institution as determined by the Commission for the respective courses, as the case may be, 
are not adhered to by any University or allied and healthcare institution, and such University or allied 
and healthcare institution has failed to take necessary corrective acti on to maintain specified minimum 
standards,  it may initiate action in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(2) After considering such representations, and on such enquiry as it may deem fit, the Commission 
may, within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt from the State Council under sub -section ( 1), 
by order, withdraw the recognition granted to the allied and healthcare institution:  
Provided that before any order passed, the Commission shall afford, the allied and healthcare instit ution 
and the State Government within whose jurisdiction the allied and healthcare institution is situated an 
opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that the Commission shall, before taking any action for withdrawal of recognition 
granted to the alli ed and healthcare professionals qualification awarded by a University or allied and 
healthcare institution, impose fine in consultation with the concerned State Council.  
(3) The Commission may, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit , by notification, 
direct that, -- 
(a) any allied and healthcare qualification shall be a recognised qualification under this Act only 
when granted before a specified date; or  
(b) any allied and healthcare qualification if granted to students of a specified  allied and healthcare 
institution shall be the recognised qualification only when granted before a specified date; or  
(c) any qualification shall be the recognised qualification in relation to a specified allied and 
healthcare institution only when grante d after a specified date.  
  20 
 44.  Failure to maintain minimum essential standards by allied and healthcare institutions .—The 
State Council may take such measures, including issuing warning, imposing fine, reducing intake or 
stoppage of admissions and recomm ending to the Commission for withdrawal of recognition, against an 
allied and healthcare institution for failure to maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the 
Commission under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
45. Grants by Ce ntral Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
46. National Allied and Healthcare Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
National Allied and Healthcare Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all Government grants, fees received by the Commission;  
(b) all sums of money received  by the Commission by way of grants, benefactions, bequests and 
transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money received by the Commission in any other manner or from any other sources 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for the expenses of the Commission incurred 
in discharge of its functions and purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
47.  Accounts and audit of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall mai ntain appropriate accounts 
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in 
accordance with such general directions as may be issued and in such form as may be specified by the 
Central Government in cons ultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or any person appointed by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or an y person 
so appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the acc ounts of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books of 
account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any person appoi nted by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament.  
48. Annual report of Commission .—The Commission s hall prepare every year, in such form and 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government an annual report giving a true and full 
account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Govern ment and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
49. Returns and information .—The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such 
reports, returns and other information as that Government may require from ti me to time.  
50. Grants by State Government .—The State Government may, after due appropriation made by 
State Legislature by law in this behalf, make to the State Council grants of such sums of money as the State 
Government may think fit for being utilised f or the purposes of this Act.  21 
 51. State Allied and Healthcare Council Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called 
the State Allied and Healthcare Council Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all sums of money received from the State Go vernment;  
(b) all sums of money received by the State Council by way of grants, fees, benefactions, bequests 
and transfers; and  
(c) all sums of money received by the State Council in any other manner or from any other source 
as may be decided by the State Government.  
(2) All receipts of the Commission and State Councils shall be routed through an online payment portal 
of the Commission and one -fourth of all the receipts shall be transferred to the National Allied and 
Healthcare Fund and three -fourth of all the receipts shall transfer to the relevant State Allied and Healthcare 
Council Fund through that portal.  
(3) The fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be applied for the expenses of the State Council incurred 
in discharge of its functions for the purp oses of this Act in the manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
52. Accounts and audit of State Council .—(1) The State Council shall maintain appropriate accounts 
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including  the balance sheet, in 
accordance with such general directions as may be issued and in such form as may be specified by the State 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the State Council shall be a udited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or any person appointed by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or any person 
so appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable by the State Council to the Comptrol ler and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of the State Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books of 
account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and  to inspect the office of the State Council.  
(4) The accounts of the State Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annual ly to the State Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, 
before that House.  
53. Annual report of State Council .—The State Council shall prepare every year, in such form and 
within such time as may be prescribed by the State Government an annual report giving a true and full 
account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to th e State 
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of the State Legislature, 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
54. Authentication of orders, etc .—All o rders and decisions of the Commission or the State Council, 
as the case may be, and the instruments issued by it shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other 
officer authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  
55. Practice by allied and healthcar e professionals .—No allied and healthcare professional shall 
discharge any duty or perform any function not authorised by this Act or any treatment not authorised within 
the scope of practice of the profession.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
56. Penalt y for falsely claiming to be entered in Central Register and State Register .—If any 
person whose name is not for the time being entered in the Central Register or a State Register falsely 
represents that it is so entered or uses in connection with his name  or title any words or letters to suggest 22 
 that his name is so entered, he shall be punished on first conviction with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or 
with f ine not exceeding one lakh rupees or with both.  
57. Misuse of titles .—If any person, -- 
(a) not being a person registered in the Central Register or a State Register, takes or uses the 
description of an allied and healthcare professional, or  
(b) not possess ing an allied and healthcare qualification under this Act, uses a degree or a diploma 
or a license or an abbreviation indicating or implying such qualification,  
shall be punished on first conviction with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, and on any  subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees or 
with both.  
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration .—If any person whose name has been removed 
from the Central Register or a St ate Register, he shall surrender forthwith his certificate of registration or 
certificate of renewal, as the case may be, or both, failing which he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and in case of a continuing offence with an additional fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees per day after the first day during which the offence continues.  
59. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act .—Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Act or any rules or regul ations made thereunder shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not 
be less than one year but which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.  
60. Cogniz ance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a complaint made by the Central Government, the State Government, the Commission, or 
the State Council, as the case may be.  
(2) No court inferior to t hat of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANE OUS 
61. Bar of jurisdiction .—No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any order made by the Commission or State Council relating to the removal of a name or the 
refusal to enter a name in the Central Register or State Register, as the case may be, under this Act.  
62. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No su it, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or State Government or against the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or any 
other Member of the Commission or any Member of the State Council or any member of the Professional 
Council or any member of the Autonomous Board, as the case may be, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder in the discharge of their 
official duties.  
63. Direction by Central Gover nment .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue 
such directions to the Commission, as in the opinion of Government are conducive for the fulfilment of the 
objects of this Act and in the discharge of its functions.  
(2) Any direction issued u nder sub -section ( 1) may include directions to the Commission to make any 
regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made.  
64. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything in consistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
65. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make ru les to carry out the provisions of this Act.  23 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers under sub -section ( 1), 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: -- 
(a) the qualifications and expe riences of the Part -time Member of the Commission under sub -clause 
(i) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the manner of selection of the Part -time Member of the Commission under sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(c) the qualification, experience and manner of the selection of the Part -time Member of the 
Commission under sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(d) the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson a nd Vice -
Chairperson of the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(e) the travelling and other allowances to the Part -time Member of the Commission under sub -
section ( 3) of section 4;  
(f) the rules of procedure with respect to the transaction of bu siness at meetings of the Commission 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(g) the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers of 
the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(h) the qualifications and exper iences of members of the Professional Council under sub -section 
(1) of section 10;  
(i) the form of application and the manner of entering the name of person in the Central Register 
under section 16;  
(j) the form, manner and fee of application for certifica te of registration under sub -section (1) of 
section 17;  
(k) the form of certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(l) the fees for and form of duplicate certificate under sub -section ( 3) of section 17;  
(m) the form, manner and fees o f application for additional entry in the Central Register under sub -
section ( 1) of section 18;  
(n) the qualifications, experiences and manner of appointment of members of Interim Commission 
under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 2) of section 20;  
(o) the form, manner, particulars and fees of the scheme under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 40;  
(p) the manner of sums of money received by the Commission under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 46;  
(q) the manner of application of fund for expenses i ncurred in discharge of the functions of the 
Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 46;  
(r) the form and time period for preparing annual report of the Commission under section 48; and  
(s) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified  by rules or in respect for which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
66. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Commission may, after public consultation and with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations generally to carry out the purpo ses of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: -- 
(a) the manner of providing basic standards of education, courses, curr icula, physical and 
instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment, examination, 24 
 training, research, continuing professional education, maximum tuition fee payable in respect of various 
recognised categories , proportionate distribution of seats and promote innovations in recognised 
categories under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(b) other particulars for allied and healthcare qualifications under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 11;  
(c) the manner of providing uniform examination with common counselling for admission under 
clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(d) the manner of providing for exit or licensing examination for allied and healthcare professionals 
and National Teachers  Eligibility Test under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(e) the manner of taking measures under clause ( k) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(f) the manner of containing information including name of person and qualification relating to any 
of the respective reco gnised categories in the Central Register under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(g) the manner of adopting standardised format for populating and maintaining the Central Register 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(h) the manner of rem oval of name of a person from the Central Register under section 19;  
(i) the number of members from each recognised category under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(j) other functions of the Under -graduate Allied and Healthcare Education or Post -graduate All ied 
and Healthcare Education or Allied and Healthcare Profession Assessment and Rating or Allied and 
Healthcare Professions Ethics and Registration under sub -section ( 6) of section 29;  
(k) the manner of containing information including name of person and q ualification relating to any 
of their respective recognised categories under sub -section ( 1) of section 32;  
(l) the manner of containing details of academic qualification, institutions, training, skill and 
competencies of Allied and Healthcare Professional s related to their profession in the State Register 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 32;  
(m) the form and manner of renewal of registration under sub -section ( 4) of section 33;  
(n) the period for registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 36;  
(o) the pe riod and manner of registration of person who offers services in any of the recognised 
categories on or before the commencement of this Act under section 38;  
(p) the recognition of corresponding allied and healthcare qualifications granted outside India un der 
sub-section ( 1) of section 39;  
(q) the manner of entitlement of registration of qualifications granted by institutions outside India 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 39;  
(r) the basic standards of education for seeking to open a new or higher course of  study or training 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5) of section 40;  
(s) any other factors under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 5) of section 40;  
(t) the manner of furnishing information by the University or college or institution under sub -
section ( 2) of sec tion 41;  
(u) the manner of verification of standards of education in allied and healthcare institutions by the 
State Council under sub -section ( 1) of section 42; and  
(v) any matter for which provision may be made by the regulations under this Act.  
67. Layi ng of rules and regulations .—Every rule made by the Central Government, and the 
regulations made by the Commission, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total perio d of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 25 
 following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulations, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulations should not be made, the rule or 
regulations shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification o r annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regulations.  
68. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Ac t. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers under sub -section ( 1), 
such rules may provide for the following matters, namely: -- 
(a) the qualifications and experiences of the member of the State Council under clause (e) of sub -
section ( 3) of section 22;  
(b) the qualifications and experiences of the member of the State Council under clause ( f) of sub -
section ( 3) of section 22;  
(c) the travelling and other allowances for the Member of the State Council under sub -section  (2) 
of section 23;  
(d) the time, place and manner of rule of procedure in respect to transaction of business at meetings 
including quorum of the State Council under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(e) the salaries, allowances and other conditions of servic es of the Secretary, other officers and 
employees of the State Council under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(f) the fees for registration in the State Register under sub -section ( 1) of section 33;  
(g) the form of certificate of registration under sub -section (3) of section 33;  
(h) the fee and form of duplicate certificate under section 34;  
(i) the fee and the manner of payment of such fee under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(j) the fee for restoration of name in the State Register under proviso to sub -section (2) of section 
35; 
(k) the fee for restoration of name in the State Register under section 37;  
(l) the manner of application of fund for expenses incurred in discharge of the functions of the State 
Council under sub -section ( 3) of section 51;  
(m) the f orm and time for preparing annual report under section 53; and  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect for which 
provision is to be made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of State Legislature, where there are two Houses and where there is one House 
of State Legislature, before that House.  
69. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in gi ving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the di fficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Par liament.  
70. Power to amend Schedule .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Commission, by a notification, add to or otherwise amend the Schedule for the purposes of this Act and 
thereupon the said Schedule shall be deemed to be amend ed accordingly.  26 
 (2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in disapproving the issue of 
the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in  the notification, the notification shall 
not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by 
both the Houses.  
  27 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2(r)]  
 
Serial 
Number  Recognised Category  Allied and Healthcare Pr ofessional  ISCO Code  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. Medical Laboratory and Life Sciences  Life Science  
 Professional  Note:  
Life Science Professional is a 
person who has knowledge of 
application of research on 
human and other life forms, 
their interactions with each  
other and the environment, to 
develop new knowledge, and 
solve human health and 
environmental problems and 
who works in diverse fields 
such as bacteriology, 
biochemistry, genetics, 
immunology, harmacology, 
toxicology and virology and 
who collect, analyse and 
evaluate the experimental and 
field data to identify and 
develop new processes and 
techniques among others.  (i) Biotechnologist  
(ii) Biochemist (non -clinical)  
(iii) Cell Geneticist  
(iv) Microbiologist (non -clinical)  
(v) Molecular Biologist (non -clinica l) 
(vi) Molecular Geneticist  
 2131  
 Medical Laboratory 
Sciences Professional  Note: 
Medical and pathology 
laboratory professional is a 
person who performs 
clinical test on specimens of 
bodily fluids and tissues in 
order to get information 
about the health of a patient 
or cause of death and having 
formal training in medical (i) Cytot echnologist  
(ii) Forensic Science Technologist  
(iii) Histotechnologist  
(iv) Hemato Technologist  
(v) Medical Lab Technologist  
 3212  28 
 laboratory technology or 
related field, which includes 
testing and operating 
equipment such as 
spectrophotometers, 
calorimeters and flame 
photometers for analysis of 
biological material i ncluding 
blood, urine and spinal fluid.  
2.  Trauma, Burn Care and Surgical/Anesthesia related technology  
 Trauma and Burn Care 
Professional  
Note: Trauma and Burn Care 
Professional is a person who 
provides advisory, 
diagnostic, curative and 
preventive m edical services 
more limited in scope and 
complexity than those 
carried out by a medical 
doctor including emergency 
and burn care technologist 
who work autonomously, or 
with limited supervision of 
medical doctors and apply 
advanced clinical 
procedures for treating and 
preventing injuries and other 
physical impairments.  (i) Advance Care Paramedic  2240  
(ii) Burn Care Technologist  2240  
(iii) Emergency Medical 
Technologist (Paramedic)  3258  
  
 Surgical and Anaesthesia -
related Technology 
Professional  
Note: Surgical and 
Anaesthesia -related 
Technology professional is a 
person who is a member of a 
multi -disciplinary team in (i) Anaesthesia Assistants and 
Technologists  3259  
(ii) Operation Theatre (OT) 
Technologists  3259  
(iii) Endoscop y and Laparoscopy 
Technologists  3259  
  29 
 the operation theatres, who 
prepares and maintains an 
operating theatre, assists the 
anaesthetist and surgical 
team during peri -operati ve 
period and provides support 
to patients in the recovery 
room and the main role 
includes the set up, check, 
and maintains anaesthesia 
equipment, preparation of 
operation room and table, 
management of the central 
sterile services department 
functions, ass istance in 
emergency situations and 
disaster preparedness and 
support of the surgeons and 
anesthetists in any other 
related clinical area.  
3.  Physiotherapy Professional  
Note: Physiotherapy 
Professional is a person who 
practices physiotherapy by 
undertaking comprehensive 
examination and appropriate 
investigation, provides 
treatment and advice to any 
persons preparatory to or for 
the purpose of or in connection 
with movement or functional 
dysfunction, malfunction, 
disorder, disability, healing 
and pain from trauma and 
disease, using physical 
modalities including exercise, 
mobilization, manipulations, 
electrical and thermal agents Physiotherapist  2264  30 
 and other electro therapeutics 
for prevention, screening, 
diagnosis, treatment, health 
promotion and fitness. The 
physiotherapist can practice 
independently or as a part of a 
multi -disciplinary team and 
has a minimum qualificat ion 
of a baccalaureate degree.  
 
4. Nutrition Science Professional  
Note: Nutrition Science 
Professional is a person who 
follows a scientific process 
to assess, plan and 
implement programmes to 
enhance the impact of food 
and nutrition o n health, 
promote good health, 
prevent and treat disease to 
optimize the health of 
individuals, groups, 
communities and 
populations as well as on 
human health with training 
in food and nutritional 
science, nutrition, dietetics.  (i) Dietician (including Cli nical 
Dietician, Food Service Dietician)  2265  
(ii) Nutritionist (including Public 
Health Nutritionist, Sports 
Nutritionist)  2265  
  
5.  Ophthalmic Sciences 
Professional  
Note: Ophthalmic Sciences 
Professional is a person who 
studies eye, related ailme nts 
and specialises in the 
management of disorders of 
eye and visual system, 
limited in scope and 
complexity as performed by (i) Optometrist  2267  
(ii) Ophthalmic Assistant  3256  
(iii) Vision Technician  3256  
 
  31 
 a medical doctor having 
Optometrists with a 
minimum of four years of 
baccalaureate degree and 
Ophthalmic 
Assistants/Vision 
Technici an with a minimum 
of two years recognised 
diploma programme.  
6. Occupational Therapy 
Professional  
Note: Occupational Therapy 
Professional is a person who 
delivers  client -centred 
services concerned with 
promoting health and well -
being through occupation to 
enable people to participate in 
the activities of everyday life, 
which includes professionals 
such as Occupational 
Therapists who achieve this 
outcome by working with 
people and communities to 
enhance their ability to 
engage in the occupations 
they are expected to do, or by 
modifying the occupation or 
the environment to better 
support their occupational 
engagement. The 
Occupational Therapist can 
practice independen tly or as a 
part of a multi -disciplinary 
team and has a minimum 
qualification of a 
baccalaureate degree.  
 Occupational Therapist  2269  
  32 
 7. Community Care, Behavioural Health Sciences and other Professionals  
 Community Care  
Note: Primary and Community 
Care Professional is a person 
who provides health education, 
referral and follow up, case 
management, and basic 
preventive healthcare and home 
visiting services to specific 
communities at field level and 
provides support and assistance 
to individuals and fami lies in 
navigating the health and social 
services system and establish a 
referral network.  (i) Environment Protection Officer  2133  
(ii) Ecologist  2133  
(iii) Community Health promoters  3253  
(iv) Occupational Health and Safety 
Officer (Inspector)  3257 
  
 Behavioural Health Sciences 
Professional  
Note: Behavioural Health Sciences 
Professional is a person who 
undertakes scientific study of the 
emotions, behaviours and biology 
relating to a person's mental well -
being, their ability to function in 
everyday life and their concept of 
self. "Behavioural health" is the 
preferred term to "mental health" 
and includes professionals such as 
counsellors, analysts, 
psychologists, educators and 
support workers, who provide 
counselling, therapy and mediation 
servi ces to individuals, families, 
groups and communities in 
response to social and personal 
difficulties.  (i) Psychologist (Except Clinical 
Psychologist covered under RCI for PWD)  2634  
(ii) Behavioural Analyst  2635   
(iii) Integrated Behaviour Health Coun sellor  2635  
(iv) Health Educator and Counsellors 
including Disease Counsellors, Diabetes 
Educators, Lactation Consultants  2635  
(v) Social workers including Clinical Social 
Worker, Psychiatric Social Worker, Medical 
Social Worker  2635  
(vi) Human Im munodeficiency Virus (HIV) 
Counsellors or Family Planning Counsellors  3259  
(vii) Mental Health Support Workers  3259  
  
 Other Care Professionals  
 (i) Podiatrist  2269  
(ii) Palliative Care Professionals  3259  
 (iii) Movement Therapist (including 
Art, Dance and Movement Therapist 
or Recreational Therapist)  2269  
   
8.  Medical Radiology, Imaging 
and Therapeutic Technology 
Professional  
Note: Medical Imaging and 
Therapeutic Equipment 
Technology Professionals 
include persons who tests 
and operate radi ographic, 
ultrasound and other medical 
imaging equipment to 
produce images of body 
structures for the diagnosis 
and treatment of injury, (i) Medical Physicist  2111  
(ii) Nuclear Medicin e Technologist  3211  
(iii) Radiology and Imaging 
Technologist [Diagnostic Medical 
Radiographer, Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI), Computed 
Tomography (CT), Mammographer, 
Diagnostic Medical Sonographers]  3211  
(iv) Radiotherapy Technologist  3211  
(v) Dosimetrist  3211  33 
 disease and other 
impairments or administers 
radiation treatments and 
monitor patients' conditions 
with training in med ical 
technology, radiology, 
sonography, mammography, 
nuclear medical technology, 
Magnetic Resource 
Imaging, Dosimetry or 
radiotherapy, under the 
supervision of a radiologist 
or other medical 
professional.    
9. Medical Technologists and 
Physician Associate  
Biomedical and Medical 
Equipment Technology 
Professional  (i) Biomedical Engineer  2149  
(ii) Medical Equipment 
Technologist  3211  
Physician Associate or 
Physician Assistant  
Note: Phy sician Associate or 
Physician Assistant is a 
person who performs basic 
clinical and administrative 
tasks to support patient care 
and is trained in a medical 
model such that he is 
qualified and competent to 
perform preventive, 
diagnostic and therapeutic 
services with physician 
supervision.  Physician Associates  3256  
 Cardio -vascular, 
Neuroscience and Pulmonary  (i) Cardiovascular Technologists  3259  
Technology Professional  (ii) Perfusionist  3259  
  (iii) Respiratory Technologist  3259  
 Note: Cardio -vascular,  
Neuroscience and Pulmonary 
Technology Professionals 
include those persons who 
have studied and have 
thorough understanding of 
respiratory, neurological and 
circulatory system and also 
the ability to operate complex 
equipment related therein and 
includes p rofessionals such as 
Perfusionist, Cardiovascular 
technologist, respiratory (iv) Electrocardiogram (ECG) 
Technologist or Echocardiogram 
(ECHO) Technologist  3259  34 
 technologist and Sleep Lab 
Technologists.  
  (v) Electroencephalogram (EEG) or 
Electro -neurodia gnostic (END) or  
Electromyography (EMG) 
Technonlog ists or Neuro Lab 
Technologists or Sleep Lab 
Technologists  3259  
 Renal Technology 
Professional  
Note: Renal Technology 
Professional is a person 
who deals with dialysis 
therapy process and 
technology to ensure an 
effective dialysis therapy 
to the patient and includes 
professionals such as 
Dialysis Therapy 
Technologists having 
baccalaureate degree who 
operate and maintain an 
artificial kidney machine, 
following approved 
methods.  Dialysis Therapy Technologists or 
Urology Technologists  3259  
10. Health Information 
Management and Health  
Informatic Profe ssional  
Note: Health and 
Information Management 
Professional is a person who 
develops, implements and 
assesses the health record 
processing, storage and 
retrieval systems in medical 
facilities and other health 
care settings to meet the 
legal, professional,  ethical 
and administrative records -
keeping requirements of 
health services delivery and 
processes, maintains, 
compiles and reports patient 
information for health 
requirements and standards 
in a manner consistent with 
the healthcare industry's 
numerical co ding system.  (i) Health Information Management 
Professional (Including Medical 
Records Analyst)  
 3252  
(ii) Health Information Management 
Technologist  3252  
(iii) Clinical Coder  
 3252  
(iv) Medical Secretary and Medical 
Transcriptionist  
 3344  
 
--------------------------The National Commission for Homoeopathy Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY ACT, 2020  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
Last updated: 25-8-2021  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY  
3. Constitution of National Commission for Homoeopathy.  
4. Composition of Commission.  
5. Search committee for appointment of Chairperson and Members.  
6. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members . 
7. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commissi on. 
8. Appointment of secretary experts, professionals officers and employees of Commission.  
9. Meeting of Commission . 
10. Power and functions of Commission . 
CHAPTER III  
ADVISORY  COUNCIL FOR HOMOEOPATHY  
11. Constitution and composition of Advisory council for Homoeopathy.  
12. Functions of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy . 
13. Meetings of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy . 
CHAPTER IV  
NATIONAL EXAMINATION  
14. National Eligibility cum -Entrance Test.  
15. National Exit Test . 
16. Post-Graduate National Entrance Test . 
17. National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy . 
CHAPTER V  
AUTONOMOUS  BOARDS  
18. Constitution of Autonomous  Boards . 
19. Composition of Autonomous Boards . 
20. Search Committee for appointment of President and Members . 
21. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members . 
22. Advisory committees of experts . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Staff of Autonomous  Boards.  
24. Meetings of Autonomous  Boards.  
25. Delegation of powers.  
26. Powers and functions of Homoeopathy Education Board . 
27. Powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy . 
28. Powers  and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy . 
29. Permission for establishment of new medical institution . 
30. Criteria for approving or disapproving scheme.  
31. State Medical Councils . 
32. National Register and State Register of Homoeopathy . 
33. Righ ts of persons to be enrolled  in National Register and their obligations thereto . 
34. Rights of persons to practice . 
CHAPTER VI  
RECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF HOMOEOPATHY  
35. Recognition of qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India . 
36. Recognition of qualifications granted by medical institutions  outside India . 
37. Withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualification . 
38. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of qualifications . 
CHAPTER VII  
GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS  
39. Grants b y Central Government.  
40. National Commission Fund  for Homoeopathy.  
41. Audit and accounts.  
42. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government.  
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous Boards.  
44. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.  
45. Information to be furnished by Commission and publication thereof . 
46. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions . 
47. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions . 
48. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission, Autonomous Boards to be public servants.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
50. Cognizance of offences . 
51. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission . 
 3 
 SECTIONS  
52. Joint sittings of Commission, National Commission for Indian Systems of Medicine and  National 
Medical Commission . 
53. State Government to promote public health.  
54. Power to make rules . 
55. Power to make regulations . 
56. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
57. Power to remove difficulties . 
58. Repeal a nd saving . 
59. Transitory provisions . 
 
 
  4 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 15 OF 2020  
[20th September, 2020.]  
An Act to provide  for a medical  education  system  that improves  access  to quality and affordable  
medical  education,  ensures  availability  of adequate  and high quality  Homoeopathy  medical  
professionals  in all parts  of the country;  that promotes  equitable  and universal  healthcare  that 
encourages  community  health perspective and makes services of Homoeopathy medical 
professionals accessible  and affordable  to all the citizens;  that promotes  national  health  goals; that 
encourages  Homoeopathy  medical  professionals  to adopt  latest  medical research  in their work  and 
to contribute  to research;  that has an objective  periodic and transparent  assessment  of medical  
institutions  and facilitates  maintenance of a Homoeopathy  medical  register  for India  and enforces  high 
ethical  standards in all aspects  of medical  services;  that is flexible  to adapt  to the changing  needs and 
has an effective  grievance  redressal  mechanism  and for matters  connected therewith  or incidental  
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the National  Commission  for 
Homoeopathy  Act, 2020.  
(2) It extends to the whole of  India.  
(3) It shall  come  into force  on such date1 as the Central  Government  may, by notification in the Official  
Gazette,  appoint:  
Provided  that different  dates  may be appointed  for different  provisions  of this Act and any reference  in 
any such provision  to the commencement  of this Act shall  be construed  as a reference to the coming into 
force of that  provision.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires, — 
(a) “Autonomous Board” means any of the Autonomous Boards constituted under section  18; 
(b) “Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy” means the Board constituted under 
section  18; 
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Commission for Homoeopathy 
appointed under section  5; 
(d) “Commission”  means  the National  Commission  for Homoeopathy  constituted under section  3; 
(e) “Council”  means  the Advisory  Council  for Homoeopathy  constituted  under section  11; 
(f) “Homoeopathy”  means  the Homoeopathic  System  of Medicine  and includes the use of 
biochemic remedies supplemented by such modern advances, scientific and  technological  development  
as the Commission  may, in consultation  with the Central Government,  declare  by notification  from  time 
to time;  
(g) “Homoeopathy Education Board” means the Board constituted for Homoeopathy 
education under section  18; 
(h) “licence” means a licence to practice Homoeopathy granted under  sub-section (1) of 
section  33; 
                                                      
1. 7th October, 2020  - S. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8,11, 18, 19, 20,21, 54 and 55, vide notification No. S.O. 3475(E), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).  
5th July, 2021 - S. 2, 7, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, and 59, vide notification No. S.O. 2693(E), see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii).  5 
 (i) “Medical  Assessment  and Rating  Board  for Homoeopathy”  means  the Board for assessment and 
rating of medical institutions constituted under section  18; 
(j) “medical institution” means any institution within or outside India which, grants  degrees,  
diplomas  or licences  in Homoeopathy  and includes  affiliated  colleges and deemed to be  Universities;  
(k) “Member”  means  a Member  of the Commission  referred  to in section  4 and includes the 
Chairperson  thereof;  
(l) “National Register” means a National Medical Register for Homoeopathy maintained by the 
Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy under section  32; 
(m) “notification”  means  a notification  published  in the Official  Gazette  and the expression “notify” 
shall be construed  accordingly;  
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this  Act; 
(o) “President”  means  the President  of an Autonomous  Board  appointed  under section  20; 
(p) “regulations” means the regulation made by the Commission under this Act;  
(q)  “State Medical Council” means a State Medical Council of  Homoeopathy constituted  under  
any law for the time being  in force  in any State  or Union  territory  for regulating the practice and 
registration of practitioners of  Homoeopathy;  
(r) “State  Register”  means  a State  register  for Homoeopathy  maintained  under any law for the time 
being in force in any State or Union territory for registration of practitioners of  Homoeopathy;  
(s) “University” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) and includes a health university.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL  COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY  
3. Constitution of National Commission for Homoeopathy. —(1) The Central  Government  shall,  by 
notification,  constitute  a Commission,  to be known as the National Commission for Homoeopathy, to 
exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this  Act. 
(2) The Commission  shall  be a body  corporate  by the name  aforesaid,  having  perpetual succession  and a 
common  seal, with power,  subject  to the provisions  of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be  sued.  
(3) The  head  office  of the Commission  shall  be at New  Delhi.  
4.  Composition of Commission. —(1) The Commission  shall  consist  of the following  persons,  
namely: –– 
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) seven ex officio Members;  and 
(c) nineteen  part-time Members.  
(2) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity  and 
integrity,  possessing  a postgraduate  degree  in Homoeopathy  from  a recognised University  and having  
experience  of not less than twenty  years  in the field of Homoeop athy, out of which  at least ten years  shall  be 
as a leader  in the area of healthcare  delivery,  growth and development of Homoeopathy or its  education.  
(3)The following  persons  shall  be appointed  by the Central  Government  as ex officio  Members of the 
Commission, namely: –– 
(a) the President  of the Homoeopathy  Education  Board;  
(b) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy;  
(c) the President  of the Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy;  
(d) Advisor (Homoeopathy) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -charge  of 
Homoeopathy,  in the Ministry  of AYUSH;  6 
 (e) the Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy,  Kolkata;  
(f) the Director,  North  Eastern  Institute  of Ayurveda  and Homoeopathy,  Shillong;  and  
(g) the Director -General, Central Council for Research  in Homoeopathy,  Janakpuri, New Delhi.  
(4) The  following  persons  shall  be appointed  by the Central  Government  as part-time Members  of the 
Commission,  namely: — 
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and  standing,  who 
have  special  knowledge  and professional  experience  in the areas  of Homoeopathy, management, law, 
health research, science and technology and economics;  
(b) ten  Members  to be appointed  on rotational  basis  from  amongst  the nominees of  the States  and 
Union  territories  in the Advisory  Council  for a term of two years  in such manner as may be  
prescribed.  
(c) six members to be appointed from amongst the nominees of the States  and Union territories, 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11, of the Advisory Council  for a term of two years  in 
such manner  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no Member shall either himself or through any of his family members, directly  or indirectly,  
own or be associated  with or have any dealings  with the managing  body of a private or non-government 
medical institution which is regulated under this Act. 
Explanation. ––For the purpose of this section and section 19, the term “leader” means the Head of a 
Department or the Head of an Organisation.  
5. Search  committee for  appointment of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Central  
Government  shall  appoint  the Chairperson  referred  to in section  4 and  the President  of the Autonomous  
Boards  referred  to in section  20 on the recommendation of a Search Committee consisting  of— 
(a) the Cabinet  Secretary —Chairperson;  
(b) two experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years in the field of Homoeopathy, to be nominated by the Central  Government —Members;  
(c) one expert, from amongst the members as referred to in clause (c) of sub -section (4) of section 
4, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be  prescribed —Member;  
(d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less  than twenty -five 
years  in the field of health  research,  management,  law, economics or  science  and technology,  to be 
nominated  by the Central  Government —Member;  
(e) the Secretary  to the Government  of India  incharge  of the AYUSH,  to be the Convenor —
Member:  
Provided  that for selection  of part-time members  of the Commission  referred  to in clause  (a) of sub-
section  (4) of section  4, the Secretary  referred  to in section  8 and other Members of the Autonomous 
Boards referred to in section 20, the Search Committee  shall  consist  of members  specified  in clauses  
(b) to (d) and Joint  Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH as Convenor —
Member and chaired  by Secretary  to the Government  of India  in-charge  of the Ministry  of AYUSH . 
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy, 
including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member, or within three 
months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Member, make  a reference  to the Search  Committee  
for filling  up of the vacancy.  
(3) The Search  Committee  shall  recommend  a panel  of at least three  names  for every vacancy referred 
to it. 
(4) Before  recommending  any person  for appointment  as the Chairperson  or a Member of the 
Commission,  the Search  Committee  shall  satisfy  itself  that such person  does not have any financial or other 7 
 interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or  Member.  
(5) No appointment  of the Chairperson  or Member  shall  be invalid  merely  by reason  of any vacancy or 
absence of a Member in the Search  Committee.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (2) to (5), the Search Committee may regulate its own  
procedure.  
6. Term of office and conditions of  service of Chairperson and Mem bers. —(1) The Chairperson 
and Members (other than ex officio Members) and Members appointed under clause s (b) and ( c) of sub -
section (4) of section 4 shall hold office for a term not exceeding  four years  and shall  not be eligible  for 
any extension  or re-appointment:  
Provided  that such person  shall  cease  to hold office  after attaining  the age of seventy years.  
(2) The term of office  of an ex officio  Member  shall  continue  as long as he holds  the office by virtue of 
which he is such  Member.  
(3) Where  a Member,  other  than an ex officio  Member,  is absent  from  three  consecutive ordinary 
meetings of the Commission and the cause of such absence is not attributable to any  valid  reason  in the 
opinion  of the Commission,  such Member  shall  be deemed  to have vacated the  seat. 
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of,  the 
Chairperson  and Member,  other  than an ex officio Member,  shall  be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Chairperson or a Member  may–– 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing a notice of not less than three months to the Central 
Government;  or 
(b) be removed  from  his office  in accordance  with the provisions  of section  7: 
Provided  that such person  may be relieved  from  duties  earlier  than three  months or allowed to 
continue beyond three months until a successor is appointed, if the Central Government so  decides.  
(6) The Chairperson  and every  Member  of the Commission  shall  make  declaration  of his  assets  and 
liabilities  at the time of entering  upon  his office  and at the time of demitting  his office  and also declare  his 
professional  and commercial  engagement  or involvement,  in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
and such declaration shall be published on the website of the  Commission.  
(7) The Chairperson  or a Member,  ceasing  to hold office  as such,  shall  not accept,  for a period  of two 
years  from  the date of demitting  such office,  any employment,  in any capacity, including  as a consultant  or an 
expert,  in any private  Medical  institution  of Homoeopathy  or, whose  matter  has been  dealt  with by such 
Chairperson  or Member,  directly  or indirectly:  
Provided  that nothing  contained  herein  shall  be construed  as preventing  such person from accepting an 
employment in a body or institution including Medical institution of Homoeopathy,  controlled  or 
maintained  by the Central  Government  or a State  Government.  
(8) Nothing  in sub-section  (7) shall  prevent  the Central  Government  from  permitting the Chairperson 
or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including as a consultant or an expert, in any 
private Medical Institution of Homoeopathy, whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairpe rson or  
Member.  
7. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commission. —(1) The Central  Government  may, by 
order,  remove  from  office  the Chairperson  or any other Member,  who— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;  or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude;  or 
(c) has become  physically  or mentally  incapable  of acting  as the Chairperson  or a Member;  or 
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  or 8 
 (e) has acquired  such financial  or other  interest  as is likely  to affect  prejudicially his functions as a 
Member;  or 
(f) has so abused  his position  as to render  his continuance  in office  prejudicial to public  interest.  
(2) No Member  shall  be removed  under  clauses  (e) and (f) of sub-section  (1) unless  he has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the  matter.  
8. Appointment of secretary experts, professionals officers and employees of Commission. —(1) 
There  shall  be a Secretariat  for the Commission  to be headed  by a Secretary,  to be  appointed  by the Central  
Government  in accordance  with the provisions  of section  5. 
(2) The Secretary  of the Commission  shall be a person  of proven  administrative  capacity and integrity, 
possessing such qualifications and experience as may be  prescribed.  
(3) The Secretary shall be appointed by the Central Government for a term of four years and he shall 
not be eligible for any extension or  re-appointment.  
(4) The Secretary shall discharge such functions of the Commission as are assigned to him by the 
Commission  and as may be specified  by regulations  made  under  this Act. 
(5) The  Commission  may appoint  such officers  and other  employees,  as it considers necessary, against 
the posts created by the Central Government for the efficient discharge of its functions under this  Act. 
(6) The salaries  and allowances  payable  to, and other  terms  and conditions  of service of the Secretary, 
officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(7) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by regulations, such 
number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of 
Homoeopathy and experience in fields including medical educ ation in Homoeopathy, public health, 
management, economics, accreditation, patient advocacy,  health  research,  science  and technology,  
administration,  finance,  accounts  or law as it deems necessary, to assist the Commission in the discharge of 
its functions  under this Act.  
9. Meeting of Commission. —(1) The Commission  shall  meet  at least once  every  quarter  at such time 
and place  as may be appointed by the  Chairperson.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if, for any reason,  the 
Chairperson  is unable  to attend  a meeting  of the Commission,  any Member  being the  President  of the 
Autonomous  Boards,  nominated  by the Chairperson  shall  preside  at the meeting.  
(3) Unless  the procedure  to be followed  at the meetings  of the Commission  is otherwise provided  by 
regulations,  one-half of the total number  of Members  of the Commission  including the Chairperson shall 
constitute the quorum and all decisions of the Commission shall be taken  by a majority  of the members,  
present  and voting  and in the event  of equality  of votes, the Chairperson  or in his absence,  the President  of 
the Autonomous  Board  nominated  under sub -section  (2), shall  have  the casting  vote.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the Commission shall 
vest in the  Chairperson.  
(5) No act or proceeding  of the Commission  shall  be invalid  merely  by reason  of— 
(a) any vacancy  in, or any defect  in the constitution  of, the Commission;  or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a Member.  
(6) A person  who is aggrieved  by any decision  of the Commission,  except  the decision rendered  under  
sub-section  (4) of section  31, may prefer  an appeal  to the Central  Government against such decision within 
fifteen days of the communication of such  decision.  
  9 
 10. Power and functions of Commission. —(1) The Commission  shall  perform  the following  
functions,  namely: — 
(a) lay down policies for  maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of 
Homoeopathy and make necessary regulations in this  behalf;  
(b) lay  down  policies  for regulating  medical  institutions,  medical  researches  and medical 
professionals and make necessary regulations  in this  behalf;  
(c) assess  the requirements  in healthcare,  including  human  resources  for health and healthcare  
infrastructure  and develop  a road map for meeting  such requirements;  
(d) frame  guidelines  and lay down  policies  by making  such regulations  as may be necessary  for the 
proper  functioning  of the Commission,  the Autonomous  Boards and the State Medical Councils of  
Homoeopathy;  
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous  Boards;  
(f) take  such measures,  as may be necessary,  to ensure  compliance  by the State Medical Councils 
of Homoeopathy of the guidelines framed and regulations made under this Act for their effective 
functioning under this  Act; 
(g) exercise  appellate  jurisdiction  with respect  to decisions  of the Autonomous Boards;  
(h) make regulations to ensure observance of professional ethics in Medical profession and to 
promote ethical conduct during the provision of care by medical practitioners;  
(i) frame  guidelines  for determination  of fees and all other  charges  in respect  of fifty per cent. of 
seats in private medical institutions and deemed to be Universities which are governed under the 
provisions of this  Act. 
(j) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) All orders  and decision s of the Commission  shall  be authenticated  by signature  of the Secretary and 
the Commission may delegate such of its powers on administrative and financial  matters,  as it deems  fit, 
to the Secretary.  
(3) The Commission  may constitute  sub-committees  and delegate  such of its powers to them as may be 
necessary to enable them to accomplish specific  tasks . 
CHAPTER III  
ADVISORY  COUNCIL FOR HOMOEOPATHY  
11. Constitution and composition of Advisory council for Homoeopathy. —(1) The Central  
Government  shall,  by notification,  constitute  an advisory  body  to be known as the Advisory Council for  
Homoeopathy.  
(2) The Council  shall  consist  of a Chairperson  and the following  Members,  namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson  of the Commission  shall  be the ex officio  Chairperson  of the Council;  
(b) every  Member  of the Commission  shall  be ex officio  member  of the Council;  
(c) one Member,  to represent  each State,  who is the Vice-Chancellor  of a University in that State, 
possessing qualifications in Homoeopathy, to be nominated by that State  Government,  and one 
member  to represent  each Union  territory,  who is the Vice- Chancellor of a University in that Union 
territory, possessing qualifications in Homoeopathy, to be nominated by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
in the Government of India:  
Provided that where the Vice -Chancellor possessing qualifications in Homoeopathy  is not 
available,  a Dean  or Head  of Faculty  possessing  qualifications  in Homoeopathy shall be  nominated;  
(d) one member  to represent  each State  and each Union  territory  from  amongst elected  members  of 10 
 the State  Homoeopathy  Medical  Council,  to be nominated  by that State Medical  Council;  
(e)  the Chairman,  University Grants  Commission;  
(f) the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation  Council;  
(g) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons holding the 
post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of Management and the Indian 
Institute of  Science;  
(h) the terms of non-ex officio Members in  the Council shall be four  years.  
12. Functions of Advisory Council for  Homoeopathy .—(1) The Council  shall  be the primary  
platform  through  which  the States  and Union territories  may put forth  their views  and concerns  before  the 
Commission  and help in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, 
training, research and development of  Homoeopathy.  
(2) The Council  shall  advise  the Commission  on measures  to determine  and maintain, and  to coordinate  
maintenance  of the minimum  standards  in all matters  relating  to medical education, training, research and  
development.  
(3) The Council  shall  advise  the Commission  on measures  to enhance  equitable  access to medical  
education.  
13. Meetings of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy .—(1) The Council  shall  meet  at least twice  in a 
year at such time and place  as may be decided by the  Chairperson.  
(2) The Chairperson  shall  preside  at the meeting  of the Council  and if for any reason the Chairperson  is 
unable  to attend  a meeting  of the Council,  such other  member  as nominated by the Chairperson shall preside 
over the  meeting.   
(3) Unless  the procedure  is otherwise  provided  by regulations,  one-half of the Members of  the Council  
including  the Chairperson  shall  form  the quorum  and all acts of the Council shall be decided by a majority 
of the Members present and  voting.  
CHAPTER IV  
NATIONAL EXAMINATION  
14. Nat ional Eligibility cum -Entrance Test. —(1) There  shall  be a uniform  National  Eligibility -cum-
Entrance  Test, for admission to the undergraduate in Homoeopathy in all medical institutions governed 
under this  Act. 
(2) The Commission  shall conduct  the National  Eligibility -cum-Entrance  Test in English and in such other  
languages,  through  such designated  authority  and in such manner,  as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Commission  shall  specify  by regulations  the manner  of conducting  common counselling  by the 
designated  authority  for admission  to all the medical  institutions  governed under this  Act: 
Provided that the common counselling shall be conducted by the designated authority  of –– 
(i) the Central Government, for All India seats; and  
(ii) the State Government, for the remaining seats at the State level.  
15. National Exit Test .—(1) A common  final year undergraduate  medical examination, to be known 
as the National Exit Test, shall be held for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of 
Homoeopathy and for enrolment in the State Register or National Register, as the case may be.  
(2) The Commission  shall  conduct  the National  Exit Test for Homoeopathy  in English and  in such other  
languages,  through  such designated  authority  and in such manner  as may be specified by  regulations.   
(3) The  National  Exit Test shall  become  operational  on such date,  within  three  years from the date on 
which this Act comes into force, as may be appointed by the Central Government, by  notification.  11 
 (4) Any  person  with a foreign  medical  qualification  shall  have  to qualify  National  Exit Test for the 
purpose  of obtaining  licence  to practice  Homoeopathy  as medical  practitioner  of Homoeopathy and for 
enrolment in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be, in such manner as may be 
specified by  regulations.  
16. Post -Graduate National Entrance Test. —(1) A uniform Post -Graduate National Entrance Test 
shall be conducted for admission to post -graduate courses in Homoeopathy in all medical institutions 
governed under this  Act. 
(2) The Commission  shall  conduct  the National  Entrance  Test for admission  to post- graduate  courses  
in English  and in such other  languages,  through  such designated  authority and in such manner, as may be 
specified by  regulations.  
(3) The Commission  shall  specify  by regulations  the manner  of conducting  common counselling by the 
designated authority for admission to the post -graduate seats in all medical institutions governed under 
this Act. 
17. National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy .—(1) A National  Teachers’  Eligibility  Test 
shall  be conducted  separately  for the post- graduates of Homoeopathy who desire to take up teaching 
profession in that  discipline.  
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy 
through such designated authority and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The National  Teachers’  Eligibility  Test for Homoeopathy  shall  become  operational on  such date,  
within  three  years  from  the date on which  this Act comes  into force,  as may be notified by the Central  
Government:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to the date 
notified under sub -section (3). 
CHAPTER V  
AUTONOMOUS  BOARDS  
18. Constitution of Autonomous  Boards .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute the following Autonomous Boards, under the overall supervision of the Commission, to 
perform the functions assigned to such Boards under this Act,  namely: — 
(a) the Homoeopathy Education  Board;  
(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homo eopathy;  and 
(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for  Homoeopathy.  
(2) Each  Board  referred  to in sub-section  (1) shall  be an autonomous  body  which  shall carry out its 
functions under this Act in accordance with the regulations made by the Commission.  
19. Composition of Autonomous Boards. —(1) The composition of the Autonomous Boards shall be 
as under,  namely: –– 
(a) the Homoeopathy Education Board shall consist of a President and four Members from the 
discipline of  Homoeopathy;  
(b) the Medical Assessment  and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom one  Member  shall  be from  the 
discipline  of Homoeopathy  and the other  Member  shall be an acceditation  expert;  
(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from the 
discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom one Member  shall  be from  the discipline  
of Homoeopathy  and the other  Member  shall  be a person who has demonstr ated public record of work 
on medical ethics or chosen from  any of the disciplines  of quality  assurance,  public  health,  law or patient  12 
 advocacy.  
(2) The President and Members of the Autonomous Boards to be chosen under sub -section (1) shall 
be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing post -graduate 
degree in respective disciplines from a recognised University and having experience of not less than 
fifteen years in respective fields, out of which at least seven years shall be as a leader:  
Provided that seven years as leader in the case of the President and Member from Homoeopathy shall 
be in the area of health, growth and development of education in Homoeopathy.  
20. Search Committee for appoi ntment of President and Members .—The Central Government 
shall appoint the President and Members of the Autonomous Boards on the basis of the 
recommendations made in accordance with the procedure specified in section 5 by the Search Committee 
constituted  thereunder.  
21. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members. —(1) The President  and 
Members  of each Autonomous  Board  shall  hold the office for a term not exceeding four years and shall 
not be eligible for any extension or re-appointment:  
Provided  that such person  shall  cease  to hold office  after attaining  the age of seventy years.  
(2) The salary  and allowances  payable  to, and other  terms  and conditions  of service  of the President and 
Members of an  Autonomous Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The provisions contained in sub -sections (3), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of section 6 relating  to other  
terms  and conditions  of service  of, and in section  7 relating  to removal  from office, the Chairperson and 
Members of the Commission shall also be applicable to the President and Members of the Autonomous  
Boards.  
22. Advisory committees of experts. —(1) Each Autonomous Board, except the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Homoeo pathy,  shall be assisted  by such advisory  committees  of experts,  as may be constituted 
by the Commission, for the efficient discharge of the functions of such Boards under this Act.  
(2) The Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  shall  be assisted  by such ethics committees 
of experts, as may be constituted by the Commission, for the efficient discharge of the functions of that 
Board under this  Act. 
23. Staff of Autonomous  Boards .—The experts, professionals, officers and other employees appointed 
under section 8 shall  be made  available  to the Autonomous  Boards  in such number  and in such manner,  as 
may be specified by regulations made by the  Commission.  
24. Meetings of Autonomous  Boards .—(1) Every Autonomous Board shall meet at least once a month 
at such time and place as it may  appoint.  
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, all decisions of the Autonomous  Boards  
shall  be made  by consensus  and if consensus  is not possible,  decision shall be made by majority of votes of 
the President and  Members.  
(3) A person  who is aggrieved  by any decision  of an Autonomous  Board  may prefer an appeal  to the 
Commission  against  such decision  within  thirty  days of the communication of  such decision.  
25. Delegation of powers. —(1) The Commission may delegate all or any of its administrative and 
financial powers to the President of each Autonomous Board to enable such Board to function smoothly 
and efficiently.  
(2) The President  of an Autonomous  Board  may further  delegate  any of his powers  to a Member  or 
officer  of that Board.  
26. Powers and functions of Homoeopathy Education Board. —(1) The Homoeopathy Education 
Board shall perform the following functions, namely: –– 
(a) determine the standards of education at the undergraduate, post -graduate and super -speciality 13 
 levels and oversee all aspects of relating  thereto;  
(b) develop a competency based dynamic curriculum for Homoeopathy at all levels  in accordance  
with the regulations  made  under  this Act, in such manner  that it develops appropriate skill, knowledge, 
attitude, values and ethics among the post - graduate and super -speciality students and enables them to 
provide healthcare, to impart medical education and to conduct medical rese arch;  
(c) frame guidelines on setting up of medical institutions for imparting undergraduate, post-
graduate and super -speciality courses in Homoeopathy, having regard to the needs of the country, the 
global norms and the regulations made under this  Act; 
(d) determine  minimum  requirements  and standards  for conducting  of courses and examinations in 
medical institutions, having regard to the needs of creativity at local levels and the regulations made 
under this  Act; 
(e) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education and 
research in medical institutions of Homoeopathy, in accordance with the regulations made under this  
Act; 
(f) specify  norms  for compulsory  annual  disclosure,  electronic ally and otherwise, by medical  
institutions  of Homoeopathy  in respect  of their functions  that has a bearing on the interest of various 
stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the  Government;  
(g) facilitate development and training of faculty  Members;  
(h) facilitate research  programmes;  
(i) grant  recognition  to medical  qualifications  of Homoeopathy  at all levels.  
 (2) The Homoeopathy Education Board may, in the discharge of its functions, make such 
recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems necessary.  
27. Powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for  Homoeopathy .—(1) The Board  
of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall perform the following functions,  namely: — 
(a) maintain  a National  Register  of all licensed  practitioners  of Homoeopathy  in accordance with 
the provisions of section  32; 
(b) regulate professional conduct and promote medical ethics in accordance with the regulations 
made under this  Act: 
Provided  that the Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  shall  ensure compliance  with 
the code  of professional  and ethical  conduct  through  the State  Medical Council,  in a case where  such State  
Medical  Council  has been  conferred  power  to take disciplinary actions in respect of professional or 
ethical misconduct by medical practitioners under respective State  Acts;  
(c) develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Medical Councils  of 
Homoeopathy  to effectively  promote  and regulate  the conduct  of medical practitioners of  
Homoeopathy;  
(d) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the actions taken by a State Medical Council 
under section  31. 
(2) The Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  may,  in the discharge  of its functions,  make  
such recommendations  to, and seek such directions  from,  the Commission, as it deems  necessary.  
28. Powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy. —(1) The 
Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall perform the following functions,  namely: – 
(a) determine the process of assessment and rating of medical institutions on the basis of their 
compliance with the standards laid down by the Homoeopathy Education Board, in accordance with 
the regulations made under this  Act; 14 
 (b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution or to start any post -graduate 
course or to increase number of seats, in accordance with the provisions of section  29; 
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions in 
accordance with the regulations made under this  Act: 
Provided that the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy may, if it deems  
necessary,  hire and authorise  any other  third  party  agenc y or persons for carrying out inspections of 
medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions:  
Provided  further  that where  inspection  of medical  institutions  is carried  out by such  third  party  
agency  or persons  authorised  by the Medical  Assessment  and Rating Board for Homoeopathy, it shall 
be obligatory on such institutions to provide access to such agency or  person;  
(d) conduct,  or where  it deems  necessary,  empanel  independent  rating  agencies to  conduct,  assess  
and rate all medical  institutions,  within  such period  of their opening, and every year thereafter, at such 
time, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations;  
(e) make  available  on its website  or in public  domain,  the assessment  and ratings of medical 
institutions at  regular intervals, in accordance with the regulations made under this  Act; 
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission  for withdrawal  of 
recognition,  against  a medical  institution  for its failure to  maintain  the minimum  essential  standards  
specified  by the Homoeopathy  Education Board, in accordance with the regulations made under this  
Act. 
(2) The Medical  Assessment  and Rating  Board  for Homoeopathy  may, in the discharge of its  functions, 
make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems  necessary.  
29. Permission for establishment of new medical institution .—(1) No person  shall  establish  a new 
medical  institution  or start any post-graduate course or increase number of seats without obtaining prior 
permission of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for  Homoeopathy.  
Explanation. ––For the purpose of this sub -section, the term “person” includes any University or a 
trust or any other body but does not include the Central Government.  
(2) For the purpose of obtaining permission under sub -section (1), a person may submit a scheme to 
the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy in such form,  containing  such particulars,  
accompanied  by such fee, and in such manner,  as may be specified by  regulations.  
(3) While considering the scheme received under sub -section (2), the Medical Assessment and 
Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall have regard to the standards of education  and research,  the standards  
and norms  for infrastructure  and faculty,  the guidelines on  setting  up of medical  institutions  and other  
requirements  determined  by the Homoeopathy Education Board, and pass an order either approving or 
disapproving the scheme within three months from the date of receipt of such  scheme:  
Provided  that before  disapproving  such scheme,  an opportunity  to rectify  the defects, if any, shall be 
given to the person  concerned.  
(4) Where a scheme is approved under sub -section (3), such approval shall be the permission under 
sub-section (1) to establish a new medical  institution.  
(5) Where  a scheme  is disapproved  under  sub-section  (3) or where  no order  is passed within three 
months of submitting a scheme under sub -section (2), the person concerned may prefer an appeal to the 
Commission within fifteen days of such disapproval or, as the case may be, after lapse  of three  months,  in 
such manner  as may be specified  by regulations.  
(6) Where  the Commission  has disapproved  the scheme  or no order  has been  passed within fifteen 
days from the date of preferring appeal under sub -section (5), the person concerned may prefer a second 
appeal to the Central Government within seven days of communication of such disapproval or, as the case 15 
 may be, lapse of specified period of fifteen  days.  
(7) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopat hy may conduct evaluation  and 
assessment  of any University  or medical  institution  at any time,  either  directly or  through  any other  expert,  
having  integrity  and experience  in medical  profession  without any prior notice and assess and evaluate the 
performance, standards and benchmarks of such University or medical  institution.  
30. Criteria for approving or disapproving scheme. —While approving or disapproving a scheme 
under section 29, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy, or the Commission, as the 
case may be, shall  take into consideration  the following  criteria,  namely: — 
(a) adequacy of infrastructure and financial  resources;  
(b) whether  adequate  academic  faculty,  non-teaching  staff and other  necessary facilities have been  
provided to ensure proper functioning of medical institution or would  be provided  within  the time-
limit  specified  in the scheme;  
(c) whether  adequate  hospital  facilities  have  been  provided  or would  be provided within  the time-
limit  specified  in the scheme;  
(d) such other factors as may be  prescribed:  
Provided  that, subject  to the previous  approval  of the Central  Government,  the criteria may be 
relaxed for the medical institutions which are set up in such areas as may be specified by the  
regulations.  
31. State Medical Councils .—(1) The State Government shall, by notification, within three years of 
the commencement  of this Act, establish  a State  Medical  Council  for Homoeopathy  in that State if no such 
Council exists in that  State.  
(2) Where  a State  Act confers  power  upon  the State  Medical  Council  to take disciplinary actions in respect 
of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered practitioner of Homoeopathy,  the State  Medical  
Council  shall  act in accordance  with the regulations  made, and the  guidelines framed, under this  Act: 
Provided  that till such time as a State  Medical  Council  for Homoeopathy  is established in  a State,  the 
Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  shall  receive  the complaints and grievances relating to 
any professional or ethical misconduct against a registered practitioner of Homoeopathy in that State in 
accordance with such procedure as may be specified by  regulations:  
Provided  further  that the Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  or, as the case may be, the 
State Medical Council shall give an opportunity of hearing to such practitioner before passing any order 
or taking any action, including imposition of any monetary penalty, against such  person.  
(3) A practitioner  of Homoeopathy  who is aggrieved  by the order  passed  or the action taken  by–– 
(a) the  State  Medical  Council  under  sub-section  (2) may prefer  an appeal  to the Board  of Ethics  
and Registration  for Homoeopathy  and the decision,  if any, of the Board of Ethics and Registration 
for Homoeopathy thereupon shall be binding on such State Medical Council, unless a second appeal is 
preferred under sub -section (4); 
(b) the Board  of Ethics  and Registration  for Homoeopathy  under  the first proviso to sub -section (2) 
may prefer an appeal to the  Commission.  
(4) A medical practitioner of Homoeopathy who is aggrieved by the decision of the Board  of Ethics  
and Registration  for Homoeopathy,  may prefer  an appeal  to the Commission within sixty days of 
communication of such  decision.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this  Act:— 
(a) “State” includes Union territory and the expressions “State Government’’ and “State  
Medical  Council  for Homoeopathy”,  in relation  to a Union  territory,  shall respectively  mean  the 
“Central  Government”  and “Union  Territory  Medical  Council for  Homoeopathy”;  16 
 (b) the expression “professional or ethical misco nduct” includes any act of commission or 
omission, as may be specified by  regulations;  
32. National Register and State Register of Homoeopathy .—(1) The Board  of Ethics  and 
Registration  for Homoeopathy  shall maintain  a National Register  containing  the name,  address,  all recognised  
qualifications  possessed  by a licensed medical practitioner of Homoeopathy and such other particulars as 
may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The National Register shall be maintained in such form, including in electronic form and in such 
manner as may be specified by  regulations.  
(3) The manner  in which  any name  or qualification  may be added  to, or removed  from, the  National  
Register  and the grounds  for removal  thereof,  shall  be such as may be specified by the  regulations.  
(4) The National Register shall be made available in the public by placing it on the website of the 
Board of Ethics and Registration for  Homoeopathy.  
(5) Every  State  Medical  Council  shall maintain  and regularly  update  the State  Register  in the specified 
electronic format and supply a physical copy of the same to the Board of Ethics and Registration for 
Homoeopathy within three months of the commencement of this Act. 
(6) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall ensure electronic synchronisation of 
the National Register and the State Register in such a manner that any change in one such register is 
automatically reflected in the other  register.  
33. Rights of persons to be enrolled  in National Register and their obligations thereto. —(1) 
Any person who has a recognised medical qualification in Homoeopathy under  this Act and qualifies  the 
National  Exit Test held under  section  15 shall  have  a licence to  practice  Homoeopathy  and shall  have  his 
name  and qualifications  enrolled  in the National Register or a State Register, as the case may  be: 
Provided  that a person  who has been  registered  in the Central  Register  of Homoeopathy maintained  under  
the Homoeopathy  Central  Council  Act, 1973  (59 of 1973)  prior  to the coming  into force of  this Act and 
before  the National  Exit Test becomes  operational  under  sub-section  (3) of section  15, shall  be deemed  to 
have  been  registered  under  this Act and be enrolled  first in the State Register and subsequently in the 
National Register maintained under this Act.  
(2) No person who has obtained a qualification in Homoeopathy from a medical institution  
established  in any country  outside  India  and is recognised  as a medical  practitioner of Homoeopathy  in that 
country,  shall,  after the commencement  of this Act and the National Exit Test for Homoeopathy becomes 
operational under sub -section (3) of section 15, be enrolled  in the National  Register  for Homoeopathy,  
unless  he qualifies  the National  Exit Test for Homoeopathy.  
(3) When  a person  whose  name  is entered  in the State  Register  or the National  Register, as the case may 
be, obtains  any title, diploma  or qualification  for proficiency  in sciences  or medicine  which  is a recognised  
qualification  under  section  34 or section  35, as the case may be, he shall  be entitled  to have  such title, 
diploma  or qualification  entered  against  his name in the State Register or the National Register, in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations.  
34. Rights of persons to practice. —(1) No person other than a person who is enrolled in the State 
Register or the National Register, as the case may be,  shall — 
(a) be allowed to practice Homoeopathy as a qualified  practitioner;  
(b) hold  office  as a physician  or a surgeon  or any other  office,  by whatever  name called, which is 
meant to be held by a physician or surgeon, as the case may  be; 
(c) be entitled  to sign or authenticate  a medical  or fitness  certificate  or any other certificate required 
by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical  practitioner;  
(d) be entitled  to give evidence  at any inquest  or in any court  of law as an expert under section 45 of 
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  on any matter relating to Homoeopathy:  17 
 Provided that the Commission shall submit a list of such practitioners to the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that a foreign citizen who is enrolled in his country as a practi tioner  of Homoeopathy  
in accordance  with the law regulating  the registration  of such  practitioners  in that country  may be permitted  
temporary  registration  in India  for such period and in such manner as may be specified by  regulations.  
(2) Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be punished  with 
imprisonment  for a term which  may extend  to one year, or with fine which  may extend to five lakh rupees, or 
with both.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section (2) shall  affect, — 
(a) the right of a person enrolled on a State Register as practitioner of Homoeopathy  to practice  
in any State  merely  on the ground  that he does not possess, as on the date of commencement of this 
Act, a recognised medical qualification in Homoeopathy;  
(b) the right of a person who has been practicing Homoeopathy for not less than  five years  in a 
State,  to continue  to practice  in that State  in which  a State  Register of  Homoeopathy  is not maintained  
as on the date of commencement  of this Act. 
CHAPTER VI  
RECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF HOMOEOPATHY  
35. Recognition of qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India. —(1) 
The medical  qualifications  in Homoeopathy  at undergraduate  or postgraduate or super -specia lity level 
granted by any University or medical institution in India shall be listed and maintained by the 
Homoeopathy Education Board, in such manner as may be specified  by regulations  and such medical  
qualification  shall  be a recognised  qualification for the  purposes of this  Act. 
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which grants an undergraduate or postgraduate or 
super -speciality  qualification in Homoeopathy not included in the list maintained by the Homoeopathy 
Education Board, may apply to that Board for granting recognition to such  qualification.  
(3) The Homoeopathy Education Board shall examine the application for grant of rec ognition  
within  period  of six mnths  in such manner  as may be specified  by regulations.  
(4) Where the Homoeopathy Education Board decides to grant recognition to the qualification  in 
Homoeopathy,  it shall  include  such qualification  in the list maintained  by it and shall also specify therein 
the date of effect of such recognition, otherwise it shall communicate its decision not to grant 
recognition to the concerned University or medical institution.  
(5) The aggrieved University or the medical institution may prefer an appeal to the Commission  
within  a period  of sixty  days from  the date of communication  of the decision  of Homoeopathy Education 
Board in such manner as may be specified by  regulations.  
(6) The Commission  shall  examine  the appeal  received  under  sub-section  (5) within  a period of two 
months and if it decides that recognition may be granted to such medical qualification, it may direct the 
concerned Board to include such qualification in the list maintained by that Board in such manner as 
may be spe cified by  regulations.  
(7) Where  the Commission  decides  not to grant  recognition  under  sub-section  (6) or fails to decide 
within the specified period, the aggrieved University or medical institution concerned  may prefer  a 
second  appeal  to the Central  Government  within  a period  of thirty days of the communication  of such 
decision  or lapse  of specified  period,  as the case may be. 
(8) All medical qualifications which have been recognised before the date of commencement of 
this Act and are included in the Second Schedule to the Homoeopathy Central  Council  Act, 1973             
(59 of 1973) , shall also be listed  and maintained  by the Homoeopathy  Education Board, in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations . 18 
 36. Recognition of  medical  qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India .—(1) 
Where an authority in any country outside India which, by the law of that country,  is entrusted  with the 
recognition  of qualifications  of Homoeopathy  in that country, makes an application to the Commission 
for granting recognition to such qualification in India,  the Commission  may, subject  to such verification  
as it deems  necessary,  either  grant  or refuse to grant recognition to that medical  qualification.  
(2) Where the Commission grants recognition to any medical qualification under sub -section ( 1), 
such qualification shall be a recognised qualification for the purposes of this  Act and shall  be included  
in the list maintained  by the Commission  in such manner  as may be  specified:  
Provided that in case the Commission decides not to grant recognition to any qualification, the 
Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such authority before refusing to 
grant such recognition.  
(3) Where the Comm ission refuses to grant recognition to a medical qualification under  sub-section  
(2), the authority  concerned  may prefer  an appeal  to the Central  Government for grant of  recognition.  
(4) All  qualifications  which  have  been  recognised  before  the date of commencement of this Act and 
are included in the Third Schedule to the Homoeopathy Central Council, Act, 1973 (59 of 1973) shall 
also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act and shall be listed and maintained  
by the Commission in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
37. Withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualification .—(1) Where,  upon  a report  
received  from  the Medical  Assessment  and Rating  Board for Homoeopathy or otherwise, it appears to 
the Commission  that— 
(a) the  courses  of study  and examination  to be undergone  in, or the proficiency required  from 
candidates  at any examination  held by, a University  or medical  institution do not conform to the 
standards specified by Homoeopathy Education Board;  or 
(b) the  standards  and norms  for infrastructure,  faculty  and quality  of education in medical 
institutions as determined by the Homoeopathy Education Board are not adhered to by any 
University or medical institution, and such University  or medical institution  has failed to take necessary  
corrective  action  to maintain  specified  minimum standards,  
the Commission may initiate action in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2):  
Provided  that the Commission  shall,  before,  taking  any action  for suo motu  withdrawal of recognition 
granted to the medical qualification awarded by a University or medical institution,  impose  penalty  in 
accordance  with the provisions  of clause  (f) of sub-section  (1) of section  28. 
(2) The Commission  shall,  after making  such further  inquiry  as it deems  fit, and after holding 
consultations with the State Government and the authority of the concerned University  or medical  
institution,  comes  to the conclusion  that the recognition  granted  to a medical  qualification  ought  to be 
withdrawn,  it may, by order,  withdraw  recognition  granted to such medical qualification and direct the 
Homoeopathy Education Board to amend the entries  against  the University  or medical  institution  
concerned  in the list maintained  by that Board to the effe ct that the recognition granted to such 
qualification is withdrawn with effect from the date specified in that  order.  
(3) If the Commission, after verification with the authority in any country outside India,  is of the 
opinion  that a recognised  medical  qualification  which  is included  in the list maintained  by it is to be de-
recognised,  it may, by order,  de-recognise  such medical  qualification and remove  it from  the list maintained  by 
the Commission  with effect  from  the date of such order.  
38. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of qualifications. —Where  the Commission  
deems  it necessary  so to do, it may, by notification,  direct that any qualification  in Homoeopathy  granted  by 
a medical  institution  outside  India,  after such  date,  as may be specified  in that notification,  shall  be 
recognised  qualification  for the purposes of this  Act: 
Provided that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be permitted  only if 
such person  has been  enrolled  as a medical  practitioner  in accordance  with the  law regulating  the 19 
 registration  of medical  practitioner  for the time being  in force  in that country:  
Provided  further  that medical  practice  by a person  possessing  such qualification  shall be limited to such 
period as may be specified in  that order:  
Provided  also that medical  practice  by a person  possessing  such qualification  shall  be permitted  only if 
such person  qualifies  National  Exit Test. 
CHAPTER VII  
GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS  
39. Grants by Central Government. —The Central  Government  may, after due appropriation  made  by 
Parliament  by law in this  behalf,  make  to the Commission  grants  of such sums  of money  as the Central  
Government may think  fit. 
40. National  Commission Fund  for Homoeopathy .—(1) There  shall  be constituted  a fund to be 
called  “the National  Commission  Fund for Homoeopathy” and there shall be credited  thereto — 
(a) all Government  grants , fees, penalties  and charges  received  by the Commission and the Autonomous  
Boards;  
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such other source as may be decided by  it. 
(2)  The fund shall be applied for making payment  towards — 
(a) The salaries  and allowances  payable  to the Chairperson  and Members  of the Commission,  
Presidents  and Members  of the Autonomous  Boards  and administrative expenses  including the salaries 
and allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the Commission and the Autonomous  
Boards;  
(b) the expenses  incurred  or to be incurred  in carrying  out the provisions  of this Act including in 
connection with the discharge of the functions of the Commission and the Autonomous  Boards.  
41. Audit and accounts. —(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation  
with the Comptroller  and Auditor -General  of India.  
(2) The accounts  of the Commission  shall be audited  by the Comptroller  and Auditor - General  of India  
at such intervals  as may be specified  by him and any expenditure  incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of   India.  
(3) The Comptroller  and Auditor -General  of India  and any other  persons  appointed  by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General  generally  has in connection  with the 
audit  of Government  accounts  and in particular,  shall  have  the right  to demand  the production  of, and 
complete  access  to, records, books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect the office of the  Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor - General  of India  or 
any other  person  appointed  by him in this behalf,  together  with the audit report  thereon,  shall  be forwarded  
annually  by the Commission  to the Central  Government which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is received, before each House of  Parliament.  
42. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government .—(1) The Commission  shall  furnish  
to the Central  Government,  at such time,  in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed or as the 
Central Government may direct, such  reports  and statements  and such particulars  in regard  to any matter  
under  the jurisdiction of the Commission,  as the Central  Government  may, from  time to time,  require.  
(2) The  Commission  shall  prepare,  once  every  year, in such form  and at such time as may  be 
prescribed,  an annual  report,  giving  a summary  of its activities  during  the previous year  and copies  of the 
report  shall  be forwarded  to the Central  Government.  20 
 (3) A copy of the report received under sub -section (2) shall be laid by the Central Government,  as 
soon  as may be after it is received,  before  each House  of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous 
Boards. —(1) Without  prejudice  to the foregoing  provisions  of this Act, the Commission  and the 
Autonomous Boards shall, in exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions under  this Act be 
bound  by such directions  on questions  of policy  as the Central  Government may  give in writing  to them  from  
time to time:  
Provided  that the Commission  and the Autonomous  Boards  shall,  as far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express their views before any direction is given under this sub-section.  
(2) The decision  of the Central  Government  whether  a question  is one of policy  or not shall be  final.  
44. Power of Central Government to give directions to  State Governments. —The Central  
Government  may give such directions,  as it may deem  necessary,  to a State Government for carrying out all 
or any of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such  directions . 
45. Information to be  furnished by Commission and publication thereof .—(1) The Commission  
shall  furnish  such reports,  copies  of its minutes,  abstracts  of its accounts and other information to the 
Central Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Government may  publish, in such manner as it may think fit, the reports, minutes, 
abstracts of accounts and other information furnished to it under sub -section ( 1). 
46. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions .—Every  University  and medical  
institutions  covered  under  this Act shall  maintain  a website  at all times  and display  in its website  all such 
information  as may be required  by the Commission or an Autonomous Board, as the case may  be. 
47. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions. —(1) Notwithstanding  anything  
contained  in this Act, any student  who was studying for  a degree  or diploma  in any medical  institution  
immediately  before  the commencement  of this  Act shall  continue  to so study  and complete  his course  for 
such degree  or diploma,  and such institution  shall  continue  to provide  instructions  and hold examination  for 
such student in accordance with the syllabus and studies as existed before such commencement, and such 
student shall be deemed to have completed his course of study under this Act and shall be awarded degree 
or diploma under this  Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where recognition granted to a medical  institution  
has lapsed,  whether  by efflux  of time or by its voluntary  surrender  or for any other  reason  whatsoever,  such 
medical  institution  shall  continue  to maintain  and provide the  minimum  standards  as approved  by the 
Commission  till such time as all the candidates are able to complete their study in that  institution.  
48. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission, Autonomous Boards to be public 
servants .—The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Commission, President  and 
Members  of Autonomous  Boards  shall  be deemed,  when  acting  or purporting to act in pursuance of any of 
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning  of section  21 of the Indian  Penal  Code  
(45 of 1860) . 
49. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Commission or any Autonomous Board or a State Medical Council or any 
Committee thereof, or any officer or other employee of the Government or of the Commission acting 
unde r this Act for anything  which  is in good  faith done  or intended  to be done  under  this Act or the rules or 
regulations made  thereunder.  
50. Cognizance of offences. —No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act except upon  a complaint  in writing  made  in this behalf  by an officer  authorised  by the Commission or  
the Ethics  and Registration  Board  or a State  Medical  Council,  as the case may be. 21 
 51. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission. —(1) If, at any time,  the Central  
Government  is of opinion  that–– 
(a) the Commission  is unable  to discharge  the functions  and duties  imposed  on it by or under the 
provisions of this Act;  or 
(b) the Commission  has persistently  made  default  in complying  with any direction issued  by the 
Central  Government  under  this Act or in the discharge  of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this  Act, 
the Central  Government  may, by notification  in the Official  Gazette,  supersede  the Commission for such period,  
not exceeding  six months,  as may be specified  in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central Government shall 
give a reasonable opportunity to the Commission to show cause as to why  it should  not be superseded  and 
shall  consider  the explanations  and objections,  if any, of the  Commission.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Commission, –– 
(a) all the Members  shall,  as from  the date of supersession,  vacate  their offices as  such;  
(b) all the powers,  functions  and duties  which  may, by or under  the provisions of  this Act, be 
exercised  or discharged  by or on behalf  of the Commission,  shall,  until the  Commission  is re-
constituted  under  sub-section  (3), be exercised  and discharged by such person or persons as the 
Central Government may  direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until the Commission  is re-
constituted  under  sub-section  (3), vest in the Central  Government.  
(3) On the expiration  of the period  of supersession  specified  in the notification  issued under sub -section 
(1), the Central Government  may, — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding   six months, as it may 
consider necessary;  or 
(b) re-constitute the Commission by fresh appointment and in such case the Members who 
vacated their offices under clause (a) of sub -section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for  
appointment:  
Provided  that the Central  Government  may, at any time before  the expiration  of the  period  of 
supersession,  whether  as originally  specified  under  sub-section  (1) or as extended  under  this sub-
section,  take action  under  clause  (b) of this sub-section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section (1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earliest  opportunity.  
52. Joint sittings of Commission, National Commission for Indian Systems of Medicine and 
National Medical Commission .—(1) There  shall  be a joint sitting  of the Commission,  the National  
Commission  for Indian System of Medicine and the National Medical Commission, at least once a year, at 
such time and place  as they mutually  appoint,  to enhance  the interface  between  Homoeopathy, Indian System 
of Medicine and modern system of  medicine.  
(2) The Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement by the Chairpersons of the 
Commissions  concerned.  
(3) The joint sitting may, by an affirmative vote of all members present and voting, decide  on 
approving  specific  educational  and medical  modules  or programmes  that could  be introduced in the 
undergraduate and postgraduate courses across medical systems, and promote medical  pluralism . 
53. State Government to promote public health. —Every  State  Government  may,  for the purposes  of 
addressing  or promoting  public health, take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare  
professionals.  
  22 
 54. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central  Government  may, by notification  in the Official  Gazette,  
make  rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular,  and without  prejudice  to the foregoing  power,  such rules  may provide for  all or any of 
the following  matters,  namely: –– 
(a) the manner of appointing ten Members of the Commission on rotational basis  from  amongst  
the nominees  of the States  and Union  territories  in the Advisory Council under clause (b) of             
sub-section (4) of section  4; 
(b) the manner of appointing members under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of section  4; 
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government under clause (c) of                   
sub-section (1) of section  5; 
(d) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members under su b-section (4) of section  6; 
(e) the form and the manner of making declaration under sub -section (6) of section  6; 
(f) the qualifications and experience to be possessed by Secretary under sub-section (2) of 
section 8;  
(g) the salaries and allowances payable  to, and other terms and conditions of the  Secretary,  
officers  and other  employees  of the Commission  under  sub-section  (6) of section  8; 
(h) the other  powers  to be exercised  and other  functions  to be performed  by the Commission under 
clause (j) of sub -section (1) of section  10; 
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and Members of an Autonomous Board under sub-section (2) of section  21; 
(j) the other factors under clause (d) of section  30; 
(k) the manner of submitting list of practitioners under the first proviso to sub -section (1) of 
section  34; 
(l) the form  for preparing  annual  statement  of accounts  under  sub-section  (1) of section  41; 
(m) the time within  which,  and the form  and the manner  in which,  the reports  and statements shall be 
furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to any matter as may be required by the 
Central Government under sub -section (1) of section  42; 
(n) the form and the time for preparing annual report under sub -section (2) of section  42; 
(o) the compensation for the premature termination of employment under the second  proviso  to 
sub-section  (3) of section  58; 
(p) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by  rules.  
55. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) In particular,  and without  prejudice  to the generality  of the foregoing  power,  such regulations  may 
provide  for all or any of the following  matters,  namely: — 
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission under sub -section (4) of 
section 8;  
(b) the procedure i n accordance with which experts and professionals may be engaged and the 
number of such experts and professionals under sub -section (7) of section  8; 
(c) the procedure  to be followed  at the meetings  of Commission,  including  the quorum at its 
meetings under sub -section (3) of section  9; 23 
 (d) the quality and standards to be maintained in education of Homoeopathy under clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section  10; 
(e) the manner  of regulating  medical  institutions,  medical  researches  and medical professionals  
under  clause  (b) of sub-section  (1) of section  10; 
(f) the manner of regulating functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and the 
State Medical Councils under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section  10; 
(g) the procedure  to be followed  at the meetings  of the Medical  Advisory  Council, including the 
quorum at its meetings under sub -section (3) of section  13; 
(h) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the manner in 
which  the National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted under sub -section (2) of section  
14; 
(i) the manner  of conducting  common  counselling  by the designated  authority for admission to 
medical institutions under sub -section (3) of section  14; 
(j) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the manner  in 
which,  the National  Exit Test shall  be conducted  under  sub-section  (2) of section  15; 
(k) the manner  in which  a person  with foreign  medical  qualification  shall  qualify National Exit Test 
under sub -section (4) of section  15; 
(l) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the manner in which 
admission to postgraduate courses shall be conducted under sub -section (2) of section  16; 
(m) the manner  of conducting  common  counselling  by the designated  authority for admission to 
the postgraduate seats in all medical institutions under sub-section (3) of section  16; 
(n) the manner of conducting the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy and the 
designated authority through whom such test shall be conducted under sub -section (2) of section  
17; 
(o) the number  of, and the manner  in which,  experts,  professionals,  officers  and other employees 
shall be made available by the Commission to the Autonomous Boards under section  23; 
(p) the manner in which decisions of the Autonomous Boards shall be made under sub -section (2) 
of section  24; 
(q) the competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels under clause (b) of sub -section (1) of 
section  26; 
(r) the manner  of setting  up of medical  institutions  for imparting  undergraduate, postgraduate and 
super -speciality courses in Homoeopathy under clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section  26; 
(s) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and examinations  in 
medical  institutions  under  clause  (d) of sub-section  (1) of section  26; 
(t) the standards  and norms  for infrastructure,  faculty  and quality  of education and research in 
medical institutions of Homoeopathy under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section  26; 
(u) the manner  of regulating  professional  conduct  and promoting  medical  ethics under clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section  27; 
(v) the procedure for assessment and rating of the medical institutions under clause (a) of sub -
section (1) of section  28; 24 
 (w) the manner  of carrying  out inspections  of medical  institutions  for assessing and rating under 
clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section  28; 
(x) the manner  of conducting,  and the manner  of empanelling  independent  rating agencies to 
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions under clause (d) of sub -section (1) of section  28; 
(y) the manner of making available on website or in public domain the assessment and ratings 
of medical institutions under clause (e) of sub -section (1) of section  28; 
(z)  the  measures  to be taken  against  a medical  institution  for failure  to maintain the minimum 
essential standards under clause (f) of sub -section (1) of section  28; 
(za) the form  of scheme,  the particulars  thereof,  the fee to be accompanied  and the manner of 
submitting scheme for establishing new medical college under sub-section (2) of section  29; 
(zb) the manner  of preferring  an appeal  to the Commission  for approval  of the scheme under sub -
section (5) of section  29; 
(zc) the areas in respect of which criteria may be relaxed under the proviso to section 30;  
(zd) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for professional  or ethical  
misconduct  of registered  medical  practitioner  and the procedure for receiving complaints and 
grievances by the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, under sub -section (2) of section  
31; 
(ze) the act of commission  or omission  which  amounts  to professional  or ethical misconduct  under  
clause  (b) of the Explanation  to section  31; 
(zf) other particulars to be contained in a National Register under  sub-section (1) of 
section 32; 
(zg) the form,  including  the electronic  form  and the manner  of maintaining  the National Register 
under sub -section (2) of section  32; 
(zh) the manner  in which  any name  or qualification  may be added  to, or removed from, the 
National Register and the grounds for removal thereof, under sub-section (3) of section  32; 
(zi) the manner  of entering  the title, diploma  or qualification  in the State  Register or the National 
Register under sub -section (3) of section  33; 
(zj) the manner  in which,  and the period  for which  temporary  registration  may be permitted  to a 
foreign  citizen  under  the second  proviso  to sub-section  (1) of section  34; 
(zk) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a University or 
medical institution in India under sub -section (1) of section 35;  
(zl) the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition under sub -section (3) of 
section 35;  
(zm) the manner  of preferring  an appeal  to the Commission  for grant  of recognition under sub -section 
(5) of section  35; 
(zn) the manner  of including  a medical  qualification  in the list maintained  by the Board under sub -
section (6) of section  35; 
(zo) the manner  in which  the Homoeopathy  Education  Board  shall list and maintain the medical 
qualifications which have been granted recognition before the date of commencement of this Act, 
under sub -section (8) of section  35; 25 
 (zp) the manner in which the Commission shall list and maintain the medical qualifications  which  
have  been  granted  recognition  before  the date of commencement of this Act, under sub -section (4) of 
section  36. 
56. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every  rule and every  regulation  made  
under  this Act shall  be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made,  before  each House  of Parliament,  while  it is in 
session,  for a total period  of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and  if, before  the expiry  of the session  immediately  following  the session  or the 
successive sessions  aforesaid,  both Houses  agree  in making  any modification  in the rule or regulation or  
both Houses  agree  that the rule or regulation  should  not be made,  the rule or regulation . 
Shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regulation.  
57. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty  arises  in giving  effect  to the provisions  of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary, for the removing of the  
difficulty:  
Provided  that no order  shall  be made  under  this section  after the expiry  of a period  of two  years  from  
the commencement  of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of  Parliament.  
58. Repeal and saving. — (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint  in this behalf,  the Homoeopathy  Central  Council  Act, 1973 (59 of 1973)  shall  stand  
repealed  and the Central  Council  of Homoeopathy  constituted  under  section  3 of the said Act shall  stand 
dissolved.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub -section (1), it shall not affect, –– 
(a) the previous operation of the Acts so repealed  or anything duly done or suffered thereunder;  
or 
(b) any  right,  privilege,  obligation  or liability  acquired,  accrued  or incurred  under the Act so 
repealed;  or 
(c) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act so repealed;  or 
(d) any  proceeding  or remedy  in respect  of any such right,  privilege,  obligation, liability, penalty as 
aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such 
penalty may be imposed as if that Act had not been  repealed.  
(3) On the dissolution  of the Central  Council  of Homoeopathy,  the person  appointed as the Chairman 
of that Council and every other person appointed as the Member and any officer and other employees of 
the Council and holding office as such immediately before such dissolution  shall  vacate  their respective  
offices  and such Chairman  and other  Members shall  be entitled  to claim  compensation  not exceeding  three  
months’  pay and allowances  for the premature  termination  of term of their office  or of any contract  of 
service:  
Provided that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the 
Central Council of Homoeopathy appointed on deputation basis to the Central Council of Homoeopathy, 
shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may 
be: 
Provided further that any officer, expert, professional or other employee who has been,  immediately  
before  the dissolution  of the Central  Council  of Homoeopathy  employed on  regular  basis  or on contractual  
basis  by the Council,  shall  cease  to be such officer,  expert, professional or other employees of the Central 
Council and shall be entitled to such compensation  for the premature  termination  of his employment,  which  
shall  not be less than three  months’ pay and allowances, as may be  prescribed.  26 
 (4) Notwithstanding  the repeal  of the aforesaid  enactment,  any order  made,  any licence to  practice  
issued,  any registration  made,  any permission  to start new medical  institution  or to start higher course of 
studies or to increase in the admission capacity granted, any recognition of medical qualifications granted, 
under the Homoeopathy Central Council Act,  1973 (59 of 1973)  which  are in force  as on the date of 
commencement  of this Act shall  continue  to be in force till the date of their expiry for all purposes, as if 
they had been issued or granted under the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made  
thereunder.  
1[(5) Notwithstanding the expiration of the period for reconstitution of the Centra l Council under section 
3A of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973  (59 of 1973) , as inserted by the Homoeopathy Central 
Council (Amendment) Act, 2018  (23 of 2018) , all acts done by the Board of Governors constituted under 
sub-section ( 4) of that secti on and all the powers and functions of the Central Council exercised and 
performed by it under the repealed Act, as amended by the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 2021 (Ord. 6 of 2021), immediately before the commencement of this Act, sh all be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and 
until superseded by anything done or by any action taken under this Act.]  
59. Transitory provisions .—(1) The Commission shall be the successor in interest to the Central 
Council of Homoeopathy  including  its subsidiaries  or owned  trusts  and all the assets  and liabilities  of the 
Central Council of Homoeopathy shall be deemed to have been transferred to the Commission.  
(2) Notwithstand ing the repeal of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act 1973, the educational  and 
medical  standards,  requirements  and other  provisions  of the Homoeopathy Central  Council  Act, 1973  and 
the rules  and regulations  made  thereunder  shall  continue  to be in force and operate till new standards or 
requirements are specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made  thereunder:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the educational and medical standards and 
requirements under th e enactment under repeal and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding  provision  of this Act and shall  continue  in 
force  accordingly  unless  and until superseded by anything or by any action  taken under this  Act. 
(3) The Central Government may take such measures, as may be necessary, for the smooth  transition  
of the dissolved  Central  Council  of Homoeopathy  to the corresponding  to new Commission under this  Act. 
____  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-2021).  
--------------------------The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE ACT, 2020                                                                                                                                         
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                             
Last updated: 17-9-2021  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
3. Constitution of National Commission for Indian System of Medicine . 
4. Composition of Commission.  
5. Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and Members . 
6. Term of office and conditions of service  of Chairperson and Members . 
7. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commission . 
8. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals, officers and other employees of Commission . 
9. Meetings of Commission . 
10. Power and functions of Commission . 
CHAPTER III  
ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
11. Constitution and composition of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine.  
12. Functions of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine.  
13. Meetings of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
NATIONAL EXAMINATION  
14. National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test.  
15. National Exit Test.  
16. Post -Graduate National Entrance Test.  
17. National Teachers ’ Eligibility Test for Indian System of Medicine.  
 
CHAPTER V  
AUTONOMOUS BOARDS  
18. Constitution of Autonomous Boards.  
19. Composition of Autonomous Boards.  
20. Search Committee for appointment of President and Members.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members . 
22. Advisory Committees of experts.  
23. Staff of Autonomous Boards.  
24. Meetings, etc., of Autonomous Boards.  
25. Delegation of powers.  
26. Powers and functions of Autonomous Boards.  
27. Powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine.  
28. Powers and funct ions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of 
Medicine.  
29. Permission for establishment of new medical institution.  
30. Criteria for approving or disapproving scheme.  
31. State Medical Council.  
32. National Register and State Register o f Indian System of Medicine.  
33. Rights of persons to be enrolled in National Register and their obligations thereto.  
34. Rights of persons to practice.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
RECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
35. Recognition of qualification s granted by Universities or medical institutions in India.  
              36. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India.  
37. Withdrawal of recognition or de -recognition of qualification.  
38. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of qualifications.  
CHAPTER VII  
GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS  
39. Grants by Central Government.  
40. National Commission Fund for Indian System of Medicine.  
41. Audit and accounts.  
42. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous Boards.  
44. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.  
45. Information to be furnished by Commission and public ation thereof.  
46. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions.  3 
 SECTIONS  
47. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions.  
48. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission and of Autonomous Boards to be public    
servants.  
49. Protectio n of action taken in good faith.  
50. Cognizance of offences.  
51. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission.  
52. Joint sittings of Commission, National Commission for Homoeopathy and National Medical 
Commission.  
53. State Government to promote public health.  
54. Power to make rules.  
55. Power to make regulations.  
56. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
57. Power to remove difficulties.  
58. Repeal and saving.  
59. Transitory provisions.  
  4 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM O F MEDICINE ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 14 OF 2020  
[20th September, 2020.]  
An Act to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable 
medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high quality medical professionals of In dian 
System of Medicine in all parts of the country; that promotes equitable and universal healthcare that 
encourages community health perspective and makes services of such medical professionals accessible 
and affordable to all the citizens; that promotes  national health goals; that encourages such medical 
professionals to adopt latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an 
objective periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates maintenance o f a 
medical register of Indian System of Medicine for India and enforces high ethical standards in all aspects 
of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing needs and has an effective grievance redressal 
mechanism and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Commission 
for India n System of Medicine Act, 2020.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different pro visions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context oth erwise requires, — 
(a) “Autonomous B oard” means any of the Autonomous Board s constituted under section 18;  
(b) “Board of Ayurveda” means the Boar d constituted under section 18;  
(c) “Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine” means the Boar d 
constituted under section 18;  
(d) “Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa” means the Boar d constituted under section 18;  
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medi cine appointed under section 5;  
(f) “Commission” means the National Commis sion for Indian System of Medici ne constituted 
under section 3;  
(g) “Council” means the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicin e constituted under 
section 11;  
                                                           
1. 7th October, 2020 — S. 3,4,5,6,8,11,18,19,20,21,54 and  55 vide notification No. S.O. 3483(E), dated 7th October, 2020 , see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
   11th June, 2021 — (All the remaining provisions) vide notification No. S.O. 2278(E), dated 11th June, 2021. see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 5 
 (h) “Indian System of Medicine” means the Ashtang Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa 
Systems of Medicine supplemented by such modern advances, scientific and technological 
development as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, declare by 
notification from time to time;  
(i) “licence” means a licence to practice any of  the Indian System of Medicine granted under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 33;  
(j) “Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine” means the Boar d 
constituted under section 18;  
(k) “medical institution” means any institution within or outside India which, grants degrees, 
diplomas or licences in Indian System of Medicine and includes affiliated colleges  and deemed to be 
Universities;  
(l) “Member” means a Member of the Commission ref erred to in section 4 and in cludes the 
Chairperson thereof;  
(m) “National Register” means a National Medical Register for Indian System of Medicine 
maintained by the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine under section 32;  
(n) “noti fication” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notify” shall be construed accordingly;  
(o) “prescribed” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “President” means the President of an Autonomous Bo ard appointe d under section 20;  
(q) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission under this Act;  
(r) “State Medical Council” means a State Medical Council of Indian System of Medicine 
constituted under any law for the time being in force in any State or Union territory for regulating the 
practice and registration of practitioners of Indian System of Medicine in that State or Union territory;  
(s) “State Register” means a State Register for Indian System of Medicine maintained under any 
law for the time bei ng in force in any State or Union territory for registration of practitioner s of 
Indian System of Medicine;  
(t) “University” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956)  and includes a health university.  
CHAPTER II  
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
3. Constitution of National Commission for Indian System of Medicine .—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, constitute a Commission, to be known as the National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine, to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned 
to it, under this Act.  
(2) The Comm ission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by  the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.  
4. Composition of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall consist of t he following persons, 
namely: –– 
(a) a Chairperson;  6 
 (b) fifteen ex officio  Members; and  
(c) twent y-three part -time Members.  
(2) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and 
integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any of the disciplines of Indian System of Medicine from a 
recognised University and having experience of not less than twenty years in any field of Indian System 
of Medicine, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of healthcare delivery, growth 
and development of Indian Syste m of Medicine or its education.  
(3) The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as ex officio Memb ers of the 
Commission, namely: — 
(a) the Presi dent of the Board of Ayurveda;  
(b) the President of the Board o f Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa;  
(c) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board  for Indian System of Medicine;  
(d) the President of the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine;  
(e) Advisor (Ayurveda) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of Ayurveda and 
Advisor (Unani) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of U nani, in the Ministry of 
AYUSH;  
(f) the Director, All India Insti tute of Ayurveda, New Delhi;  
(g) the Director General, Central Council for Research in  Ayurvedic Sciences, New Delhi;  
(h) the Director General, Central Council for Researc h in Unani Medicine, New Delhi;  
(i) the Director General, Central Council for Researc h in Siddha, Chennai;  
(j) the Director, Nationa l Institute of Siddha, Chennai;  
(k) the Director, National  Institute of Una ni, Bengaluru;  
(l) the Director, North Eastern Institute on Ayur veda and Homoeopathy, Shillong;  
(m) the Director, Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, Jamnagar; and  
(n) the Director, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur.  
(4) The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part -time Memb ers of the 
Commission, namely: — 
(a) four Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing, who 
have special knowledge and professional experience  in any of the disciplines of Indian System of 
Medicine, Sanskrit, Urdu, Tamil, management, law, health research, science and technol ogy and 
economics;  
(b) ten Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the States and 
Union te rritories in the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine for a term of two years in 
such manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) six members from Ayurveda, one member each from Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa, to be 
appointed from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories, under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 11, in the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine, for a term of 
two years in su ch manner as may be prescribed:  7 
 Provided that no Member shall either himself or through an y of his family members, directly or 
indirectly, own or be associated with or have any dealings with the managing body of a private or non -
government medical institution whi ch is regulated under this Act.  
Explanation .––For the purpose of this section and s ection 19, the term “leader” means the Head of a 
Department or the Head of an Organisation.  
5. Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Central 
Government shall appoint the Chairperson, referred to in section 4 and the President  of the Autonomous 
Boards referred to in section 20 on the recommendation of a  Search Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Cabinet Secreta ry—Chairperson;  
(b) two experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years i n any of the fields of Indian System of Medicine, to be nominated by the Central 
Government —Members;  
(c) one expert, from amongst the Members referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4, 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such mann er as may be prescribed —Member;  
(d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years in the field of Sanskrit, Urdu, Tamil, health research, management, law, economics or science 
and technology, to be nomin ated by  the Central Government —Member;  
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of AYUSH, to be the 
Conv enor—Member:  
Provided that for selection of part -time Members of the Commission referred to in clause ( a) of sub -
section ( 4) of section 4, the Secretary referred to in section 8 and other Members of the Autonomous 
Boards referred to in section 20, the Search Committee shall consist of Members specified in the clauses 
(b) to ( d) and Joint Secretary to the Government of India i n the Ministry of AYUSH as Convenor -
Member and chaired by Secretary to the Government of India in c harge of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of any vacancy, 
including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member, or within three 
months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Search 
Committee  for filling up of the vacancy.  
(3) The Search Committee shall recommend a panel of  at least three names fo r every vacancy referred 
to it. 
(4) Before recommending any person for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the 
Commission, the Search Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or 
other int erest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions  as such Chairperson or Member.  
(5) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy 
or absence of a Member in the Search Committee.  
(6) Subject to the p rovisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 5), the Search Committee may regulate its own 
procedure.  
6. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. ––(1) The Chairperson 
and Members (other than ex officio  Members) and Members appointed under clause s (b) and (c)  of  
sub- section ( 4) of section 4 shall hold office for a term not exceeding four years and shall not be eligible 
for any ext ension or re -appointment:  
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after atta ining the age of seventy years.  8 
 (2) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall continue as long as he holds the office by vir tue 
of which he is such Member.  
(3) Where a Member, other than an ex officio  Member, is absent from three consecutive ordinary 
meetings of the  Commission and the cause of such absence is not attributable to any valid reason in the 
opinion of the Commission, such Member shall be deemed to hav e vacated the seat.  
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and Member, other than an ex officio  Member, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The  Chairperson or a Member may, –– 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing a notice of not less than three month s to the Central 
Government; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance wi th the provisions of section 7:  
Provided that such person may be relieved from duties earlier than three months or allowed to 
continue beyond three months until a successor is appointed, if the  Central Government so decides.  
(6) The Chairperson and every Member of the Commission shall make declaration of his assets and 
liabilities at the time of entering upon his office and at the time of demitting his office and also declare his 
professional and commercial engagem ent or involvement, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
and such declaration shall be published on  the website of the Commission.  
(7) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not accept, for a period of two 
years from th e date of demitting such office, any employment, in any capacity, including as a consultant 
or an expert, in any private Medical institution of Indian System of Medicine or, whose matter has been 
dealt with by such Chairperson or Member, directly or indirectly:  
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing such person from accepting 
an employment in a body or institution including Medical institution of Indian System of Medicine, 
controlled or maintained by the Central Go vernment or a State Government.  
(8) Nothing in sub -section ( 7) shall prevent the Central Government from permitting the Chairperson 
or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including as a consultant or an expert, in any 
private Medical institution  of Indian System of Medicine, whose matter has been dealt with by such 
Chairperson or Member.  
7. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commission .––(1) The Central Government may, by 
order, remove from office, the Chairp erson or any other Member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governmen t, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Member; or  
(d) is of un sound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functi ons as 
a Member; or  
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicia l to public interest.  
 (2) No Member shall be removed under clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  9 
 8. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals, officers and other employees of 
Commission .––(1) There shall be a Secretariat for the Commission to be headed by a Secretary, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in accordance wi th the provisions of section 5.  
(2) The Secretary of the Commission shall be a person of proven administrative capacity and 
integrity, possessing such qualifications and e xperience as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Secretary shall be appointed by the Central Government for a term of four years and he shall 
not be eligible for a ny extension or re -appointment.  
(4) The Secretary shall discharge such functions of the Commission as are assigned to him by the 
Commission and as may be specified by regulations made un der this Act.  
(5) The Commission may appoint such officers and other employees, as it cons iders necessary, 
against the posts created by the Central Government for the efficient discharge o f its functions under this 
Act. 
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, 
officers and other emp loyees of the Commission shall be s uch as may be prescribed.  
(7) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by regulations, such 
number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge  of 
Indian System of Medicine, and experience in fields including medical education in Indian System of 
Medicine, public health, management, economics, accreditation, patient advocacy, health research, 
science and technology, administration, finance, accou nts or law as it deems necessary, to assist the 
Commission in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
9. Meetings of Commission .––(1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such 
time and place as may b e appointed by the Chairperson . 
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if, for any reason, the 
Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Commission, any Member being the President of the 
Autonomous Boards, nominated by the Chairperso n shall presid e at the meeting.  
(3) Unless the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Commission is otherwise provided by 
regulations, one -half of the total number of Members of the Commission including the Chairperson shall 
constitute the quorum and all decisi ons of the Commission shall be taken by a majority of the members, 
present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the President 
of the Autonomous Board nominated under sub -section ( 2), shall have the casting vo te. 
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the Commission  shall 
vest in the Chairperson.  
(5) No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the cons titution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a Member.  
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission, except the decision rendered 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 31, may pr efer an appeal to the Central Government against such decision 
within fifteen days of the communication of such decision.  
10. Power and functions of Commission .––(1) The Commission shall perform th e following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of Indian 
System of Medicine and make necess ary regulations in this behalf;  10 
 (b) lay down policies for regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical 
professionals and make necess ary regulations in this behalf;  
(c) assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for health and healthcare 
infrastructure and develop a road map  for meeting such requirements;  
(d) frame guidelines and lay down policies by making such regu lations as may be necessary for 
the proper functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and the State Medical Councils of 
Indian Syste m of Medicine;  
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous Boards;  
(f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State Medical Councils 
of Indian System of Medicine of the guidelines framed and regulations made under this Act for their 
effect ive functioning under this Act;  
(g) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to deci sions of th e Autonomous Boards;  
(h) ensure observance of professional ethics in Medical profession and to promote ethical conduct 
during the provision of  care by medical practitioners;  
(i) frame guidelines for determination of fees and all other charges in respect of  fifty per cent. of 
seats in private medical institutions and deemed to be Universities which are governed un der the 
provisions of this Act;  
(j) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by signature of the Secretary 
and the Commission may delegate such of its powers on administrative and financial matters, as it deems 
fit, to the Secretary.  
(3) The Commission may constitute sub -committees and deleg ate such of its powers to them as may 
be necessary to enable them to accomplish specific tasks.  
CHAPTER III  
ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
11. Constitution and composition of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine .––(1) The 
Central Government shall, by notification, constitute an advisory body to be known as the Advisory 
Council  for Indian System of Medicine.  
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission shall  be the ex offi cio Chairperson of the Council;  
(b) every Member of the Commission shall be ex officio  member of the Council;  
(c) one member, to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in that State, 
possessing qualifications in the  Indian System of medicine, to be nominated by that State 
Government, and one member to represent each Union territory, who is the Vice -chancellor of a 
University in that Union territory, possessing qualifications in the Indian System of Medicine, to be 
nominated by the Ministry of Home Affa irs in the Government of India:  
Provided that where the Vice -Chancellor possessing qualifications in the Indian System of 
Medicine is not available, a Dean or a Head of Faculty possessing qualifications in the Indian Sys tem 
of Medicine shall be nominated;  
(d) one member to represent each State and each Union territory from amongst elected members 
of the State Medical Council of Indian System of Medicine, to be nominated by that State Medical 
Council;  11 
 (e) the Chairman , University Grants Commission;  
(f) the Director, National Assess ment and Accreditation Council;  
(g) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons holding the 
post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Insti tutes of Management and the 
Indian Institutes of Science.  
12. Functions of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine .—(1) The Council shall be the 
primary platform through which the States and Union territories may put forth their views and concerns 
before the Commission and help in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical 
education, trai ning, research and development.  
(2) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain, and to 
coordinate maintenan ce of, the minimum standards in all matters relating to medical education, trai ning, 
research and development.  
(3) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to enhance equitable access to medical 
education.  
13. Meetings of Advisory Council for In dian System of Medicine .—(1) The Council shall meet 
atleast twice a year at such time and place as may  be decided by the Chairperson.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Council and if for any reason the Chairperson 
is unable to attend a meeting of the Council, such other member as nominated by the Chairperson shall 
preside over the meeting.  
(3) Unless the procedure is otherwise provided by regulations, one -half of the members of the 
Council including the Chairperson shall form the quorum and all acts of the Council shall be decided by a 
majority of the members present and voting.  
CHAPTER IV  
NATIONAL EXAMINATION  
14. Nati onal Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test. —(1) There shall be a uniform National Eligibility -
cum-Entrance Test for admission to the undergraduate courses in each of the disciplines of the Indian 
System of Medicine in all medical instit utions governed under this A ct: 
Provided that National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test shall be exempted for student s who have taken 
admission in –– 
(i) Pre -tib for Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery; and  
(ii) Pre -Ayurveda for Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery.  
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test in English and in such 
other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, as m ay be specified by 
regulations.  
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner  of conducting common counselling by 
the designated authority for admission to all the medical institutions governed under this Act:  
Provided that the common counselling shall be conducted b y the designated authority of –– 
(i) the Central Gover nment, for Al l India seats; and  
(ii) the State Government, for the rema ining seats at the State level.  
(4) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of admission of students to 
undergraduate courses who are exempted under sub -section ( 1). 12 
 15. National Exit  Test.—(1) A common final year undergraduate medical examination, to be known 
as the National Exit Test, shall be held for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of 
respective disciplines of Indian System of Medicine and for enrollment in the  State Register or Nationa l 
Register, as the case may be.  
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Exit Test for Indian System of Medicine in English 
and in such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner as may be specified  
by regulations.  
(3) The National Exit Test shall become operational on such date, within three years from the date on 
which this Act comes into force, as may be appointed by the Centr al Government, by notification.  
(4) Any person with a foreign medical qu alification shall have to qualify national Exist Test for the 
purpose of obtaining licence to practice as medical practitioner of Indian System of Medicine and for 
enrollment in the State Register or the National Register, as the case may be, in such manne r as may be 
specified by regulations.  
16. Post -Graduate National Entrance Test .—(1) A uniform Post -Graduate National Entrance Test 
shall be conducted separately for admission to postgraduate courses in each discipline of the Indian 
System of Medicine in al l medical institutions governed under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Entrance Test for admission to postgraduate courses 
in English and in such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, as may be 
specif ied by regulations.  
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common counselling by 
the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate seats in all medical institutions governed under 
this Act.  
17. National Teachers ’ Eligibility Test for Indian System of Medicine. —(1) A National Teachers’ 
Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the postgraduates of each discipline of Indian System of 
Medicine who desire to take up teaching profession in that discipline.  
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Indian System of 
Medicine through such designated authority and in such manner as m ay be specified by regulations.  
(3) The National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Indian System of Med icine shall become operational 
on such date, within three years from the date on which this Act comes into force, as may be noti fied by 
the Central Government:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to t he date 
notified under sub -section ( 3). 
CHAPTER V  
AUTONOMOUS BOARDS  
18. Constitution of Autonomous Boards .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute the following Autonomous Boards, under the overall supervision of the Commission, to 
perform the functions assigned to such Boards under this Act, namely: — 
(a) the Board of Ayurveda;  
(b) the Board  of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa;  
(c) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for  Indian System of Medicine; and  
(d) the Board of Ethics and Registration for  Indian System of Medicine.  13 
 (2) Each Board referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be an autonomous bo dy which shall carry out its 
functions under this Act in accordance with the regulations made by the Commission.  
19. Composition of Autonomous Boards .—(1) The composition of the Autonomous Boar ds shall be 
as under, namely: –– 
(a) the Board of Ayurveda shall  consist of a President and four Members from the Ayurveda 
disciplin e of Indian System of Medicine;  
(b) the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa shall consist of a President and two Members 
from each of the Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa discipline s of Indi an System of Medicine;  
(c) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall consist of a 
President and eight Members:  
 Provided that the President and six out of eight Members shall be chosen from the Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Sowa -Rigpa  and Unani disciplines of Indian System of Medicine in such manner that at least one Member 
represents each such discipline separately, and the remaining two Members shall be accreditation experts;  
(d) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System  of Medicine shall consist of  a 
President and eight Members:  
Provided that the President and six out of eight Members shall be chosen from the Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Sowa -Rigpa and Unani disciplines of Indian System of Medicine in such manner that at least one Member 
represents each such discipline separately, and the remaining two Members shall be chosen from any of 
the disciplines of quality assurance, public health , law or patient advocacy.  
(2) The President and Members of the Autonomous Boards to be chosen u nder sub -section ( 1) shall 
be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing postgraduate 
degree in respective disciplines from a recognised University and having experience of not less than 
fifteen years in respec tive fields, out of which at least se ven years shall be as a leader:  
Provided that seven years as leader in the case of the President and Member from Indian System of 
Medicine shall be in the area of health, growth and development of education in Indian Sy stem of 
Medicine.  
20. Search Committee for appointment of President and Members .—The Central Government 
shall appoint the President and Members of the Autonomous Boards on the basis of the recommendations 
made in accordance with the procedure specified in section 5 by the Search Committee constituted 
thereunder.  
21. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members .—(1) The President and 
Members of each Autonomous Board shall hold the office for a term not exceeding four years and shall 
not be eligible for any extension or re -appointment:  
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after atta ining the age of s eventy years.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the President 
and Members of an Autonomous Boards shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The provisions contained in sub -sections ( 3), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of section 6 relating to the terms 
and conditions of service of, and in section 7 relating to removal from office, the Chairperson and 
Members of the Commission shall also be applicable to the President and Members of the Autonomous 
Boards.  
22. Advisor y Committees of experts .—(1) Each Autonomous Board, except the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Indian System of Medicine, shall be assisted by such advisory Committees of experts, as 
may be constituted by the Commission, for the efficient discharge of  the functions of such Boards under 
this Act.  14 
 (2) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall be assisted by such 
ethics committees of experts, as may be constituted by the Commission, for the efficient discharge of the 
functi ons of that Boards under this Act.  
23. Staff of Autonomous Boards .—The experts, professionals, officers and other employees 
appointed under section 8 shall be made available to the Autonomous Boards in such number and in such 
manner, as may be specified by  regulations made by the Commission.  
24. Meetings, etc., of Autonomous Boards .—(1) Every Autonomous Board shall meet at least once 
a month at such ti me and place as it may appoint.  
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, all decision s of the Autonomous Boards 
shall be made by consensus and if consensus is not possible, decision shall be made by majority of votes 
of the President and Members.  
(3) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of an Autonomous Board may prefer an appeal to the 
Commission against such decision within thirty days of the communication of such decision.  
25. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Commission may delegate all or any of its administrative and 
financial powers to the President of each Autonomous Board to enab le such Board to function smoothly 
and efficiently.  
(2) The President of an Autonomous Board may further delegate any of his powers to a Member or 
officer of that Board.  
26. Powers and functions of Autonomous Boards .—(1) The Board of Ayurveda, in respect o f the 
discipline of Ayurveda, and the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, in respect of the disciplines of 
Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, shall perform the following functions 
in respect of their respective disciplines, namely: — 
(a) determine the standards of education at the undergraduate, postgraduate and super -speciality 
levels and overse e all aspects relating thereto;  
(b) develop a competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels in accordance with the 
regulations ma de under this Act, in such manner that it develops appropriate skill, knowledge, 
attitude, values and ethics among the postgraduate and superspeciality students and enables them to 
provide healthcare, to impart medical education a nd to conduct medical rese arch;  
(c) frame guidelines on setting up of medical institutions for imparting undergraduate, 
postgraduate and super -speciality courses in Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, having 
regard to the needs of the country, the global norms and the r egulatio ns made under this Act;  
(d) determine minimum requirements and standards for conducting of courses and examinations 
in medical institutions, having regard to the needs of creativity at local levels and the r egulations 
made under this Act;  
(e) determine sta ndards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education and 
research in medical institutions of Indian System of Medicine, in accordance with the r egulations 
made under this Act;  
(f) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosure, electronica lly or otherwise, by medical 
institutions of Indian System of Medicine in respect of their functions that has a bearing on the 
interest of various stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission and the Government;  
(g) facilitate development a nd training of faculty members;  
(h) facilitate research programmes;  
(i) grant recognition to medica l qualifications at all levels.  15 
 (2) The Board of Ayurveda and the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa  may, in the discharge of 
their functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it 
deems necessary.  
27. Powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine .—
(1) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall perform the  following 
functions, namely: –– 
(a) maintain a National Register of all licensed practitioners of Indian System of Medicine in 
accordance wit h the provisions of section 32;  
(b) regulate  professional conduct and promote medical ethics in accordance with the regulations 
made under this Act:  
Provided that the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall ensure 
compliance with the code of professional and ethical con duct through the State Medical Council, in a 
case where such State Medical Council has been conferred power to take disciplinary actions in 
respect of professional or ethical misconduct by medical practitione rs under respective State Acts;  
(c) develop mech anisms to have continuous interaction with State Medical Councils of Indian 
System of Medicine to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of medical practitioner s of Indian 
System of Medicine;  
(d) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to the ac tions taken by a State Medical Council 
under section 31.  
(2) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine may, in the discharge of its 
functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems  
necessary.  
28. Powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of 
Medicine .––(1) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall perform 
the following functions, namely: –– 
(a) determine the procedu re for assessment and rating of medical institutions on the basis of their 
compliance with the standards laid down by the Board of Ayurveda or, as the case may be, the Board 
of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, in accordance with the r egulations made under thi s Act;  
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution or to start any postgraduate 
course or to increase number of seats, in accordance wit h the provisions of section 29;  
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions in 
accordance with the r egulations made under this Act:  
Provided that the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine may, if it 
deems necessary, hire and authorise any other third party agency or persons for carrying out 
inspections of medical institutions for assessin g and rating such institutions:  
Provided further that where inspection of medical institutions is carried out by such third party 
agency or persons authorised by the Medical Assessment and Ra ting Board for Indian System of 
Medicine, it shall be obligatory on such institutions to provide access to such  agency or person;  
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies to conduct, assess 
and rate all medical institut ions, within such period of their opening, and every year thereafter, at such 
time, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations;  
(e) make available on its website or in public domain, the assessment and ratings of medical 
institutions at regular  intervals, in accordance with the r egulations made under this Act;  16 
 (f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission for withdrawal of 
recognitio n, against a medical institution for its failure to maintain the minimum essential standards 
specified by the Board of Ayurveda or, as the case may be, the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -
Rigpa, in accordance with the r egulations made under this Act.  
(2) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine may, in the discharge 
of its functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it 
deems necessary.  
29. Permission for establishment of new medical  institution .––(1) No person shall establish a new 
medical institution or start any postgraduate course or increase number of seats without obtaining prior 
permission of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board  for Indian System of Medicine.  
Explanation .–– For the purpose of this sub -section, the term “person” includes any University, trust 
or any other body, but does not include the Central Government.  
(2) For the purpose of obtaining permission under sub -section ( 1), a person may submit a scheme to 
the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine in such form, containing such 
particulars, accompanied by such fee, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) While considering the scheme received under sub -section ( 2), the Medical Assessment and Rating 
Board for Indian System of Medicine shall have regard to the standards of education and research, the 
standards and norms for infrastructure and faculty, the guidelines on setting up of medical institutions and 
other requi rements determined by the Board of Ayurveda or, as the case may be, the Board of Unani, 
Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa under section 26, and pass an order either approving or disapproving the scheme 
within three months from the date of receipt of such scheme:  
Provi ded that before disapproving such scheme, an opportunity  to rectify the defects, if any, shall be  
given to the person concerned.  
(4) Where a scheme is approved under sub -section ( 3), such approval shall be the permission under 
sub-section ( 1) to estab lish a new medical institution.  
(5) Where a scheme is disapproved under sub -section ( 3), or where no order is passed within three 
months of submitting a scheme under sub -section ( 2), the person concerned may prefer an appeal to the 
Commission within fifteen day s of such disapproval or, as the case may be, after lapse of three months, in 
such manner as m ay be specified by regulations.  
(6) Where the Commission has disapproved the scheme or no order has been passed within fifteen 
days from the date of preferring ap peal under sub -section ( 5), the person concerned may prefer a second 
appeal to the Central Government within seven days of communication of such disapproval or, as the case 
may be, lapse of sp ecified period of fifteen days.  
(7) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine may conduct 
evaluation and assessment of any University or medical institution at any time, either directly or through 
any other expert, having integrity and experience in medical profession, without any prior not ice and 
assess and evaluate the performance, standards and benchmarks of such University or medical institution.  
30. Criteria for approving or disapproving scheme .––While approving or disapproving a scheme 
under section 29, the Medical Assessment and Ratin g Board for Indian System of Medicine, or the 
Commission, as the case may be, shall take into consideration t he following criteria, namely: — 
(a) adequacy of infrastructure and financial resource s; 
(b) whether adequate academic faculty, non -teaching staff, and other necessary facilities have 
been provided to ensure proper functioning of medical institution or would be provided within the 
time-limit specified in the scheme;  17 
 (c) whether adequate hospital facilities have been provided or would be provided withi n the time -
limit specified in the scheme;  
(d) such other factors as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, the criteria may be 
relaxed for the medical institutions which are set up in such areas as may be specified by the 
regulations.  
31. State Medical Council .––(1) The State Government shall, by notification, within three years of 
the commencement of this Act, establish a State Medical Council for Indian System of Medicine in that 
State if no suc h Council exists in that State.  
(2) Where a State Act confers power upon the State Medical Council to take disciplinary actions in 
respect of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered practitioner of Indian System of 
Medicine, the State Medical C ouncil shall act in accordance with the regulations made, and the gui delines 
framed, under this Act:  
Provided that till such time as a State Medical Council for Indian System of Medicine is established 
in a State, the Board of Ethics and Registration for I ndian System of Medicine shall receive the 
complaints and grievances relating to any professional or ethical misconduct against a registered 
practitioner of Indian System of Medicine in that State in accordance with such procedure as m ay be 
specified by re gulations:  
Provided further that the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine or, as the 
case may be, the State Medical Council shall give an opportunity of hearing to such practitioner before 
passing any order or taking any action, i ncluding imposition of any monetary penalty, against such 
person.  
(3) A practitioner of Indian System of Medicine who is aggrieved by the order passed or the action 
taken by –– 
(a) the State Medical Council under sub -section ( 2) may prefer an appeal to the Board of Ethics 
and Registration for Indian System of Medicine and the decision, if any, of the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Indian System of Medicine thereupon shall be binding on such State Medical 
Council, unless a second appeal is p referred und er sub -section ( 4); 
(b) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine under the first proviso to 
sub-section ( 2) may pref er an appeal to the Commission.  
(4) A medical practitioner of Indian system of medicine who is aggrieved by the de cision of the 
Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine, may prefer an appeal to the Commission 
within sixty days of communication of such decision.  
Explanation .—For the purposes  of this Act, — 
(a) “State” includes Union territory and the expressions “State Government” and “State Medical 
Council for Indian System of Medicine”, in relation to a Union territory, shall respectively mean the 
“Central Government” and “Union Territory Medical Council for Indian System of Medicine”;  
(b) the expression “professional or ethical misconduct” includes any act of commission or 
omission, as may be specified by regulations.  
32. National Register and State Register of Indian System of Medicine .––(1) The Board of Et hics 
and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall maintain a National Register containing the name, 
address, all recognised qualifications possessed by a licensed medical practitioner of the Indian System of 
Medicine and such other particulars as m ay be specified by regulations.  18 
 (2) The National Register shall be maintained in such form, including in electronic form and in such 
manner as m ay be specified by regulations.  
(3) The manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed fr om, the National 
Register and the grounds for removal thereof, shall be such as may b e specified by the regulations.  
(4) The National Register shall be made available to the public by placing it on the website of the 
Board of Ethics and Registration  for In dian System of Medicine.  
(5) Every State Medical Council shall maintain and regularly update the State Register in the 
specified electronic format and supply a physical copy of the same to the Board of Ethics and Registration 
for Indian System of Medicine within three months o f the commencement of this Act.  
(6) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall ensure electronic 
synchronization of the National Register and the State Register in such a manner that any change in one 
such register is automatically reflected in the other register.  
33. Rights of persons to be enrolled in National Register and their obligations thereto .––(1) Any 
person who has a recognised qualification in Indian System of Medicine under this Act and qualifie s the 
National Exit Test held under section 15 shall be granted a licence to practice Indian System of Medicine 
and shall have his name and qualifications enrolled first in the State Register and subsequently in the 
National Register maintained under this Act: 
Provided that a person who has been registered in the Central Register of Indian System of Medicine 
maintained under the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970)  prior to the coming into 
force of this Act and before the National Exit Tes t becomes operational under sub -section ( 3) of section 
15, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the National Register 
maintained under this Act.  
(2) No person who has obtained a qualification in Indian System of Medicin e from a medical 
institution established in any country outside India and is recognised as a medical practitioner of Indian 
System of Medicine in that country, shall, after the commencement of this Act and the National Exit Test 
for Indian System of Medici ne becomes operational under sub -section ( 3) of section 15, be enrolled in the 
National Register for Indian System of Medicine, unless he qualifies the National Exit Test for Indian 
System of Medicine.  
(3) When a person whose name is entered in the State Register or the National Register, as the case 
may be, obtains any title, diploma or qualification for proficiency in sciences or medicine which is a 
recognised qualification under section 35 or section 36 , as the case may be, he shall be entitled to have 
such title, diploma or qualification entered against his name in the State Register or the National Register, 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
34. Rights of persons to practice .–– (1) No person other than a person who is enrolled in the State 
Register or the National Register, as the case may be, shall — 
(a) be allowed to practice Indian System of Medici ne as a qualified practitioner;  
(b) hold office as a physician or surgeon or any other office, by whatever name called, which is 
meant to be held by a physician or surgeon, as the case may be;  
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate  
required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner;  
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under section 45 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  on any matter rel ating to Indian System of Medicine:  
Provided that the Commission shall submit a list of such practitioners to the Central Government 
in su ch manner as may be prescribed:  19 
 Provided further that a foreign citizen who is enrolled in his country as a practition er of Indian 
System of Medicine in accordance with the law regulating the registration of such practitioners in that 
country may be permitted temporary registration in India for such period and in such manner as m ay 
be specified by regulations.  
(2) Any per son who acts in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
(3) Nothing contained  in this section shall affect –– 
(a) the right of a person enrolled in a State Register as practitioner of Indian System of Medicine 
to practice in any State merely on the ground that he does not possess, as on the date of 
commencement of this Act, a recognised medical qualification in  the Indian System of Medicine;  
(b) the privileges, including the right to practice any system of medicine, conferred by or under 
any law for the time being in force in a State on the practitioners of Indian System of Medicine 
enrolled in th e State registe r of that State;  
(c) the right of a person who has been practicing Indian System of Medicine for not less than five 
years in a State, to continue to practice in that State in which a State Register of Indian System of 
Medicine is not maintained as on the d ate of commencement of this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
RECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE  
35. Recognition of qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India .––(1) 
The medical qualifications in Indian System of Medicine at undergraduate or postgraduate or  
super -speciality level granted by any University or medical institution in India shall be listed and 
maintained by the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, S iddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations and such medical qualification shall be a recognised 
medical qualification for the purpos es of this Act.  
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which gr ants an undergraduate or postgraduate or 
super -speciality qualification in Indian System of Medicine not included in the list maintained by the 
Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, may apply to that 
Board for granting recognition to such qualification.  
(3) The Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, shall 
examine the application for grant of recognition to a qualification in Indian System of Medicine within a 
period o f six months in such manner as m ay be specified by regulations.  
(4) Where the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, 
decides to grant recognition to the qualification in Indian System of Medicine, it shall inclu de such 
qualification in the list maintained by it and shall also specify therein the date of effect of such 
recognition, otherwise it shall communicate its decision not to grant recognition to the medical 
qualification to the concerned Uni versity or medic al institution.  
(5) The aggrieved University or the medical institution may prefer an appeal to the Commission 
within a period of sixty days from the date of communication of the decision of the Board of Ayurveda or 
the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigp a, as the case may be, in such manner as m ay be specified by 
regulations.  
(6) The Commission shall examine the appeal received under sub -section ( 5) within a period of two 
months and if it decides that recognition may be granted to such medical qualification, it may direct the 
concerned Board to include such qualification in the list maintained by that Board in such manner as m ay 
be specified by regulations.  20 
 (7) Where the Commission decides not to grant recognition under sub -section ( 6) or fails to decide 
within the specified period, the aggrieved University or medical institution may prefer a second appeal to 
the Central Government within a period of thirty days from the date of communication of such decision or 
lapse of specif ied period, as the case may be.  
(8) All medical qualifications which have been recognised before the date of commencement of this 
Act and are included in the Second Schedule and Third Schedule to the Indian Medicine Central Council 
Act, 1970  (48 of 1970) , shall also be liste d and maintained by the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of 
Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
36. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India .––(1) 
Whe re an authority in any country outside India which, by the law of that country is entrusted with the 
recognition of qualifications of Indian System of Medicine in that country, makes an application to the 
Commission for granting recognition to such qualifi cation in India, the Commission may, subject to such 
verification as it deems necessary, either grant or refuse to grant recognition to that medical qualification.  
(2) Where the Commission grants recognition to any medical qualification under sub -section ( 1), such 
qualification shall be a recognised qualification for the purposes of this Act and shall be included in the 
list maintained by the Commission in s uch manner as may be specified:  
Provided that in case the Commission decides not to grant recognition  to any qualification, the 
Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such authority before refu sing to grant 
such recognition.  
(3) Where the Commission refuses to grant recognition to a medical qualification under  
sub-section ( 2), the Authority concerned may prefer an appeal to the Central Gover nment for grant of 
recognition.  
(4) All qualifications which have been recognised before the date of commencement of this Act and 
are included in the Fourth Schedule to the Indian Medicine Cen tral Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970)  shall 
also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act and shall be listed and maintained 
by the Commission in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
37. Withdrawal of recognition or de -recognition of qualification .––(1) Where, upon a report 
received from the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine or otherwise, it 
appears to the Commission that — 
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or th e proficiency required from 
candidates at any examination held by, a University or medical institution do not conform to the 
standards specified by the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the 
case may be; or  
(b) the standards  and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education in medical 
institutions as determined by the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, 
as the case may be, are not adhered to by any University or medical institution, an d such University 
or medical institution has failed to take necessary corrective action to maintain specified minimum 
standards,  
the Commission may initiate action in accordance with the  provisions of sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that the Commission shall, b efore, taking any action for suo motu  withdrawal of recognition 
granted to the medical qualification awarded by a University or medical institution, impose penalty in 
accordance with the provisions of clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28.  
(2) The Commission shall, after making such further inquiry as it deems fit, and after holding 
consultations with the State Government and the authority of the concerned University or medical 
institution, comes to the conclusion that the recognition granted to a medical qualification ought to be 21 
 withdrawn, it may, by order, withdraw recognition granted to such medical qualification and direct the 
Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, as the case may be, to amend the 
entries against t he University or medical institution concerned in the list maintained by that Board to the 
effect that the recognition granted to such qualification is withdrawn with effect from th e date specified in 
that order.  
(3) If the Commission, after verification w ith the authority in any country outside India, is of the 
opinion that a recognised medical qualification which is included in the list maintained by it is to be  
de-recognised, it may, by order, de -recognise such medical qualification and remove it from t he list 
maintained by the Commission with effect from the date of such order.  
38. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of qualifications .––Where the Commission 
deems it necessary so to do, it may, by notification, direct that any qualificatio n in Indian System of 
Medicine granted by a medical institution outside India, after such date, as may be specified in that 
notification, shall be recognised qualificatio n for the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be permitted only if 
such person has been enrolled as a medical practitioner in accordance with the law regulating the 
registration of medical practitioner for the time being in force in that country:  
Provided further that medical  practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be limited to 
such period as may be specified in that order:  
Provided also that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be permitted only 
if such person qualifies National Exit Test.  
CHAPTER VII  
GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS  
39. Grants by Central Government .––The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central 
Government  may think fit.  
40. National Commission Fund for Indian System of Medicine .––(1) There shall be constituted a 
fund to be called “the National Commission Fund for Indian System of Medicine” and t here shall be 
credited thereto — 
(a) all Government grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the Commis sion and the 
Autonomous Boards;  
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such other source as may be decided by it.  
(2) The fund shall be appli ed for making payment towards –– 
(a) the salaries and allowa nces payable to the Chairperson and Members of the Commission, the 
Presidents and Members of the Autonomous Boards and the administrative expenses including the 
salaries and allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the Commission  and 
Auton omous Boards;  
(b) the expenses incurred or to be incurred in carrying out the provisions of this Act including in 
connection with the discharge of the functions of the Commission and the Autonomous Boards.  
41. Audit and accounts .––(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in consultation 
with the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  22 
 (2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Au ditor -General of India and any other persons appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General genera lly has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of, and complete access to, records, books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents 
and papers and to inspect the of fice o f the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually by the Commission to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
42. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government .––(1) The Commission shall 
furnish to the Central Government,  at such time, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed 
or as the Central Government may direct, such reports and statements and such particulars in regard to 
any matter under the jurisdiction of the Commission, as the Central Government ma y, from time to time, 
require.  
(2) The Commission shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the 
report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid by the Central Government, as 
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous Boards .–– 
(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission and the Autonomous 
Boards shall, in exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions under this Act be bound by su ch 
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in wri ting to them from time to 
time:  
Provided that the Commission and the Autonomous Boards shall, as far as practicable, be given an 
opportunity to express their views before any dir ection i s given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
44. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments .––The Central 
Government may give such dir ections, as it may deem necessary, to a State Government for carrying out 
all or any of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions.  
45. Information to be furnished by Commission and publication thereof .––(1) The C ommission 
shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts and other information to the 
Central Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish, in such manner as it may think fit, the reports, minutes, 
abstracts of accounts and other information furnished to it under sub -section ( 1). 
46. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions .––Every university and medical institutions 
covered under this Act shall maintain a website at all times and  display in its website all such information 
as may be required by the Commission or an Autonomous Board, as the case may be.  23 
 47. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions .––(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, any student who  was studying for a degree or diploma in any medical institution 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to so study and complete his course for 
such degree or diploma, and such institution shall continue to provide instructions and hold examination 
for such student in accordance with the syllabus and studies as existed before such commencement, and 
such student shall be deemed to have completed his course of study under this Act and shall be awarded 
degree or diploma under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where recognition granted to a medical institution 
has lapsed, whether by efflux of time or by its voluntary surrender or for any other reason whatsoever, 
such medical institution shall continue to mainta in and provide the minimum standards as approved by 
the Commission till such time as all the candidates are able to complete their study in that institution.  
48. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission and of Autonomous Boards to be public 
servants .––The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Commission and the 
President and Members of Autonomous Boards shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within th e meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
49. Protection of action taken in good faith .–– No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Commission or any Autonomous Board or a State Medical Counci l or any 
Committee thereof, or any officer or other employee of the Government or of the Commission acting 
under this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules 
or regulations made thereunder.  
50. Cognizance of offences .––No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a complaint in writing made in this behalf by an officer authorised by the Commission or 
the Ethics and Registration Board or a State Medical Counci l for Indian System of Medicine, as the case 
may be.  
51. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission .––(1) If, at any time, the Central 
Government is of opinion that –– 
(a) the Commission is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it  by or under  the 
provisions of this Act; or  
(b) the Commission has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provi sions of this Act,  
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Commission for such period, not exceeding 
six months, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central G overnment shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the Commission to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and shall 
consider the explanations and objecti ons, if any, of the Commission.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Commission, –– 
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on beh alf of the Commission, shall until the Commission is  
re-constituted under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the 
Central Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until the Commission is  
re-constituted under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  24 
 (3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified by the notification issued under  
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may, — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six months, a s it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Commission by fresh appointment and in such case the Members who 
vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deem ed disqualified for 
appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this  
sub-section, take action under clause (b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament  at the earliest opportunity.  
52. Joint sittings of Commission, National Commission for Homoeopathy and National Medical 
Commission .––(1) There shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy, and the National Medical Co mmission, at least once a year, at such time and place as they 
mutually appoint, to enhance the interface between Indian System of Medicine, Homoeopathy  and 
modern system of medicine.  
(2) The Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement  by the Chairperson s of the 
Commissions concerned.  
(3) The joint sitting may, by an affirmative vote of all members present and voting, decide on 
approving specific educational and medical modules or programme that could be introduced in the  
under -graduat e and post -graduate courses across medical systems, and promote medical pluralism.  
53. State Government to promote public health .––Every State Government may, for the purposes 
of addressing or promoting public health, take necessary measures to enhance the  capacity of the 
healthcare professionals.  
54. Power to make rules .––(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power,  such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matter s, namely: –– 
(a) the manner of appointing ten Members of the Commission on rotational basis from amongst 
the nominees of the States and Union territories in the Advisory Council under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 4) of section 4;  
(b) the manner of appointing members under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4;  
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(d) the salary an d allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members unde r sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(e) the form and the manner of making declaration under sub -section ( 6) of section 6;  
(f) the qualifications and experience to be possessed by Secretary under sub -section ( 2) of 
 sectio n 8; 
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the Secretary, 
officers and other employees of the Commission unde r sub -section ( 6) of section 8;  25 
 (h) the other powers to be exercised and other functions to be performed by the Commission 
under clause ( j) of sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and Members of an Autonomous Board under  sub-section ( 2) of section 21;  
(j) the other factors under clause ( d) of section 30.  
(k) the manner of submitting a list of practitioners under the first proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 34;  
(l) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts under  sub-section ( 1) of section 41;  
(m) the time within which, and the form and the manner in which, the reports and statements shall 
be furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to any matter as may be required by 
the Central Government under  sub-section ( 1) of section 42;  
(n) the form and the time for preparing annual report under  sub-section ( 2) of section 42;  
(o) the compensation for the premature termination of employment under the second proviso to  
sub-section (3) of section 58;  
(p) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.  
55. Power to make regulations .––(1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission unde r sub -section ( 4) of 
section 8;  
(b) the procedure in accordance with which experts and professionals may be engaged and the 
number of such experts and professionals unde r sub -section ( 7) of section 8;  
(c) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of  Commission, including the quorum at its 
meetings under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(d) the quality and standards to be maintained in education of Indian System of Medicine under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(e) the manner of regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical professionals 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(f) the manner of functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and the State Medical 
Councils under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(g) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Medical Advisory Council, including the 
quorum at its meetings under  sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
(h) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the man ner in 
which the National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted under sub -section ( 2) of section 
14; 
(i) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority for admission to 
medical institutions under  sub-section ( 3) of secti on 14;  
(j) the manner of admission of students to undergraduate courses under  sub-section ( 4) of section 
14; 26 
 (k) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the manner in 
which, the National Exit Test shall be conducted under  sub-section ( 2) of section 15;  
(l) the manner in which a person with foreign medical qualification shall qualify National Exist 
Test under  sub-section ( 4) of section 15;  
(m) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the manner in 
which admission to postgraduate courses shall be conducted under su b-section ( 2) of section 16;  
(n) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority for admission to 
the postgraduate seats in all medical institutions under  sub-section ( 3) of section 16;  
(o) the manner of conducting the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Indian System of 
Medicine and the designated authority through whom such test shall be conducted under  sub-section 
(2) of section 17;  
(p) the number of,  and the manner in which, experts, professionals, officers and other employees 
shall be made available by the Commission to the Auto nomous Boards under section 23;  
(q) the manner in which decisions of the Autonomous Boards shall be made under  sub-section ( 2) 
of section 24;  
(r) the competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 26;  
(s) the manner of imparting undergraduate, postgraduate and super -speciality courses in 
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa un der clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(t) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and examinations in medical 
institutions under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(u) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education and research in 
medical institutions of Indian System of Medicine under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(v) the manner of regulating professional conduct and promoting medical ethics under clause ( b) 
of sub-section ( 1) of section 27;  
(w) the procedure for assessment and rating of the medical institutions under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 28;  
(x) the manner of carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating under 
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 28;  
(y) the manner of conducting, and the manner of empanelling independent rating agencies to 
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 28;  
(z) the manner of making avai lable on website or in public domain the assessment and ratings of 
medical institutions under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 28;  
(za) the measures to be taken against a medical institution for failure to maintain the minimum 
essential standards under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(zb) the form of scheme, the particulars thereof, the fee to be accompanied and the manner of 
submitting scheme for establishing new medical college under  sub-section ( 2) of section 29;  
(zc) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for approval of the scheme under  
sub-section ( 5) of section 29;  
(zd) the areas in respect of which criteria may be relaxed u nder the proviso to section 30;  27 
 (ze) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for professional or 
ethical misconduct of registered medical practitioner and the procedure for receiving complaints and 
grievances by the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine, under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 31;  
(zf) the act of commission or omission which amounts to professional or ethical misconduct under 
clause ( b) of the Explanation to section 31;  
(zg) other particulars to be contained in a National Register under sub -section ( 1) of section 32;  
(zh) the form,  including the electronic form and the manner of maintaining the National Register 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section 32;  
(zi) the manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed from, the 
National Register and the grounds for removal t hereof, under  sub-section ( 3) of section 32;  
(zj) the manner of entering the title, diploma or qualification in the State Register or the National 
Register under  sub-section ( 3) of section 33;  
(zk) the manner in which, and the period for which temporary re gistration may be permitted to a 
foreign citizen under the second proviso to sub -section (1) of section 34;  
(zl) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a University or 
medical institution in India under  sub-section ( 1) of section 35;  
(zm) the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 35;  
(zn) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for grant of recognition under   
sub-section ( 5) of section 35;  
(zo) the manner of including a medical qualification in the list maintained by the Board under 
sub-section (6) of section 35;  
(zp) the manner in which the Board of Ayurveda or the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa 
shall list and maintain the medical qualifications whi ch have been granted recognition before the date 
of commencement of this Act, under sub -section ( 8) of section 35;  
(zq) the manner in which the Commission shall list and maintain the medical qualifications which 
have been granted recognition before the dat e of commencement of this Act, under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 36.  
56. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .––Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case m ay be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
57. Power to remove difficulties .––(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provis ions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it be necessary, f or the removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this A ct. 28 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
house of Parliament.  
58. Repeal and saving .––(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint in this behalf, the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970)  shall 
stand repealed and the Central Council of Indian Medicine constituted under section 3 of the  said Act 
shall stand dissolved.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub -section ( 1), it shall not affect, –– 
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything du ly done or suffered thereunder;  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so 
repealed;  
(c) any penalty incurred in respect of any contraventio n under the Act so repealed; or  
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, priv ilege, obligation, liability, penalty 
as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty may be imposed as if that Act had not been repealed.  
(3) On the dissolution of the Central Council of India n Medicine, the person appointed as the 
Chairman of that Council and every other person appointed as the Member and any officer and other 
employees of the Council and holding office as such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate 
their respective offices and such Chairman and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not 
exceeding three months’ pay and allowances for the premature termination of term of their office  or of 
any contract of service:  
Provided that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the 
Central Council of Indian Medicine appointed on deputation basis to the Central Council of Indian 
Medicine, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to th eir parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the 
case may be:  
Provided further that any officer, expert, professional or other employee who has been, immediately 
before the dissolution of the Central Council of Indian Medicine employed on regular basis or on 
contractual basis by the Council, shall cease to be such officer, expert, professional or other employees of 
the Central Council and shall be entitled to such compensation for the premature termination of his 
employment, which shall not be less than thr ee months’ pay and al lowances, as may be prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid enactment, any order made, any licence to practice 
issued, any registration made, any permission to start new medical institution or to start higher course  of 
studies or to increase in the admission capacity granted, any recognition of medical qualifications granted, 
under the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970) which are in force as on the date of 
commencement of this Act shall continue t o be in force till the date of their expiry for all purposes, as if 
they had been issued or granted under the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder.  
1[(5) Notwithstanding the expiration of the period for reconstitution of the C entral Council under 
section 3A of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970) , as inserted by the Indian 
Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2020  (25 of 2020) , all acts done by the Board of Governors 
constituted under sub -section ( 4) of that section and all the powers and functions of the Central Council 
exercised and performed by it under the repealed Act, as amended by the Indian Medicine Central 
Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021  (Ord. 5 of 2021) , immediately before the commencemen t of this 
Act, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act and shall continue in 
force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or by any action taken under this Act.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2021, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18-8-2021).  29 
 59. Trans itory provisions .––(1) The Commission shall be the successor in interest to the Central 
Council of Indian Medicine including its subsidiaries or owned trusts and all the assets and liabilities of 
the Central Council of Indian Medicine shall be deemed to have been transferred to the Commission.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970  (48 of 1970) , the 
Medical standards, requirements and other provisions of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 
and the rules and regulations made thereunde r shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards 
or requirements are specified under this Act or the rules a nd regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the medical standards and requirements 
unde r the enactment under repeal and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly 
unless and until superseded by anything or by a ny ac tion taken under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may take such appropriate measure as may be necessary for smooth 
transition of the dissolved Central Council of Indian Medicine to the corresponding to new Commission 
under this Act.  
------------------- ---- 
--------------------------The National Forensic Sciences University Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
 
1 
 THE NATIONAL FORENSIC SCIENCES UNIVERSITY ACT, 2020  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Forensic Sciences University as an institution of national importance.  
3.  Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSITY  
4. Establishment and incorporation of University.  
5. Effect of incorporation of University.  
6. Objects of University.  
7. Powers and functions of University.  
8. Jurisdiction of University.  
9. University to be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
10. Admission of students.  
11. Teaching at University.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF UNIVERSITY  
12. Authorities of University.  
13. Chancellor.  
14. Court.  
15. Board of Governors.  
16. Powers of Board of Governors.  
17. Terms of office of members of Board of Governors.  
18. Academic Council.  
19. Powers of Academic Council.  
20. Officers of University.  
21. Vice Chancellor.  
22. Powers of Vice Chancellor.  
23. Campus Directors.  
24. Dean.  
25. Executive Registra r. 
26. Finance Officer.  
27. Other officers.  
28. Finance Committee.  
29. Powers of Finance Committee.  
30. Board for Affiliation and Recognition.  
31. Other officers of University.  
32. Grants by Central Government.  
33. Grants by State Governments.    
2 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
 
34. Corpus of University.  
35. Fund.  
36. Accounts and audit.  
37. Pension and provident funds.  
CHAPTER V  
ANNUAL REPORT AND APPOINTMENTS  
 
38. Annual report of University . 
39. Appointments of officers of University . 
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND ORDINANCE  
  
40. Statutes.  
41. Statutes how to be made.   
42. Ordinances.  
43. Ordinances how made.  
CHAPTER VII  
 TRIBUNAL OF ARBITRATION  
44. Tribunal of Arbitration.  
45. Redressal for debarment from examination and disciplinary action against students.  
CHAPTER VIII  
 MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
47. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of matters relating to Board of Governors.  
48. Acts and proceeding not to be invalidated by vacancies,  etc. 
49. University to be a public authority under Right to Information Act.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
51. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
52. Residuary provision.  
53. Laying of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notifica tions.  
54. Power to remove difficulties.  
55. Transitional provisions.  
56. Repeal of Gujarat Act 17 of 2008.  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
3 
 THE NATIONAL FORENSIC SCIENCES UNIVERSITY ACT, 2020  
 
ACT NO. 32 OF 2020  
 [28th September , 2020.]  
An Act to establish and declare an institution to be known as the National Forensic Sciences 
University as an institution of national importance to facilitate and promote studies and research 
and to achieve excellence in the field of forensic science in co njunction with applied behavioural 
science studies, law, criminology and other allied areas and technology and other related fields, 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year  of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Forensic Sciences 
University Act, 2020.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration of National Forensic Sciences University as an institution of national 
importance. — Whereas the objects of the National Forensic Sciences University are such as to make it 
an institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the National University of Forensic 
Sciences is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University referred to in section 18;  
(b) “academic staff ” means teachers and such categories of staff as are designated to be academic 
staff b y the Statutes;  
(c)  “affiliated college ” means an institution recognised as such by the Board of Governors in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder;  
(d) “Board of Governors ” means the Board of Governors of the Univers ity referred to in section 15;  
(e) “campus ” means the campus of the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University situated at 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, and that of the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of 
Criminology and Forensic Sciences situated at Roh ini, New Delhi, or such other campus as may be 
established by the University at any place within India or outside India;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2020, vide notification No. S.O. 3424(E), dated 30 th August , 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii).   
4 
 (f) “Chancellor ” means the Chancellor of the University;  
(g) “college ” means a college or institution maintained or admitted to the pri vileges of the 
University for imparting education and training in forensic sciences or its related disciplines;  
(h) “Court ” means the Court of the University referred to in section 14;  
(i) “Dean ”, in relation to any School campus, means the Dean of such School campus;  
(j) “department ” means an academic department of the University;  
(k) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication such as broadcasting, telecasting, internet, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(l) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers, other 
academic and non -academic staff of the University;  
(m) “Executive Registrar ” means the E xecutive Registrar of the University referred to in                  
section 25;  
(n) “Finance Committee ” means the Finance Committee of the University referred to in section 28;  
(o) “Fund ” means the Fund of University referred to in section 35;  
(p) “notifi cation ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(q) “School ” means a school of study of the University;  
(r) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the University 
made under this Act;  
(s) “student ” means a student of the University and its affiliated colleges, and includes any person 
who has enrolled for pursuing any course of study in the University;  
(t) “teachers ” means Directors, Deans, professors, associate professors, assistant professors and 
such other persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research or for giving 
guidance for research or rendering assistance to students, in the University or in any college or 
institution maintained by the University;  
(u) “University ” means the National Forensic Sciences University established under this Act;  
(v) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of the University referred to in section 21.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSITY  
4. Establishment and incorporation of University. — (1) The Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat established under the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University Act, 2008 (Gujrat Act  
5 
 17 of 2018), and the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forens ic 
Sciences, New Delhi shall be established as an University by the name of National Forensic Sciences 
University.  
(2) The National Forensic Sciences University shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The headquarters of the University shall be at Gandhinagar, Gujarat.  
(4) The campuses of the University shall include the  campuses situated at Gujarat Forensic Sciences 
University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat and the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of 
Criminology and Forensic Sciences, New Delhi and such other campuses as the Central Government may, 
by notification , specify.  
(5) The first Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor, Board of Governors, Academic Council, Directors, Deans, 
Executive Registrar and all other persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as 
they continue to hold such office or membe rship, shall constitute the University.  
5. Effect of incorporation of University. — On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat or the Lok  
Nayak  Jayaprakash Narayan Nationa l Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences, New Delhi in 
any other law for the time being in force or in any contract or other instrument, shall be deemed as a 
reference to the University;  
(b) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other a cademic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted or other things done under the provisions of the 
Gujarat Forensic Sciences University Act, 2008, in so far as it relates to the Gujarat Forensic Sciences 
University, Gand hinagar, shall be deemed to have been, respectively, made, issued, conferred, 
awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and, except as otherwise 
provided by or under this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances or regulations, cont inue in force unless 
and until they are superseded by the Statutes or Ordinances made under this Act;  
(c) the status of "Centre of Excellence" and "Institute of Strategic or Security related Interest" 
granted to the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Ga ndhinagar by the Government of Gujarat and 
the status of "Center of Excellence for Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances" conferred by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, to the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, 
Gandhinagar, shall be applicable to the University;  
(d) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Gujarat Forensic Sciences 
University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat or the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of 
Criminology and Forensic Sciences, New Delhi shall vest in the University;  
(e) all rights, debts and other liabilities of the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat or the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic 
Sciences, New Delhi shall be transferred to and be the rights, debts and liabilities of the University;   
6 
 (f) every person employed by the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat or 
the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sc iences, New 
Delhi, immediately before such commencement, shall hold his office or service in the University by 
the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the  same  
rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gr atuity, provident fund, and other matters as he would have 
held if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is 
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the 
Statutes, not detrimental to the service conditions of such employee:  
Provided that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Registrar and other officers of the 
Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat or the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan 
National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences, New Delhi, in any law for the time being in 
force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be deemed to be reference to the Executive 
Registrar and other officers of the University;  
(g) any activity for appointment or promotion of academic or non -academic staff underway in the 
Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar at the time of commencement of this Act shall be 
deemed to be valid, and further proceeding in such appointment o r promotion shall be taken in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and be continued from the stage at the time of 
commencement of this Act;  
(h) every person pursuing, before the commencement of this Act, any academic or research 
course or programmes of study in the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, shall be 
deemed to have migrated and registered with the University, on such commencement, at the same 
level of course or programme and shall continue to pursue such academic or research co urse and 
programmes of study in the University;  
(i) every person pursuing, before the commencement of this Act, any academic or research course 
in the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences, 
New Delhi, shall c ontinue to pursue their academic courses and programmes of study under the 
enrolment and affiliation of the Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Delhi which shall 
conduct examinations and award degrees to them upon successful completion of such cours es and 
programmes of study;  
(j) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar or the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash 
Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic Sciences, New Delhi, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be continued or instituted by or against the University.  
6. Objects of University.  — The objects of the University shall be — 
(i) to facilitate and promote academic lea rning and practices in the field of forensic science in 
conjunction with applied behavioural science studies, law, legal studies, criminology and other allied 
areas and technology, including training,  skill-development, research and extension of work with 
focus on emerging areas in the said fields for strengthening criminal justice institutions in the country;   
7 
 (ii) to foster research and applied applications in forensic science, applied behavioural  science 
studies, law, legal studies and other allied areas and technology for training, research and 
development by promoting innovations and best practices;  
(iii) to promote and provide advanced institutional and research facilities in the fields of fore nsic 
science, applied behavioural science, law, legal studies and other allied areas and technology;  
(iv) to create capacities and capabilities of global standards of education, training and research for 
development of aptitude, skills and knowledge within and outside the country at various levels in the 
fields of forensic science, applied behavioural scienc e, law, legal studies and other allied areas and 
technology;  
(v) to coordinate with the Central Government and State Governments to improve investigation, 
crime detection and prevention through projects and research, funded by grants -in-aid from the 
Centra l Government and State Governments, in fields of forensic science, applied behavioural 
science, law, legal studies, criminology and other allied areas and technology;  
(vi) to advice and assist the Central Government, State Governments and Union territory 
Administrations in formulation of relevant policies including their review in the fields of forensic 
science, applied behavioural science, law, legal studies, criminology and other allied areas and 
technology;  
(vii) to coordinate and network with the instit utions having specialisation so as to expand the 
fields of forensic science, applied behavioural science, law, legal studies, criminology and other allied 
areas and technology, for promoting academics and research work through various pursuits;  
(viii) to a dminister, maintain and manage the University and to establish such off -site campus and 
off-shore centres for education, training and research as are necessary for the furtherance of the 
objects of the University within and outside the country;  
(ix) to ass ist the Central Government or State Governments to accredit forensic science 
laboratories, provide standard operating procedures, and lay down specifications for forensic 
equipment and kits to be used for forensic work in the country;  
(x) to set -up campus,  colleges, schools, centres and institutions of excellence for imparting State 
of-the-art education, training and research in the fields of forensic science, cyber security and digital 
forensics, behavioural science, technology and management;  
(xi) to assi st the Central Government to create and maintain national forensic data base required 
for criminal investigation, including fingerprints, voice, Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA), firearms, 
counterfeit currency, narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, cyber security, cyber defence and 
internal security;  
(xii) to undertake special projects for Central Government and State Governments; and  
(xiii) to undertake any other objects, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which the 
Central Government may, b y notification, specify in this behalf.   
8 
 7. Powers and functions of University. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
University shall exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to provide for studies, training , skill -development, research and extension of work in forensic 
science, applied behavioural science, law, legal studies, criminology and other allied areas and 
technology with focus on emerging areas of forensic science studies and related technologies;  
(b) to establish and maintain campuses, colleges, institutions, schools, departments, laboratories, 
libraries, centres of research, training, skill -development, research and specialised studies within and 
outside the country;  
(c) to plan and prescribe cours es of study or skill -development, such as degrees, diplomas, and 
certificates;  
(d) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions;  
(e) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(f) to grant, subject t o such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, of evaluation or any other method of testing, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, 
degrees or other academic distinction for good and sufficient cause;  
(g) to provi de facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(h) to introduce semester system, continuous evaluation and choice -based credit system and enter 
into agreements with other Universities and academic institutions for credit transfer and joint degree 
programmes;  
(i) to make provisions for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies, national or international, as the University may deem 
necessary;   
(j) to receive grants -in-aid to undertake projects for research and special assignments for the 
Central Government and State Governments;  
 (k) to determine, specify and receive payment of fees and other charges as the University may 
deem fit, from studen ts and any other person, institution or body corporate for instruction and other 
services, including training, consultancy and advisory services, provided by the University;  
(l) to establish, maintain and manage University buildings, halls, hostels and oth er campuses for the 
University in any other place;  
(m) to affiliate colleges and institutions of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(n) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the University 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare, cultural and corporate life;   
9 
 (o) to create academic and other teaching posts and to make appointments thereto (except the 
posts of Chancellor and Vice -Chancellor) as may be necessary for imparting instruction and 
managing the affairs of the University;  
(p) to appoint on contract or oth erwise visiting professors, emeritus professors, consultants, 
scholars including those located outside the country, and such other persons who may contribute to 
the advancement of the University;  
(q) to create non -teaching, administrative, ministerial and other posts in the University and to 
make appointment thereto;  
(r) to cooperate, collaborate or partner or associate with educational or other institutions and 
organisations, public and private, including those located outside the country having objects w holly or 
partly similar to those of the University by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in such 
manner as may be conducive to their common objects;  
(s) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(t) to p rovide for the preparation of instructional material including related software and other 
audio -visual aids;  
(u) to sponsor and make provision for research and development in areas of core competence of 
the University;  
(v) to enter into, carry out, vary o r cancel contracts;  
(w) to demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be specified by Ordinances;  
(x) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts from persons and to name after them such chairs, 
institutions, buildings and the like, as the Uni versity may determine, whose gift and donations to the 
University is worth such as the University may decide;  
(y)  to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or immovable, including trust 
and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(z) to initiate measures to enlist the cooperation of the industry to provide complementary 
facilities;  
(za) to establish off -shore campus at any place outside the country as and when it is considered 
necessary for advancing the aims and object ives of the University;  
(zb) to provide for printing, reproduction and publication of research and other work;  
(zc) to provide, control and maintain discipline among the students and all categories of 
employees and to lay down the conditions of service of such employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(zd) to conduct innovative experiments and develop new methods and technologies in the field of 
science, technology and management in relation to the domains of investigation, prevention and  
10 
 detection of cri mes and furthering the cause of criminal justice systems in order to achieve 
international standards of such education, training research and consultancy;  
(ze) to admit students for courses in Institute and its affiliated centr es and institutes on an all India 
basis in such manner as may be laid down in the Statutes;  
(zf) to admit foreign students, Overseas Citizen of India card holder, Person of Indian Origin, 
non-resident Indian, children of Indian workers in Gulf and South -East Asian Countries, in such 
manner and as may be laid down in the Statutes;  
(zg) to purchase or to take on lease any land or building or works which may be necessary or 
convenient for the purpose of the University on such terms and conditions as it may think fit and 
proper and to co nstruct, alter and maintain any such buildings or works;  
(zh) to raise and borrow moneys on bonds, mortgages, promissory notes or other obligations or 
securities founded or based upon all or any of the properties and assets of the University or without 
any securities and upon such terms and conditions as it may think fit and to pay out of the funds of the 
University, all expenses incidental to the raising of moneys, to repay and redeem any money 
borrowed after taking prior permission of the Board of Govern ors;  
(zi) to invest the funds of the University in or upon such securities and transpose any investment 
from time to time in such manner as it may deem fit in the interest of University; and  
(zj) to do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or co nducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the University.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the University shall not dispose of in 
any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Central Governme nt. 
8. Jurisdiction of University. — The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of 
India.  
9. University to be open to all races, creeds and classes. — (1) The University shall be open to 
all persons irrespective of gender, race, caste, creed, disability, domicile, ethnicity, social or economic 
background.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the University which in 
the opinion of the Board of Governors involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and 
object of this section.  
(3) Admissions to every academic programme of study in the University shall be based on merit 
assessed through transparent and reasona ble criteria disclosed prior to the commencement of the 
process of admission by the University:   
Provided that the University shall be a Central Educational Institution for the purposes of the 
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act , 2006 (5 of 2007).   
11 
 10. Admission of students. — (1) It shall be the endeavor of the University to maintain an all -India 
character, and high standards of teaching and research.  
(2) Admission of students for courses in University shall be made on an all -India basis in such 
manner as may be specified in the Ordinances.  
11. Teaching at University. — All teaching at the University and its campuses or affiliated colleges 
shall be conducted by and in the name of the University in accordance with the Statutes and Or dinances 
made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF UNIVERSITY  
12. Authorities of University. — The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely: —  
(a) Chancellor;  
(b) Court;  
(c) Board of Governors;  
(d) Academic Council;  
(e) Board fo r Affiliation and Recognition;  
(f) Finance Committee; and  
(g) such other authorities as may laid down in the Statutes to be the authorities of the University.  
13. Chancellor. — (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a person of eminence as 
the Chancellor of the University in consultation with such State Governments as it deems fit.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University and shall preside at 
the convocations of the University held for conferring de grees.  
(3) The Chancellor may invite any person or persons of eminence to advise the University in 
relation to the affairs of the University as and when necessary.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Chancellor may order or undertake an  
inspection or inquiry, if he deems it necessary.  
(5) The Chancellor shall have such other powers as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
14. Court.  –(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Court for the University to 
be headed by the Chancellor.  
(2) The members of the Court shall be nominated by the Central Government, in consultation with 
such State Governments as it deems fit, from amongst persons of eminence, including from the fields of 
forensics, bio -technology, criminal justice, law enforcement, technology and academia.   
12 
 (3) The term of office of members of the Court shall be such as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the convenor of the Court.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court sha ll have the following powers and perform the 
following functions, namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University, and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider  and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts; and  
(c) to perform such other functions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(6) The Court shall meet at least once in a year.  
15. B oard of Governors. — (1) The Board of Governors of the University shall consist of the 
following members, namely: — 
(a) Vice -Chancellor —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) Financial  Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India —member, ex officio ;  
(c) one representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary —member, ex officio ;  
(d) an officer of the Home Department, not below the rank of the Secretary to the Government of 
Gujarat —member, ex of ficio; 
(e) Registrar General of the High Court of Gujarat —member, ex officio ;  
(f) Director -cum-Chief  Forensic Scientist, Director of Forensic Science Services, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India —member, ex officio ;  
(g) five persons of eminenc e selected from the fields of forensic science, law, enforcement, 
criminology, computer science, engineering, technology, management, forensic medicine and 
pharmacy, to be nominated by the Central Government, in consultation with such State Governments 
as it deems fit —members;  
(h) all Campus Directors of the University —members, ex officio .  
(2) The Executive Registrar shall be the Secretary of the Board.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be 
assigne d to him by or under this Act or the Statutes.  
16. Powers of Board of Governors. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of 
Governors shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and the control of affairs of the 
University and shall exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise provided by this Act, Statutes   
13 
 or Ordinances and shall have the power to review the acts of the Academic Council and the Finance 
Committee and other committees or authorities of the Universi ty. 
(i) take decisions on question of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
University;  
(ii) institute courses of study in the University;  
(iii) make Statutes;  
(iv) modify or cancel Statutes;  
(v) create posts and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the University and 
determine salary structure and the terms and conditions of different cadres of employees;  
(vi) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, annual accounts and the budget estimates of 
the University for every financial year;  
(vii) invest money and funds of the University and to take decision on the recommendations of the 
Finance Committee;  
(viii) publish or finance the publication of studies, treaties, books, periodicals, reports and other 
literature from time to time and to sell or arrange for the sale as it may deem fit;  
(ix) appoint such committees as it considers necessary for the exercise o f its powers and 
performance of its duties under this Act;  
(x) appoint Campus Directors;  
(xi) consider and approve the proposals recommended by the Board for Affiliation and 
Recognition;  
(xii) delegate any of its power to the Directors, Deans, Executive Registrar or any other officer, 
employee or to any authority of the University or to a committee appointed by it; and  
(xiii) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by or under this Act or the Sta tutes or Ordinances made thereunder for achieving the objects of 
the University.  
(3) The Board of Governors shall meet at least two times in a year and the presence of at least six 
members shall form the quorum for a meeting of the Board of Governors.  
17. Terms of office of members of Board of Governors. — (1) Save as otherwise provided in this 
section, the term of a nominated member of the Board of Governors under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15 shall be three years from the date of his nominat ion. 
(2) A nominated member of the Board of Governors shall be eligible for re -nomination for the next 
term.   
14 
 (3) A nominated member of the Board of Governors may resign from his office by writing under his 
hand addressed to the Chairperson and his resignation shall take effect from the date it is accepted by the 
Chairperson.  
(4) The term of office of an ex officio  member of the Board of Governors shall continue so long as he 
holds the office by the virtue of which he is a member.  
18. Academic Counci l.—(1) The Academic Council of the University shall consist of the following 
members, namely: — 
(i) Vice -Chancellor —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) two academicians or professionals to be nominated by the Board of Governors —members;  
(iii) two academicians or  professionals in the field of forensic science to be nominated by the Board 
of Governors —members;  
(iv) Director -cum-Chief Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science Services, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India —member, ex officio ; 
(v) Campus Directors —members, ex officio ; 
(vi) one Dean or professor or associate professor from each discipline of the School, by rotation, to 
be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor —members, ex officio ;  
(vii) two representatives of industry or industry bodies in related sectors to be nominated by the 
Board of Governors —members.  
(2) The Executive Registrar shall be the Secretary of the Council.  
(3) The term of office of the members nominated under clauses ( ii), (iii), (vi) and ( vii) of                  
sub-section ( 1) shall be three years, and the members shall be eligible for re -nomination for the next term.  
19. Powers of Academic Council. — Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made 
thereun der, the Academic Council of the University shall exercise the following powers and perform 
following functions, namely: — 
(i) to specify the academic policies of the University and be responsible for the maintenance and 
improvement of standards of instruct ion, education and evaluation in the University;  
(ii) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
from the faculty of the University or the Board of Governors and to take appropriate action thereof;  
(iii) to review and recommend to the Board of Governors regarding proposals received from the 
Board for Affiliation and Recognition;  
(iv) to make Ordinances;   
15 
 (v) to recommend to the Board of Governors, to make such Statutes as are consistent with this Act 
regarding the academic functioning of the Institute including discipline of students; and  
(vi) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by the Statutes or Ordinances.  
20. Officers of University. — The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: — 
(a) Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) Campus Directors;  
(c) Deans;  
(d) Executive Registrar; and  
(e) such other persons in the service of the University as may be laid down in the Statutes, to be 
the officers of the University.  
21. Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with such State 
Governments as it deems fit, by notification, appoint the Vice -Chancellor of the University.  
(2) A person shall be qualified to be appointed as  the Vice -Chancellor of the University, if he is — 
(i) a person of eminence in the field of forensic sciences;  
(ii) associated in administration of criminal justice, development matters, education, philanthropy, 
industrial or business development or exemplary administration in the central services, State services, 
corporations or public bodies at national and international levels.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment for another term or till he attains the age of seventy years.  
(4) The other terms and conditions of the Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be laid down in the 
Statutes.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor may resign from his office by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Chancellor and such a resignation shall take effect from the date of acceptance by the Chancellor.  
22. Powers of Vice Chancellor. — (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall have, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, power to cause an inspection or review to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, 
of the University, its buildings, hostels, libraries, equipment and systems and processes  and of any 
institution or centr e maintained by the University, and also of the examinations, teaching, research and 
other works conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with t he administration, academic affairs and finance of the University.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Vice -Chancellor shall —  
16 
 (i) preside at the meetings of the Board of Governors, Academic Council, Board for Affiliatio n and 
Recognition and Finance Committee;  
(ii) be the principal academic and executive officer of the University and shall exercise general 
supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the decisions of all the 
authorities of  the University;  
(iii) be responsible for imparting of instructions and maintenance of discipline in the University;  
(iv) submit annual reports and accounts to the Board of Governors;  
(v) ensure that decisions taken by the Board of Governors are implemen ted;  
(vi) have the power to delegate some of his powers to any of his subordinates under intimation to 
the Board of Governors;  
(vii) nominate a Director of the University to perform his functions during the period of his leave;  
(viii) have all financial powers of the Secretary to the Government of India for the purposes of rules 
of the Government, in so far as they are applicable or may be made applicable to the conduct of the 
business of the University, subject to the additional power that may be delegat ed by the Board of 
Governors from time to time;  
(ix) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by or 
under this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances or as may be delegated to him by the Board of Governors.  
(3) If the post of the Vice -Chancellor remains vacant for any reason, it shall be open to the Chancellor 
to authorise a senior regular professor in the service of the University or any other appropriate person 
possessing the qualification provided under sub -section ( 2) of section 21 to exercise such powers, 
functions and duties of the Vice -Chancellor during such vacancy.  
 (4) Where any matter is of urgent nature requiring immediate action and the same cannot be 
immediately dealt with by the authority or body of the University empowered under this Act to deal with 
it, the Vice -Chancellor may take such action as he may deem fit and shall forthwith report the action so 
taken by him to the authority or body of the University who or which, in the ordinary course, would have 
dealt with the matter:  
Provided that if such authority or other body is of the opinion that such action ou ght not to have been 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor, it may refer the matter to the Board of Governors which may either confirm 
the action taken by the Vice -Chancellor or annul the same or modify it in such manner as it thinks fit, and 
thereupon the action s hall cease to have effect or, as the case may be, shall take effect in such modified 
form, and such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done by or under the order of the Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) Where the  exercise of the power by the Vice -Chancellor under sub -section ( 4) involves the 
appointment of any person, such appointment shall be confirmed by the competent authority in the 
University empowered to approve such appointment in accordance with the provis ions of this Act and the 
Statutes made thereunder, within a period of one year from the date of order of the Vice -Chancellor,  
17 
 otherwise such appointment shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of one year from the 
date of order of the Vice -Chancellor.  
23. Campus Directors. — (1) The Campus Directors of the University shall be appointed by the 
Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board of Governors in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) The Campus Directors shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in managing the academic, administrative 
and other affairs of the campus of University, and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions 
as may be laid down in the Statutes or entrusted to them  by the Vice -Chancellor.  
24. Dean. — (1) The Deans of each School of the University shall be appointed by the Vice -
Chancellor on such terms and conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) The Deans shall assist the Vice -Chancellor, Executive Registr ar and respective Campus Directors 
in managing the academic and other affairs of the Schools of the University and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such functions as may be laid down in the Statutes or entrusted to them by the               
Vice -Chan cellor.  
25. Executive Registrar. — (1) The Executive Registrar shall be appointed by the University in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) The Executive Registrar shall exercise the following powers and perf orm the following duties, 
namely: — 
(i) be responsible for the custody of records, common seal, the funds and properties of the 
University;  
(ii) place before the Board of Governors and other authorities of the University all such information 
and documents a s may be necessary for transaction of its business;  
(iii) be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for the proper discharge of his functions;  
(iv) be responsible for the administration of the University and conduct the examinations and make 
all other arrangem ents necessary thereof and be responsible for the execution of all processes 
connected therewith;  
(v) attest and execute all documents on behalf of the University;  
(vi) verify and sign the pleadings in all suits and other legal proceedings by or against th e 
University and all processes in such suits and proceedings shall be issued to and served on the 
Executive Registrar;  
(vii) act as the Secretary of the Board of Governors, the Academic Council, the Finance Committee 
and such committees as may be specified  by the Board of Governors; and  
(viii) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be laid down in the Statutes 
or as may be delegated to him by the Board of Governors or the Vice -Chancellor.   
18 
 26. Finance Officer. — The Finance Officer sh all be appointed by the University in such manner, on 
such emoluments and on such other terms and conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
27. Other officers. — The manner of appointme nt and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be such as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
28. Finance Committee. — (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely: — 
(a) Vice -Chancellor, who shall be the Chairpe rson of the Committee;  
(b) two members of the Board of Governors, of which one shall be ex officio  member to be 
nominated by the Board of Governors;  
(c) all Campus Directors;  
(d) one expert in the field of finance to be nominated by the Board of Governors;  
(e) Dean of any one School of the University, in rotation, as may be nominated by the Board of 
Governors.  
(2) The Executive Registrar shall be the Secretary of the Finance Committee.  
(3) The term of office of the members nominated under clauses (b), (d) and (e) shall be three years 
and the said members shall be eligible for renomination.  
29. Powers of Finance Committee. — Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Finance 
Committee shall  exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to examine the annual accounts and annual budget estimates of the University and to advise the 
Board of Governors thereof;  
(b) to review from time to time the financial positi on of the University;  
(c) to make recommendations to the Board of Governors on all financial policy matters of the 
University;  
(d) to make recommendations to the Board of Governors on all proposals involving raising of 
funds, receipts and expenditure;  
(e) to provide guidelines for investment of surplus funds;  
(f) to make recommendations to the Board of Governors on all proposals involving expenditure for 
which no provision has been made in the budget or for which expenditure in excess of the amount 
provided  in the budget needs to be incurred;  
(g) to examine all proposals relating to the revision of pay scales, upgradation of the pay scales and 
those items which are not included in the budget prior to placing before the Board of Governors; and   
19 
 (h) to exercise  such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances made thereunder.  
30. Board for Affiliation and Recognition. — (1) The Board for Affiliation and Recognition shall be 
respons ible for admitting colleges and institutions to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board for Affiliation and Recognition, the term of office of its members 
and its powers and functions shall be such as may be laid down in the Sta tutes.  
31. Other officers of University. — The Board of Governors may, by Statutes, declare such other 
authorities or officers of the University and specify the powers, functions and duties of each such 
authority or officer, as the case may be.  
32. Grants b y Central Government. — For the purpose of enabling the University to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the University, in each financial year, such sums of money in such 
manner as it may deem fit.  
33. Grants by State Governments. — The University may receive such sums of money as grants -in-
aid annually or as one -time grant from any State Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
34. Corpus of University. —The University may receive funds from the Central Government or State 
Governments or other sources or use its funds to maintain and operate a corpus of the University.  
35. Fund. — (1) The University shall maintain a Fund to which s hall be credited — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central  Government;  
(b) all moneys received from State Governments;  
(c) all fees and other charges received by the University;  
(d) all moneys received by the University by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers;  
(e)  all interest from corpus, or any other such earnings;  
(f) any loans taken by the University;  
(g) the moneys received by the University from the collaborating industries in terms of the 
provisions of the Memorandu m of Understanding entered between the University and such industry 
for establishment of sponsored chairs, fellowships or infrastructure facilities of the University; and  
(h) all moneys received by the University in any other manner or from any other sourc e.   
20 
 (2)  All moneys credited to the Fund of the University shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the University may, with the approval of the Finance Committee, decide.  
(3)  The Fund of the University shall be applied towards the e xpenses of the University including 
expenditure incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by or under this Act.  
36. Accounts and audit. — (1) The University shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an  annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet, in such form and 
accounting standard as may be specified, by notification, by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
 (2) The accounts of the Univ ersity shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by it in connection with such audit shall be payable by it to the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of Indi a and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the University shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
University.  
(4) The accounts of the University as cer tified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid befo re each 
House of Parliament.  
37. Pension and provident funds. — (1) The University may constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditio ns as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) Where any provident fund has been constituted under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government 
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to such fund as 
if it were a G overnment provident fund.  
CHAPTER V  
ANNUAL REPORT AND APPOINTMENTS  
38. Annual report of University. —(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared by the 
Vice -Chancellor, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the 
fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken by it, and be 
submitted to the Board of Governors on or before such date as may be specified and the Board of 
Governors shall consider the rep ort in its annual meeting.  
(2) The annual report, as approved by the Board of Governors, shall be published and placed on the 
website of the University.   
21 
 (3) The Vice -Chancellor shall prepare and release for every year a report, in English and in Hindi, th e 
working of the University in the previous year on or before the expiry of nine months from the close of 
financial year, and a copy of the same, together with an audited statement of accounts showing the 
income and expenditure for the previous year shall be submitted to the Central Government within that 
stipulated time, and the same may be caused to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
39. Appointments of officers of University. — All appointments of the employees of the University, 
except the Vice -Chancellor, shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, 
by—  
(a) the Board of Governors, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of 
Assistant Professor or above, or if the appointment is made on the non -acade mic staff in any post 
equivalent to Group ‘A’ and above, as the case may be;  
(b) by the Vice -Chancellor, in any other case.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES  
40. Statutes. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: —  
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities and other bodies of the University, as may 
be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff from within the country or from outside the 
country, and other employees of the University, their emoluments and conditions of service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, in surance, provident 
fund, manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board of Governors by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;   
22 
 (j) the conferment of affiliation to a college or an institution or a Department under the University;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, departments, centr es, halls, colleges and 
institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the management of campuses and affiliated colleges by the University;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(p) the mainte nance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(q) any other matter, which by this Act are to be, or may be, laid down in the Statutes.  
41. Statutes how to be made. — (1) The first Statutes of the University shall be made by the Board 
of Govern ors with the prior approval of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid as 
soon as may be it is made, before each House of Parliament:  
Provided that till such Statutes are made, the provisions of existing regulations of the Gujarat 
Foren sic Sciences University, Gandhinagar shall continue to be applicable:  
Provided further that till the Statutes for the administrative functioning of Delhi campus of the 
University is made, the functions in Delhi campus shall continue in the same manner pres ently being 
followed by the Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and Forensic 
Sciences, New Delhi.  
(2) The Board of Governors may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend 
or repeal the Statutes referred t o in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board of Governors shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the 
status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opin ion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Board of Governors.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter as it may specify.  
(4) The power to make Statutes shall include the power to give retrospect ive effect from a date not 
earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes or any of them, but no retrospective 
effect shall be given to any Statute so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such 
Statute may be ap plicable.  
42. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;   
23 
 (b) the courses of  study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the m eans to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to examinations, 
degrees and diplomas to the University;  
(f) the conditions and institution for award  of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examination including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the specifying of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of centr es of studies, boards of studies, specialised laboratories and other 
committees;  
(k) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(l) the setting up of machinery for redressal of grievances of employees and students; and  
(m) any other matter which by this Act or Statutes, is to be, or may be, specified in the Ordinances.  
43. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be 
made by the Academic Council.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Academic Council shall have effect from such date as it may direct, 
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board of Governors and shall 
be considered by the Board of Governors at its next succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Board of Governors shall have power by resolution to approve, modify or cancel any such 
Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modifie d accordingly or 
cancelled, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER VII  
TRIBUNAL OF ARBITRATION  
44. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a 
written contract, which shall be retained by the University and a copy of which shall be given to the 
employee concerned.   
24 
 (2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Board of Governor, one member nominated by the employee concerned and chaired by an umpire 
appointed by the Central Gover nment.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in 
respect of the matters decided by the said Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee from availing of th e judicial 
remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section (2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitratio n and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be laid down in the 
Statutes.  
45. Redressal for debarment from examination and disciplinary action against students. — (1) 
Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the 
University by an order or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor and who has been debarred from appearing at 
the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within  ten days of the date of receipt of 
such order or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board of Governors and the Board of 
Governors may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be.  
 (2) Any dispute arising o ut of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                     
sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 44 shall apply to  a reference made under this sub -section.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies. — If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Governors for decision.  
47. Power of Centr al Government to make rules in respect of matters relating to Board of 
Governors. —(1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry out the 
purposes relating to the Board of Governors.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice t o the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Board of Governors;  
(b) the disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being  a member of the Board of Governors;  
(c) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members may be removed;   
25 
 (d) the meetings of the Board of Governors and the procedure for conduct of business;  
(e) the travelling and other allowances payabl e to members of the Board of Governors; and  
(f) the manner in  which functions of the Board of Governors may be exercised.  
48. Acts and proceeding not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act of the Board of Governors 
or any other body set up under this  Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of —  
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof; 
or 
 (c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
49. University to be a public authority under Right to Information Act. —The provisions of Right 
to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005)  shall apply to the University, as it were a pub lic authority defined 
in clause ( h) of section 2 of that Act.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or Statutes or Ordinances made thereunder .  
51. Power of Central Government to issue directions. — (1) The University shall, in discharge of 
its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from time to time.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or not shall be 
final.  
52. Residuary provision. — (1) The Board of Governors shall have the authority to deal with any 
matter pertaining to the University and not specifically dealt with in this Act.  
(2) The decision of the Board of Governors on all such matters shall be final.  
53. Laying of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notifications.  – (1) Every rule, Statute or Ordinance 
made and every notification issued under this Act sha ll be published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every rule, Statute or Ordinance made and every notification issued under this Act, shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the  rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification or both 
Houses agree that the rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be made, the rule, Statute, 
Ordinance or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as  the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification.   
26 
 54. Power to remove difficulties .— (1) If any difficulty ari ses in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
55. Transitional provisions. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes made 
thereunder, — 
(a) the existing Director General of the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University,  Gandhinagar shall be 
appointed by the Central Government as the first Vice -Chancellor of the University for a period of 
three years and he shall be eligible for re -appointment for a further period of three years;  
(b) till such time the University constitu tes such authorities or committees as may be required under 
the provisions of this Act, the existing committee or Board in the Gujarat Forensic Sciences 
University, Gandhinagar shall continue to exercise the respective roles or, as the case may be, till th e 
Board of Governors determine;  
(c) the existing Director of Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology and 
Forensic Sciences, New Delhi shall be appointed as the Campus Director for Delhi campus of the 
University till a regular Direc tor is appointed by the University;  
(d) the existing Registrar of the Gujarat Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar shall be 
appointed as the first Executive Registrar of the University, or, as the case may be, till the Board of 
Governors determine.  
56. Repeal of Gujarat Act 17 of 2008. —(1) The Gujarat Forensic Sciences University Act, 2008 is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, —  
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and c ertificates awarded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Gujarat Forensic 
Sciences University Act, 2008, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued, conferred, 
awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this A ct and, except as otherwise 
provided by or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until they are superseded by 
any order made under this Act or the Statutes; and  
(b) all the proceedings of selection committee or any other authority, i f any, for the appointment or 
promotion of teachers and other employees that took place before the commencement of this Act and 
all actions of the concerned authorities in respect of the recommendations of such selection committee 
or authority, if any, whe re no orders of appointment on the basis thereof were passed before the 
commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure for selection has been modified  
27 
 by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in connection with s uch pending 
selections shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act and be continued from the stage 
where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if the concerned authorities take a 
decision to the contrary.  
--------------------------The National Institutes of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY,  
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of certain Institutes as institutions of national importance . 
3. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes . 
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes . 
6. Powers and functions of Institutes . 
7. Institutes to be open  to all races, creed and classes . 
8. Institutes to be not -for-profit legal entity . 
9. Teaching at Institutes.  
CHAPTER III  
THE AUTHORITIES  OF INSTITUTES  
10. Authorities of Institutes . 
11. Board of Governors . 
12. Powers and functions of Board . 
13. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, Members of Board . 
14. Filling of casual vacancy . 
15. Resignation of Members . 
16. Senate.  
17. Functions of Senate . 
18. Powers and functions of Chairperson . 
19. Director . 
20. Registrar . 
21. Other authorities and officers . 
22. Appointments . 
23. Statutes . 
24. Statutes h ow made . 
25. Ordinances . 
26. Ordinances how made . 2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Tribunal of Arbitration . 
CHAPTER IV  
THE COUNCIL  
28. Establishment of Council . 
29. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Council.  
30. Functions of Council . 
31. Meetings of Council . 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Grants by Central Government . 
33. Fund of Institutes . 
34. Accounts and audit . 
35. Pension, insurance and provident funds . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidate by vacancies, etc . 
37. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
38. Power to make rules . 
39. Rules, Statutes and Ordinances to be published in Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
40. Power to remove difficulties . 
41. Transitional provisions . 
THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF FOOD TEC HNOLOGY,  
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 19 OF 2021  
[30th July , 2021.]  
An Act to declare certain institutions of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management to be the 
institutions of national importance and to provide for instructions and research in food technology, 
entrepreneurship and management and for the advancement of learning and dissemination of 
knowledge in such branches and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Institutes of Food 
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force  on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shal l be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Declaration of certain Institutes as institutions of national importance .—Whereas the objects 
of the Institutes mentioned in the Schedule are such as to make them institutions of national importance, it 
is hereby declared that each such Institute is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” in relation to an Institute means the Board of Governors referred  to in section 11;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) “corresponding Institute ” in relation to an Institute mentioned in column ( 2) of the Schedule, 
means an Institute as specified in column ( 3) of the said Schedule;  
(d) “Council” means the Council established under section 28;  
(e) “Director” means the Director of the Institute appointed under section 19;  
(f) “existing Institute ” means an Institute mentioned in column ( 2) of the Schedule;  
(g) “Fund” means the Fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 33;  
(h) “Institute” means the Institute mentioned in column ( 3) of the Schedule;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2021, vide notification No. S.O. 4036(E), dated 30th September , 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 ( ii).   4 
 (i) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
(j) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Registrar” means the Registrar of the Institute appointed under section 20;  
(m) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;  
(n) “Senate” means the Senate of the Institute referred to in section 16;  
(o) “Society” means the existing Institute registered as a Society under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; and  
(p) “Statutes and Ordinances ” in relation to any Institute means, the Statutes and Ordinances of 
that Institute made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTES  
4. Incorporation of Institutes .—On and from the date of commencement of this Act, each of the 
Institute mentioned in column ( 3) of the Schedule shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
5. Effect of incorporation of Institutes . —On and from the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any reference to an existing Institute in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the corresponding Institute;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, of or belonging to an existing Institute shall vest in 
the corresponding Institute;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of an existing Institute shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of the corresponding Institute;  
(d) every person employed by an existing Institute immediately before such commencement shall 
hold his office or service in the corresponding Institute, with the same tenure, for the same 
remuneration and upon the same terms and co nditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held had this Act not been 
enacted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such 
tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms and conditions of the con tract with the 
said employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute, of 
compensation equivalent to three months' remuneration in case of permanent employee and one 
month's remuneration in the case of other em ployee:  5 
 Provided further that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Director or Vice -
Chancellor, and other officers of an existing Institute under any law for the time being in force, or any 
instrument or other document, shall be construed as a reference to the Director, and other officers of 
the corresponding Institute;  
(e) every person pursuing, before commencement of this Act, any academic or research course in 
an existing Institute, shall be deemed to have migrated and registered with the cor responding 
Institute, on such commencement at the same level of course in the Institute from which such person 
migrated; and  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against an existing Institute, immed iately before the commencement of this Act, shall be continued or 
instituted by or against the corresponding Institute.  
6. Powers and functions of Institutes .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, each Institute shall 
exercise the following powers and  perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to provide for instruction and research in such branches of food science and food technology, 
and any other branches of engineering, technology, science and management as the Institute may 
think fit, and for t he advancement of learning and dissemination of knowledge in such branches;  
(b) to hold examinations and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions 
or titles;  
(c) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(d) to fix, dema nd and receive fees and other charges;  
(e) to establish, maintain and manage halls and hostels for the residence of students;  
(f) to supervise and control the discipline of all categories of employees and students of the 
Institute and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare, cultural and corporate 
life; 
(g) to provide for the maintenance of units of the National Cadet Corps for the students;  
(h) to institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto except the Direct or; 
(i) to deal with any property belonging to or vested in the Institute in such manner as the Institute 
may deem fit for advancing the objects of the Institute;  
(j) to receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government and to receive 
bequests, donations and transfers of movable or immovable property from testators, donors or 
transferors, as the case may be;  
(k) to co -operate and collaborate with educational or other institutions in any part of the world 
having objects wholly or partly si milar to those of the Institute by exchange of teachers and scholars 
and generally in such manner as may be conducive to their common objects;  
(l) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals; and  6 
 (m) to do all such thin gs as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an Institute shall not dispose of in any 
manner any immovable property without the p rior approval of the Central Government.  
7. Institutes to be open to all races, creed and classes .—(1) Each Institute shall be open to all 
persons irrespective of gender, race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to 
religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers, officers, employees 
or workers or in any other connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by any Institute, which in t he 
opinion of the Council involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this section.  
(3) The admission to every academic course or programme of study in each Institute shall be based on 
merit, assessed through transparent and reas onable criteria disclosed through its prospectus, prior to the 
commencement of the process of admission by such Institute:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Institute from making special 
provisions for the employment or a dmission of women, persons with disabilities or for persons belonging 
to any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens and, in particular, for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes:  
Provided further that each such Institute shall be a  Central Educational Institution for the purposes of 
the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006  (5 of 2007) . 
8. Institutes to be not -for-profit legal entity .—(1) Each Institute shall be a not -for-profit legal entity 
and no part of the su rplus, if any, in revenue of the Institute, after meeting all expenditures in regard to its 
operations under this Act, shall be invested for any purpose other than for the growth and development of 
the Institute or for conducting research therein.  
(2) Each  Institute shall strive to raise funds for self -sufficiency and sustainability.  
9.Teaching at Institutes .—All teaching at each of the Institutes shall be conducted by or in the name 
of the Institute in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
THE AUTHORITIES OF INSTITUTES  
10. Authorities of Institutes .—The following shall be the authorities of an Institute, namely: — 
(a) a Board of Governors;  
(b) a Senate; and  
(c) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes  to be the authorities of the Institute.  
11. Board of Governors .—(1) The Board of Governors of each Institute shall be the principal 
executive body of that Institute.  
(2) The Board of each Institute shall consist of the following Members, namely: — 7 
  
(a) a Chairperson, from amongst eminent persons distinguished in the field of food industry or 
education or food science or food processing technology or management or such other field, to be 
appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Director of the Institut e — Member, ex officio ;  
(c) the Chairperson of the Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India or his nominee  — Member, ex officio ;  
 
(d) the Director -General of the Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research or his nominee  — Member, ex officio ; 
(e) one representative, not below the rank of 
a Director, of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government dealing with Food 
Processing Industries  — Member, ex officio ; 
(f) two representatives having special 
knowledge in the field of food processing 
indust ry to be nominated by the Central 
Government  — Members;  
(g) one representative from an Indian 
Institute of Management  — Member, ex officio ; 
(h) one representative from an Indian 
Institute of Technology  — Member, ex officio ; 
(i) the Dean of Faculty of the Institute, if any  — Member, ex officio ; 
(j) Secretary to the Government of India in 
the Department of Higher Education or his 
nominee  — Member, ex officio;  
(k) three faculty members of the Institute 
from amongst Professors, Associate Professors 
and Assistant Professors, by rotation of seniority  — Members, ex officio ; 
  (l) one nominee of the concerned State 
Government not below the rank of a Joint 
Secretary  — Member, ex officio ; and  
(m) Registrar of the Institute  — Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) The Chairperson shall have the power to invite any number of experts, not being members of the 
Board, to attend meetings of the Board, but such invitees shall not be entitled to vote at the meeting.  
12. Powers and functions of Board .—(1) Subject to the p rovisions of this Act, the Board of each 
Institute shall be responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the 
Institute and shall exercise all the powers of the Institute not otherwise provided for by this Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.  8 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the Board of each Institute shall exercise 
the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to take decision on questions of policy relating to the administration and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) to examine and approve the annual budget estimates of the Institute;  
(c) to examine and approve the plan for development of the Institute and to id entify sources of 
finance for implementation of the plan;  
(d) to establish departments, faculties or schools of studies and initiate programmes or courses of 
study at the Institute;  
(e) to set -up centres of food processing studies and allied areas within t he country after approval 
of the Central Government;  
(f) to grant degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions or titles, and to institute and award 
fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals;  
(g) to confer honorary degrees in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes;  
(h) to grant honorary awards and other distinctions;  
(i) to create academic, administrative, technical and other posts and determine, by Statutes, the 
qualification, classification, terms and conditions of service and method of a ppointment of such posts;  
(j) to set -up centres  of food processing studies and allied areas outside India in accordance with 
the guidelines laid down by the Central Government from time to time and in accordance with the 
provisions of the laws for the time being in force in such foreign country;  
(k) to pay, variable pay to the Director of the Institute on the basis of performance objectives as 
may be specified by the Statutes;  
(l) to make, amend and repeal the Statutes;  
(m) to consider and modify or cancel the Ordinances; and  
(n) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred on or 
assigned to it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board may, by Statutes, delegate such powers and 
functions of the Board to the Director as it may d eem fit.  
(4) The Board shall conduct an annual review of the performance of the Director, in the context of the 
achievements of objects of the Institute:  
Provided that such review shall include performance review of faculty members of the Institute on 
such parameters, periodicity and terms of reference as may be determined by the Board.  
(5) The Board shall, through an independent agency or group of experts, within a period of three 
years from the date of incorporation of the Institute, and thereafter at lea st once every three years, 9 
 evaluate and review the performance of the Institute, including its faculty, on the parameters of long term 
strategy and rolling plans of the Institute and such other parameters as the Board may decide and the 
report of such revi ew shall be placed in public domain.  
(6) The qualifications, experience and the manner of selection of the independent agency or group of 
experts, referred to in sub -section ( 5), shall be such as may be specified by the Statutes.  
(7) The report of the eval uation and review under sub -section ( 5) shall be submitted by the Board to 
the Central Government along with an action taken report:  
Provided that the Central Government may after considering the report, give suggestions to the Board 
for further actions to  be taken by it.  
(8) Where in the opinion of the Chairperson or the Director, the situation is so emergent that an 
immediate decision needs to be taken in the interest of the Institute, the Chairperson, in consultation with 
the Director, may issue such ord ers as may be necessary after recording the grounds for his opinion:  
Provided that such orders shall be submitted for ratification by the Board in the next meeting.  
(9) The Board shall, in exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under this Ac t, be 
accountable to the Central Government, and the Central Government may issue directions to the Board in 
public interest on the matters of policy.  
(10) The Board shall have the power to appoint such Committees as it considers necessary for the 
exercise  of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act.  
13. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, Members of Board .—(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of the Chairperson or a Member, other than 
an ex officio  Member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of his appointment or nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member of the Board.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing Member, other than an ex officio  
Member, shall, unless the Council otherwise directs, co ntinue in office until another person is nominated 
as a Member in his place or until the expiry of six months whichever is earlier.  
(4) The Members of the Board, other than an ex officio  Member, shall be entitled to such allowances, 
as may be provided by t he Statutes.  
14. Filling of casual vacancy .—When a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or Member 
whether by reason of removal, resignation, death or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within a 
period of six months from the date of such vac ancy in accordance with the provisions of section 11.  
15.  Resignation of Members .—The Chairperson or a Member, other than an ex officio  Member, 
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member, other than an ex officio  Member, shall, unless he is 
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the 10 
 expiry of six months from the date of receipt of such not ice or until a person duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
16. Senate .—(1) The Senate shall be the principal academic body of the Institute, consisting of the 
following  persons, namely: — 
(a) the Director                       — Chairperson, ex officio;  
(b) the Registrar                       — Member, ex officio;  
(c) all full time faculty at the level of 
Professors appointed or recognised  as 
such by the Institute for the purpose of 
imparting instructions in the Institute                       — Members, ex officio ; 
(d) three persons, not being employees of 
the Institute, to be nominated by the 
Board in consultation with the Director 
from a mongst academicians of repute, one 
each from the fields of food science, 
management and food technology                        — Members; and  
(e) such other members of the staff as 
may be laid down in the Statutes                 — Members, ex officio .  
 (2) The term of office of a Member nominated under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be two years 
from the date of his nomination.  
(3) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a Member.  
17. Functions of Senate .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of an Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance of standards of instruc tion, education and examination in the Institute and shall exercise such 
other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred on or assigned to it by the Statutes.  
18. Powers and functions of Chairperson .—(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at the 
meetings of the Board and at the Convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform suc h other functions as may be 
conferred on or assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes.  
19. Director .—(1) The Director shall be appointed by the Board.  
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and shall be 
responsible for the proper administration of the Institute and for imparting of instruction and maintenance 
of discipline therein.  
(3) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Board.  11 
 (4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and p erform such other functions as may be 
conferred on or assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or Ordinances.  
20. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of each Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions as 
may be laid down by the Statutes and shal l be the custodian of the records, common seal, funds of the 
Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board,  the Senate and such Committees as may be 
specified by the Statutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as ma y be 
conferred on or assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Director.  
21. Other authorities and officers .—The powers and functions of other authorities and officers, 
other than those mentioned above, shall be such as may be determined by the  Statutes.  
22. Appointments .— All appointments of the staff of every Institute shall be made in accordance 
with the procedure laid down in the Statutes, by — 
(a) the Board, if the appointment is of the academic staff in the post of Assistant Professor or 
above or if the appointment is of the non -academic staff in any post which is above level 7 in the pay 
matrix; and  
(b) the Director, in any other case.  
23. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(b) the formation of departments of teaching;  
(c) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinations for degrees and diplomas of the Institute;  
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) the qualifications, classification, terms and conditions of service and method of appointment 
to academic, administrative, technical and other posts;  
(f) the c onstitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers and other staff of the Institute;  
(g) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the Institute;  
(h) the establishment and maintenance of halls  and hostels;  
(i) the conditions for residence of students of the Institute and charging of fees for residence in 
the halls and hostels and other charges;  
(j) the manner of filling up the vacancies of Members of the Board;  12 
 (k) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and Members of the Board;  
(l) the authentication of the orders and decisions of the Board;  
(m) the financial accountability of the Institute;  
(n) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any Committee, the quorum at such meetings and the 
procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business; and  
(o) any other matter which, by this Act, is required to be, or may be, specified by the Statutes.  
24. Statutes how made .—(1) The first Statutes of each Institute shall be framed by the Council  with 
the previous approval of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be 
after they are made before each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal t he 
Statutes in the manner hereafter provided in this section.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of Statute shall require 
the previous approval of the Central Government which may approve it or remit it to the Boar d for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been approved by the Central Government.  
25. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of the students to the Institute;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute;  
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to 
the examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas;  
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(e) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(f) the conduct of examinations;  
(g) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and  
(h) any other matter which, by this Act or the Statut es, is to be or may be provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
26. Ordinances how made .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the Ordinances shall be 
made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may dir ect, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be after it is made, to the Board and shall be 
considered by the Board at its next meeting.  13 
 (3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any Ordinance and such Ordinanc e 
shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or cancelled, as the case may be.  
27. Tribunal of Arbi tration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institute, one member 
nominated by the employee concerned, and an umpire appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The  decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in 
respect of the matters decided by the said Tribunal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall preclude the employee or the Institute, as the case ma y 
be, from availing the judicial remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.  
(3) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(4) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration sh all apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE COUNCIL  
28. Establishment of Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a central body to be called  the Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in -charge of Food 
Processing Industries, Central Government  — Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Minister of the State for Food 
Processing Industries, Central Go vernment  — member, ex officio ; 
(c) Chairperson, Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India  — member, ex officio ; 
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India 
in-charge of the Ministry or Department of 
the Central Government dealing with 
Finance  — membe r, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chief Executive Officer, National 
Institution for Transforming India  — member, ex officio ; 
(f) the Secretary to the Government of India 
in-charge of the Ministry or Department of 
the Central Government dealing with Higher 
Education  — member, ex officio ; 
(g) three representatives of eminence from 
Food Processing Industry to be nominated by 
the Chairperson of the Council  — members;  14 
 (h) three eminent academicians known for 
their contribution in the field of food 
processing, to be nom inated by the 
Chairperson of the Council  — members;  
(i) three Members of Parliament, of whom 
two shall be elected by the House of the 
People and one by the Council of States  —members:  
Provided that the office of member of the Council shall not disqualify  its holder for being chosen as 
or for being a Member of either House of Parliament;  
(j) the Secretary to the Government of India 
in-charge of the Ministry of the Central 
Government dealing with Food Processing 
Industries  — Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) The Central Government may, by order, designate one amongst the members as Vice -chairperson 
to the Council.  
29. Term of office of, vacancies among, and allowances payable to members of Council .—(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term o f office of a member of the Council, other than an  
ex officio  member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that the term of member referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 28 shall come 
to an end as  soon as the member becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister or the 
Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the people or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of 
States or ceases to be a Member of the House from which he was elected.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(3) The members of the Council referred to in clauses ( g) and ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 28 shall 
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
(4) The vacancy of a member of the Council, other than an ex officio  member, shall be filled up in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue fo r the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been so nominated.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member, other than an ex officio  
member, shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue  in office until another person is 
nominated as a member in his place or until the expiry of six months whichever is earlier.  
(7) The members of the Council, other than ex officio  members, shall be paid such travelling and 
other allowances as may be provid ed by the Statutes.  
(8) A member of the Council other than an ex officio  member may be removed from his office by the 
Central Government in such circumstances and manner as may be prescribed.  15 
 30. Functions of Council .—(1) It shall be the general function of the Council to co -ordinate the 
activities of all the Institutes and it shall facilitate the sharing of experiences, ideas and concerns with a 
view to enhance the performance of the Institutes.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council shall perform the following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to lay down broader policy framework for the functioning of the Institutes;  
(b) to recommend to the Central Government, the institution of scholarships including for 
research and for the benef it of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and 
other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens;  
(c) to deliberate on such matters of common interest to Institutes as may be referred to it by an 
Institute;  
(d) to pr omote necessary coordination and co -operation in the working of the Institutes;  
(e) to review the achievement of policy objectives; and  
(f) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
31. Meetings of Council .—The Council shall meet at such time and place and follow such procedure 
in its meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Grants by Central Government .—For the purpose of enabling the Institutes to discharge their 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to each of the Institute in each financial year such sums of money 
and in such manner as it may think fit.  
33. Fund of Institutes .—(1) Each Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited, — 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,  benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund of each Institute shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the Instit ute may, with the approval of the Board, decide.  
(3) The Fund of each Institute shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including 
expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under this Act.  
34. Acco unts and audit .—(1) Each Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such form and manner 16 
 as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with  the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.  
(2) The accounts of each Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of any Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with s uch audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers an d to inspect the offices of the 
Institute.  
(4) The accounts of each Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annuall y to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament in accordance with such procedure as may be laid down by the Central Government.  
35. Pension , insurance and provident funds .—(1) Each Institute shall constitute for the benefit of 
its employees, including the Director, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified 
by the Statutes, such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where the provident fund refer red to in sub -section ( 1) has been constituted, the Central 
Government may declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to 
such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Acts and proceedings not  to be invalidate by vacancies, etc .—No act of the Council, or any 
Institute, or Board, or Senate or any other Committee set up under this Act or the Statutes shall be invalid 
merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in, the constitution thereof;  or 
(b) any defect in the nomination or appointment of a person acting as member thereof; or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.  
37. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Chairperson or Members of the Board, Senate or Council or any officer or employee of the 
Institute for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of 
this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
38. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  17 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all o r any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of filling up the vacancy under sub -section ( 4) of section 29;  
(b) the circumstances and the manner in which a member of the Council may be removed from 
his office under sub -section ( 8) of section 29;  
(c) the other functions of the Council under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(d) the time and place of meeting of the Council, its quorum and the procedure for conducting 
business therein under section 31;  
(e) the form and manner in which  the annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet 
shall be prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 34; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
39. Rules, Statutes and Ordinances to be published in Official Gaz ette and to be laid before 
Parliament .—(1) Every rule, every Statute and every Ordinance made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every rule, every Statute and every Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the se ssion or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, Statute or Ordinance or both Houses agree that the rule, Statute or 
Ordinance should not be made, the rule, Statute or Ordinance shall thereafter have eff ect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule, Statute 
or Ordinance.  
40. Power to remove d ifficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to b e necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
41. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the Board of Governors of an Institute functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continu e to function until a new Board is constituted for that Institute 
under this Act, but on the constitution of a new Board under this Act, the members of the existing 
Board holding office before such constitution shall cease to hold office;  18 
 (b) until the first Statutes and Ordinances are made under this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances of 
the existing Institutes, as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to 
apply to the corresponding Institutes in so far as they are not in consistent with the provisions of this 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 4]  
 
Sl. No.  Name of existing Institute  Name of corresponding Institute  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. National Institute of Food 
Technology  Entrepreneurship and 
Management  (NIFTEM) Kundli, 
Haryana . National Institute of Food Technology,  
Entrepreneurship and Management,. Kundli, 
Haryana.  
2. Indian Institute of Food Processing  
Technology (IIFPT) Thanjavur, 
Tamil Nadu.  National Institute of Food Technology, 
Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur, 
Tamil Nadu.  
 
--------------------------The Provisional collection of Taxes Act 2023.pdf--------------------------
THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES ACT, 2023  
_____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________ 
 
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title.  
2. Definition.   
3. Power of Central Government to make declaration.  
4. Effect of declarations under this Act, and duration thereof.  
     5. Refunds to be made in certain cases.  
     6. Repeal.  
  THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTION OF TAXES ACT, 2023  
ACT NO. 50 OF 2023  
[28th December, 2023.]  
 
An Act to provide for the immediate effect for a limited period of provisions in Bills relating to the 
imposition or increase of duties of customs or excise.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
      1. Short title .— This Act may be called the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 2023.  
 2. Definition .—In this Act, a “declared provision” means a provision in a Bill in respect of which a 
declaration has been made under section 3.  
 3. Power of Central Government to make declaration .—Wh ere a Bill to be introduced in Parliament 
on behalf of the Government provides for the imposition or increase of a duty of customs or excise with or 
without change in tariff classification, the Central Government may cause to be inserted in the Bill a 
declaration that it is expedient in the public interest that any provision of the Bill relating to such imposition 
or increase shall have immediate effect under this Act.   
 4. Effect of declarations under this Act, and duration thereof .— (1) A declared provision shall have 
the force of law immediately on the expiry of the day on which the Bill containing it is introduced.  
(2) A declared provision shall cease to have the force of law under the provisions of this Act — 
(a) when it comes into o peration as an enactment, with or without amendment;  
(b) when the Central Government, in pursuance of a motion passed by Parliament, directs, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, that it shall cease to have the force of law; or  
      (c) if it has no t already ceased to have the force of law under clause ( a) or clause ( b), then on the 
expiry of the seventy -fifth day after the day on which the Bill containing it was introduced.  
5. Refunds to be made in certain cases.— (1) Where a declared provision comes into operation as an 
enactment in an amended form before the expiry of the seventy -fifth day after the day on which the Bill 
containing it was introduced, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which would not have been collected if the provision adopted in the enactment had been the declared provision:  
Provided that the rate at which refunds of any duty may be made under this sub- section shall not exceed 
the difference between the rate of such duty proposed in the declared provision and the rate o f such duty in 
force when the Bill was introduced.  
(2) Where a declared provision ceases to have the force of law under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of             
sub-section ( 2) of section 4, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which would not hav e been 
collected if the declaration in respect of it had not been made. 
6. Repeal .— The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931(16 of 1931) is hereby repealed.  
--------------------------The Rashtriya Raksha University Act 2020.pdf--------------------------
 
1 
 THE RASHTRIYA RAKSHA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2020  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of Rashtriya Raksha University as an institution of national importance.  
3.  Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSITY  
4. Establishment and incorporation of University .  
5. Effect of incorporation of University.  
6. Objects of University.  
7. Powers and functions of University.  
8. Jurisdiction of University.  
9. University t o be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
10. Admission of students.  
11. Teaching at University.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF UNIVERSITY  
12. Authorities of University.  
13. Governing Body.  
14. Term of office, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Governing Body.  
15. Powers and functions of Governing Body.  
16. Executive Council.  
17. Academic Council . 
18. Functions of Academic Council.  
19. Finance Committee.  
20. Board for Affiliation and Recognition.   
2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Officers of University.  
22. Vice -Chancellor . 
23. Pro Vice -Chancellor.  
24. Registrar.  
25. Dean.  
26. Finance Officer.  
27. Other authorities and officers.  
28. Grants by Central Government.  
29. Grants by State Governments.  
CHAPTER IV  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
30. Corpus of University.  
31. Fund.  
32. Accounts and audit.  
33. Pension and provident fund.  
CHAPTER V  
ANNUAL REPORT AND APPOINTMENTS  
34. Annual report of University.  
35. Appointments . 
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES  
36. Statutes.  
37. Statutes how made.  
38. Ordinances.  
39. Ordinance s how made.  
CHAPTER VII  
 TRIBUNAL OF ARBITRATION  
40. Tribunal of Arbitration for employees.  
41. Redressal for debarment from examination and disciplinary action against students.  
  
3 
 SECTIONS  
CHAPTER VIII  
 MISCELLANEOUS  
  
42. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies.  
43. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of matters relating to Governing Body.  
44. Acts and proceeding not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
45. University to be public authority under Right to Information Act.  
46. Power of Central Government to review work and progress made and to hold enquiries.  
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
48. Residuary provisions.  
49. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
50. Power to remove difficulties.  
51. Laying  of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notifications.  
52. Transitional provisions.  
53. Repeal of Gujarat Act 14 of 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
4 
 THE RASHTRIYA RAKSHA UNIVERSITY ACT, 2020  
ACT NO. 3 1 OF 2020  
 [28th September , 2020.]  
An Act to establish and declare an institution to be known as the Rashtriya Raksha University as an 
institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament i n the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Rashtriya Raksha University 
Act, 2020.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Rashtriya Raksha University as an institution of national                          
importance.  — Whereas the objects of the Rashtriya Raksha University are such as to make it an 
institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the Rashtriya Raksha University is an 
institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  — In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University referred to in section 17;  
(b) “affiliated college ” means an institution recognised as such by the Executive Council in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder;  
(c) “college ” means an institution maintained by or admitted to the privileges of the University 
and includes an affiliated college;  
(d) “Dean ” means the Dean of the University appointed under section 25;  
(e) “department ” means an academic department of the University;  
(f) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as, broadcasting, telecasting, internet, correspondence courses, seminars, 
contact programmes or the combination of any two or more such modes ;  
(g) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers, other 
academic and non -academic staff of the University;  
(h) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University constituted under                  
section  16;  
(i) “Finance Committee ” means the Finance Committee of the University constituted under                  
section 19;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2020, vide notification No. S.O. 3422(E), dated 30th September , 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii).   
5 
 (j) “Fund ” means the Fund of University referred to in section 31;  
(k) “Governing Body ” means the Governing Body of the University c onstituted under section 13;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “Pro Vice -Chancellor ” means the Pro Vice -Chancellor of the University appointed under 
section 23;  
(n) “Registrar ” means the Registrar of the Univ ersity appointed under section 24;  
(o) “School ” means a school of study of the University;  
(p) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the University 
made under this Act;  
(q) “student ” means a student of the University and includes any person who has enrolled for 
pursuing any course of study in the University;  
(r) “teachers ” means professors, associate professors and assistant professors appointed or 
recognised as such by Statutes for the purposes of imparting instruction in the University or for giving 
guidance for research or rendering assistance to students for pursuing any course of study in the 
University;  
(s) “University ” means the Rashtriya Raksha University established under se ction 4;  
(t) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of the University appointed under section 22.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF UNIVERSITY  
4. Establishment and incorporation of University. — (1) The Raksha Shakti University in the State 
of Gujarat, established under the Raksha Shakti University Act, 2009  (Gujarat Act 14 of 2009) , shall be 
established as a body corporate under this Act by the name of Rashtriya Raksha University.  
(2) The Rashtriya Raksha University shall be a body corporate having perp etual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The Headquarters of the University shall be at Gandhinagar in t he State of Gujarat.  
(4) The University may establish and maintain centres and campuses at such other places in India and 
abroad as it may deem fit.  
5. Effect of incorporation of University. — On and from the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) any refer ence to the Raksha Shakti University in any contract or other instrument shall be 
deemed as a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Raksha Shakti University shall 
vest in the University;  
(c) all right s and liabilities of the Raksha Shakti University shall be transferred to, and be the 
rights and liabilities of, the University;   
6 
 (d) every person employed by the Raksha Shakti University immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall hold his office  or service in the University by the same tenure, at the 
same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges 
as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same if thi s 
Act had not been enacted, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated 
or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable t o such employee, his employment may 
be terminated by the University in accordance with the term of the contract with the employee or, if 
no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the University of compensation 
equivalent to three mo nths’ remuneration in case of permanent employees and one month ’s 
remuneration in the case of other employees:  
 Provided further that every person employed before the commencement of this Act, pending the 
execution of a contract, shall be deemed to have be en appointed in accordance with the provisions of 
a contract consistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes:  
Provided also that any reference, by whatever form of words, to the Vice -Chancellor of the 
Raksha Shakti University in any law for th e time being in force, or in any instrument or other 
document, shall be construed as a reference to the Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(e) every person pursuing any academic or research course in every existing institute or 
department under Raksha Shakti University, immediately before commencement of this Act, shall be 
deemed to have migrated and registered with the corresponding institute or department, on such 
commencement at the same level of course in the University from which such person migrated and 
shall continue to pursue such academic or research course in the University;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted by or a gainst Raksha Shakti University, 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be continued or instituted by or against the 
University;  
(g) all colleges, institutions, faculties and departments affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges 
of, or maintained by, the Raksha Shakti University shall stand affiliated to, or admitted to the 
privilege of, or maintained by, the University.  
6. Objects of University. — The objects of the University shall be to promote global standards and to 
provide —  
(a) dyn amic and high standards of learning and research;  
(b) working environment dedicated to the advancement and dissemination of education, research, 
training and scholarship of the highest quality in the domain of policing including coastal policing, 
security,  law enforcement, criminal justice, cyber security, cyber crime, artificial intelligence and 
related areas of internal security; and  
(c) public safety with a view to build human capital having the highest ideals of citizenship and 
citizen centric services  with special reference to women, weaker sections and minorities, who are 
endowed with the necessary intellectual acumen, moral commitment and professional competence to 
meet hands -on, the challenges of crime, justice and public safety in a free society.   
7 
 7. Powers and functions of University. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the University 
shall exercise the following powers and perform the following functions, namely: —  
(a) to provide instructions and research in such branches of police science s including coastal 
policing, security, cyber security, artificial intelligence, cyber crime, risk management, social sciences 
including studies related to gender sensitisation, minorities and weaker sections, juvenile justice and 
such other subjects relev ant for the Government as well as private sector, as the University may think 
fit, and for the advancement of learning, research and dissemination of knowledge in such branches;  
(b) to plan and prescribe courses of study such as degrees, diplomas and certi ficates including                
in-service courses of short and long duration;  
(c) to endeavour to design and conduct through its affiliated colleges, integrated courses including 
post-matriculation in policing related or allied subjects;  
(d) to hold exam inations and grant degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic 
distinctions;  
(e) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;  
(f) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, of evaluation or any other method of testing, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, 
degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(g) to provide facilities through distance education system to such persons as it may determine;  
(h) to introduce semester system, continuous evaluation and choice -based credit system and enter 
into agreements with other Universities and academic institutions for credit transfer and joint degree 
programmes;  
(i) to obtain accreditation from the National Asses sment and Accreditation Council or any other 
accrediting agency at the national level;  
(j) to introduce e -governance with an effective management information system;  
(k) to fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(l) to establish, maintain and man age colleges, institutions and halls in other States and Union 
territories and hostels for the residence of students;  
(m) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research and 
instructions as are, in the opinion of the Uni versity, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(n) to supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the University 
and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare, cultural and corporate life;  
(o) to institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto (except in the case of 
the Vice -Chancellor) as may be necessary for imparting instructions and managing all affairs of the 
University;  
(p) to appoint persons working in any other University or academic institution, including those 
located outside the country as teachers of the University for a specified period;   
8 
 (q) to co -operate, collaborate or partner or associate with educational or othe r institutions and 
organisations, public and private, including those located outside the country having objects wholly or 
partly similar to those of the University by exchange of teachers and scholars and generally in such 
manner as may be conducive to th eir common objects;  
(r) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, prizes and medals;  
(s) to provide for the preparation of instructional material, including related software and other 
audio -visual aids;  
(t) to make provisions for rese arch and development in areas of core competence of the 
University;  
(u) to enter into, carry out, vary or cancel contracts;  
(v) to provide, control and maintain discipline among the students and all categories of employees 
and to lay down the conditions o f service of such employees including their code of conduct;  
(w) to establish and maintain such infrastructure as may be necessary;  
(x) to set up campuses across the country and off -shore campuses as per requirement;  
(y) to admit foreign students, Oversea s Citizen of India card holder, Person of Indian Origin,      
non-resident Indian, children of Indian workers in Gulf and South  East Asian Countries, in such 
manner and as may be laid down in the Statutes;  
(z) to do all such things as may be necessary, in cidental or conducive to the attainment of all or 
any of the objects of the University.  
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the University shall not dispose of in any 
manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the C entral Government.  
8. Jurisdiction of University.  —The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.  
9. University to be open to all races, creeds and classes. —(1) The University shall be open to all 
persons irrespective of gender, rac e, caste, creed, disability, domicile, ethnicity, social or economic 
background.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the University which in the 
opinion of the Executive Council involves conditions or obligations oppo sed to the spirit and object of 
this section.  
(3) Admissions to every academic programme  of study in the University shall be based on merit 
assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed prior to the commencement of the process 
of admission by the University:  
Provided that the University shall be a Central Educational Institu tion for the purposes of the Central 
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (5 of 2007).  
10. Admission of students. —  (1) It shall be the endeavour of the University to take necessary 
measures to maintain an all -India character, hig h standard of teaching and research.  
(2) Admission of students for courses in the University shall be made on an all -India basis in such 
manner as may be specified in the Ordinances.   
9 
 (3) Admission of students on international basis may be made in such mann er as may be laid down in 
the Statutes and the directions or instructions or guidelines issued by the Central Government in this 
behalf.  
11. Teaching at University. — All teaching at the University shall be in accordance with the Statutes 
and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES OF UNIVERSITY  
12. Authorities of University.  —The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely: — 
(a) Gove rning Body;  
(b) Executive Council;  
(c) Academic Council;  
(d) Finance Committee; and  
(e) such other authorities as may be laid down in the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
13. Governing Body.  — (1) The Central Government may, by the not ification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Governing Body of the University from such date as it may specify therein.  
 (2) The Governing Body shall consist of not more than fifteen members including the Chairperson, 
with majority of members from acade mia, industry and relevant professional fields, to be nominated by 
the Central Government including the following, namely: —  
(a) Chairperson;  
(b) Vice -Chancellor of the University, ex officio ;  
(c) one representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs not be low the rank of Joint Secretary,                 
ex officio ; 
(d) an officer of Indian Legal Service, not below the rank of Joint Secretary, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, ex officio ;  
(e) two representatives of the Government of Gujarat being officers not below the rank of 
Secretary in that Government;  
(f) one representative of State Police Universities by rotation;  
(g) one person of eminence from the academia or field of education;  
(h) one person of eminence or expertise from the industry or corporate sector;  
(i) one person to be an expert of global eminence from a field having relevance to the objects of 
the University;  
(j) not more than three persons having expertise in defence, po licing, internal security and allied 
fields.   
10 
 (3) The Central Government may, in consultation with such State Governments as it deems fit, 
appoint the Chairperson of the Governing Body, who shall be an eminent person from the field of 
academia, defence, se curity, law enforcement or internal security.  
14. Term of office, vacancies among, and allowances payable to, members of Governing                  
Body.  — (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of the Governing 
Body, other than an ex officio member, shall be for a period of three years from the date of nomination.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office by virtue 
of which he is a member.  
(3) The term of office of  a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the 
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been nominated.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing member shall, unless the 
Governing Body other wise directs, continue in office until another person is nominated as a member in 
his place.  
(5) The members of the Governing Body shall be entitled to such travelling and other allowances as 
may be laid down in the Statutes, but no member shall be entitle d to any salary by reason of this                    
sub-section.  
 15. Powers and functions of Governing Body.  — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
Governing Body of the University shall be responsible for the general policy making, superintend ence, 
direction and control of the affairs of the University and shall exercise all the powers of the University not 
otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power to review 
the acts of the Academic Council.  
(2) It shall be the general duty of the Governing Body to co -ordinate the activities of the University.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Governing Body shall perform the 
following functions, namely: —  
(a) to formulate and review the broad policies and programmes of the University and suggest 
measures for the development of the University;  
(b) to advise on matters relating to the duration of the courses, degrees and other academic 
distinctions to be confe rred by the University, admission standards and other academic matters;  
(c) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and conditions of service of 
employees, institution of scholarships and fellowships, levying of fees and other matters of common 
interest;  
(d) to examine the development plans of the University and to approve such of them as are 
considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the financial implications of such approved plans;  
(e) to examine the annual budget estimates of the University and to recommend to the Central 
Government the allocation of funds for that purpose;  
(f) to lay down the policy and take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration 
and working of the University;  
(g) to institute cou rses of study;   
11 
 (h) to make Statutes;  
(i) to institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts;  
(j) to make necessary recommendation in matters for the furtherance of the objective of the 
University;  
(k) to consider and direct the Executive  Council to amend or repeal Ordinances;  
(l) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, annual accounts and the budget estimates 
of the University for the next financial year, together with a statement of its development plans, 
submitted by the Executive Council and Academic Council, as it thinks fit;  
(m) to delegate any of its powers to the Executive Council, Vice -Chancellor, Pro Vice -
Chancellors, Deans, Registrar or any authority of the University or to a committee or to any other 
officer or e mployee, of the University;  
(n) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
upon it by this Act or the Statutes.  
(4) The Governing Body shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers necessar y 
for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.  
16. Executive Council. — (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of th e Executive Council.  
(3) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be such as may be laid down in the Statutes:  
Provided that such number of members as may be laid down in the Statutes  shall be from among the 
members of the Governing Body.  
17. Academic Council. —The Academic Council of the University shall consist of the following 
persons, namely: — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Academic Council;  
(b) the professors appointed or recognised as such by the University for the purpose of imparting 
instruction;  
(c) three persons to be appointed by the Governing Body from among persons of national or 
international eminence in the industry or academia having  relevance to the objects of the University;  
(d) two persons, not being employees of the University, to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor, 
from amongst educationists of repute;  
(e) one person with wide experience in policing and internal security on ro tation from States and 
Union territories to be nominated by the Central Government; and  
(f) two persons from international universities to be nominated by the Governing Body.  
18. Functions of Academic Council.  —The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body 
of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and Ordinances made  
12 
 thereunder, co -ordinate and exercise control and general supervision over the academic policies of the 
University and shall be responsible fo r the maintenance of standards of learning, education, instruction, 
evaluation and examinations within the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
19. Finance Committee. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee shall be 
such as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
20. Board for Affiliation and Recognition. — (1) The Board for Affiliation and Recognition shall be 
responsible for admitting colle ges and institutions to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board for Affiliation and Recognition, the term of office of its members 
and its powers and duties shall be such as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
21. Officers of Univ ersity. — The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: — 
(a) Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) Pro Vice -Chancellor;  
(c) Registrar;  
(d) Dean;  
(e) Finance Officer; and  
(f) such other officers as may be laid down in the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
22. Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with such State 
Governments as it deems fit, appoint the Vice -Chancellor of the University, who shall be a person 
possessing the highest level of competence, integrity, moral and institutional commitment, with extensive 
knowledge in policing or research or administration or social sciences, preferably having wide experience 
in police training and internal security or a distinguished academician with a minimum of ten years 
admin istrative experience in a reputed research or academic organisation.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be principal academic and chief executive officer of the University and 
shall be responsible for the proper administration of the University and for the impa rting of instruction 
and maintenance of discipline therein.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Governing Body.  
(4) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to ensure that decisions taken by the Governing Body 
are implemented.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Academic Council and 
convocations of the University.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by  this Act or laid down in the Statutes or Ordinances.  
23. Pro Vice -Chancellor. —The Pro Vice -Chancellor of the University shall be appointed in such 
manner, on such emoluments and other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform 
such d uties, as may be laid down in the Statutes.   
13 
 24. Registrar. —(1) The Registrar of the University shall be appointed in such manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall be the custodian of records, com mon seal, funds of the University and such 
other property of the University as the Governing Body shall commit to his charge.  
(3) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Governing Body, the Executive Council, the 
Academic Council and such other com mittees as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(4) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for the proper discharge of his 
functions.  
(5) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act or the Statutes or by the Vice -Chancellor.  
25. Dean.  —The Dean of the University shall be appointed in such manner, on such emoluments and 
other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be laid dow n 
in the Statutes.  
26. Finance Officer.  —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, on such emoluments 
and other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be laid 
down in the Statutes.  
27. Other authorities and officers.  —The powers and duties of other authorities and officers, other 
than those hereinbefore mentioned, of the University including their terms and conditions of service shall 
be such as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
28. Grants by Central Government.  —For the purpose of enabling the University to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the University in each financial yea r such sums of money in such 
manner as it may think fit.  
29. Grants by State Governments.  —The University may receive such sums of money as grants -in-
aid annually or as one -time grant from any State Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
 ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
30. Corpus of  University. —The University may receive funds from the Central Government or State 
Governments or other sources or use its funds to maintain and operate a corpus of the University.  
31. Fund. — (1) The University shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credi ted— 
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;  
(b) all moneys received from State Governments;  
(c) all fees and other charges received by the University;  
(d) all moneys received by the University by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; and  
(e) all moneys received by the University in any other manner or from any other source.   
14 
 (2) All moneys credited to the Fund of the Univers ity shall be deposited in such banks or invested in 
such manner as the University may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund of the University shall be applied towards meeting its expenses including expenditure 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its duties under this Act.  
32. Accounts and audit. —(1) The University shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form an d 
accounting standard as may be specified, by notification, by the Central Government in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the University shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by it in connection with such audit shall be payable by it to the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the acco unts of the University shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the 
University.  
(4) The accounts of the University as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other perso n appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
33. Pension and provident fund. —(1) The University may constitute for the benefit of its employees 
such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme as it may deem fit in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be laid down in the Statutes.  
(2) Where any provident fund has been constituted under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government 
may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925)  shall apply to such fund as 
if it were a Government provident fund.  
CHAPTER V  
ANNUAL REPORT AND APPOINTMEN TS 
34. Annual report of University.  — (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared by the 
Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards 
the fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based  assessment of the research being undertaken by it, and 
be submitted to the Governing Body on or before such date as may be specified and the Governing Body 
shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The annual report as approved by the Governin g Body shall be published and placed on the 
website of the University.  
(3) The Executive Council shall prepare and release for every year a report, in English and in Hindi, 
the working of the University in the previous year on or before the expiry of nine  months from the close 
of financial year, and a copy of the same, together with an audited statement of accounts showing the  
15 
 income and expenditure for the previous year shall be submitted to the Central Government within that 
stipulated time, and the same  may be caused to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
35. Appointments. —All appointments of the employees of the University, except that of the                 
Vice -Chancellor, shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes,  by— 
(a) the Governing Body, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in the post of Assistant 
Professor or above, or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff, in any post equiv alent to 
Group ‘A’ and above;  
(b) by the Vice -Chancellor, in any other case.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES  
36. Statutes.  —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: —  
  (a) the manner of recognition of an institution by the Executive Council as affiliated college;  
 (b) the constitution, powers and functions of, authorities and other bodies including disciplinary 
committee and examination committee, of the University as may be constituted from time to time;  
 (c) the appointment and cont inuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(d) the appointment, p owers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and conditions of service;  
(f) the appointment of teachers and academic staff  working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(g) the conditions of service of employees including provisions for pension, insurance, provident 
fund, the manner of termination of service and discip linary action;  
(h) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(i) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(j) the procedure for appeal to the Governing B ody by any employee or student against the action 
of any officer or authority of the University;  
(k) the conferment of autonomous status on a college or an institution or a department;  
(l) the establishment and abolition of Schools, departments, centr es, halls, colleges and 
institutions;  
(m) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies including learned bodies, associations and the private sector;  
(n) the conferment of honorary degrees;   
16 
 (o) the with drawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(p) the management of colleges and institutions established by the University;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(r) the mainte nance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(s) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, laid down in the Statutes.  
37. Statutes how made. — (1) The first Statute of the University shall be made by the Governing 
Body with the prior approval of the Central Government and a copy of the same shall be laid, as soon as 
may be it is made, before each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Governing Body may, fr om time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1):  
Provided that the Governing Body shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority  of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Governing Body.  
 38. Ordinances.  —Subject to the provisions of this A ct and the Statutes, the Ordinances may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificat es of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to 
examinations, degrees and diplomas to the University;  
(f) the conditions and institution for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and 
prizes;   
(g) the conduct of examination including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, w hich may be made for the residence and teaching of women 
students and the specifying of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the establishment of centr es of studies, boards of studies, specialised laboratories and other 
committees;  
(k) the creation, c omposition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(l) the setting up of machinery for redressal of grievances of employees and students; and   
17 
 (m) any other matter which by this Act o r Statutes, is to be, or may be, specified in the 
Ordinances.  
39. Ordinances how made. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be 
made by the Executive Council.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Executive Council shall have effect fro m such date as it may direct, 
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Governing Body and shall be 
considered by the Governing Body at its next succeeding meeting.  
(3) The Governing Body shall have power by resolution to a pprove, modify or cancel any such 
Ordinance and such Ordinance shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or 
cancelled, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER VII  
TRIBUNAL OF ARBITRATION  
40. Tribunal of Arbitration for employees. —(1) Every employee of the University shall be 
appointed under a written contract, which shall be retained by the University and a copy of the same shall 
be given to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University a nd any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and chaired by an umpire 
appointed by the Governing Body.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in 
respect of the matters decided by the said Tribunal: Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall 
preclude the employee from availing of the  judicial remedies available under articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation                       
Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) . 
 (5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be laid down in the Statutes.  
41. Redressal for debarment from examination and disciplinary action against                         
students. —(1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls 
of the University by an order of the Vice -Chancellor on the recommendation of the disciplinary 
committee or examination committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at 
the examinations of the University for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of 
such order by him, appeal to the Governing Body and the Governing Body may confirm, modify or 
reverse the decision of the Vice -Chancellor.   
18 
 (2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 40 shall apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Disputes as to constitution of authorities and bodies. — If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly elected or appointed as,  or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other body 
of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government, and the decision of that 
Government thereon shall be final.  
43. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of matters relating to Governing 
Body. —(1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry out the 
purposes relating to Governing Body.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rule s may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Governing Body;  
(b) the disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being a member of the Governing Body;  
(c) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members may be removed;  
(d) the meetings of the Governing Body and the procedure for conduct of business;  
(e) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Governing Body; and  
(f) the manner in which functions of the Governing Body may be exercised.  
44. Acts and proceeding not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc. —No act of the Governing Body 
or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member                
thereof; or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the ca se.  
45. University to be public authority under Right to Information Act. —The provisions of the 
Right to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005)  shall apply to the University, as if it were a public authority 
defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of that Act.  
46. Power of Central Government to review work and progress made and to hold                    
enquiries. — (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review  
19 
 the work and progress of the University, including colleges and institutions administered by it, and hold 
enquiries thereof and to submit a report thereon in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
(2) Upon receipt of any such report, the Central Government may, after obtaining the views of the 
Governing Body thereon through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as it 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be 
bound to comply with such directions.  
47. Protection of act ion taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or  the Ordinances made thereunder.  
48. Residuary provisions.  — (1) The Governing Body shall have the authority to deal with any 
matter pertaining to the University and not specifically dealt with in this Act.  
(2) The decision of the Governing Body on all su ch matters shall, subject to revision by the Central 
Government, be final.  
49. Power  of Central Government to issue directions. —The University shall carry out such 
directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient 
administration of this Act.  
50. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such d irections not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the period of two 
years from the date of  commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
51. Laying of rules, Statutes, Ordinances and notifications. — (1) Every rule, Statute or Ordinance 
made and every notification issued under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every rule, Statute or Ordinance made and every notification issued under this Act, shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia ment, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification or both 
Houses agree that the rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification should not be made, the rule, Statute, 
Ordinance or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule, Statute, Ordinance or notification.   
20 
 52. Transit ional provisions.  — (1) The existing Board of Governors, Finance Committee and other 
committees functioning in the Raksha Shakti University, Gujarat shall continue to function till such time 
the University constitutes the authorities or committees under th e provisions of this Act.  
(2) The existing officers of the Raksha Shakti University, Gujarat such as, Vice -Chancellor, Registrar 
or Finance Officer, shall continue to function till such time the officers are appointed under the provisions 
of this Act.  
53. Repeal of Gujarat Act 14 of 2009. —(1) The Raksha Shakti University Act, 2009 is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, —  
(a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awa rded, privileges granted, or other things done under the Raksha Shakti 
University Act, 2009, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued, conferred, awarded, 
granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act and, except as otherwise  provided by 
or under this Act or the Statutes, continue in force unless and until they are superseded by any order 
made under this Act or the Statutes; and  
(b) all the proceedings of selection committee or any other authority, if any, for the appointment 
or promotion of teachers and other employees that took place before the commencement of this Act 
and all actions of the concerned authorities in respect of the recommendations of such selection 
committee or authority, if any, where no orders of appointment  on the basis thereof were passed 
before the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding that the procedure for selection has been 
modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceedings in connection with such 
pending selections sha ll be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act and be continued from 
the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if the concerned 
authorities take a decision to the contrary.  
__________  
--------------------------The Repealing and Amending Act 2023.pdf--------------------------
THE REPEALING AND AMENDING ACT, 2023  
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS         
_________ 
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title.  
2. Repeal of certain enactments.  
3. Amendment of  enactments.  
4. Savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE   
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
        THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
  THE REPEALING AND AMENDING ACT, 2023  
ACT NO. 37 OF 2023  
                                                                                                              [17th December, 2023.]  
 
An Act to repeal certain enactments and to amend an enactment.   
    B E it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
 1. Short title . —This Act may be called the Repealing and Amending Act, 2023.  
 2. Repeal of certain enactments.  —The enactments specified in the First Schedule and the Second 
Schedule are hereby repealed.  
 3. Amendment of enactment . —The enactment specified in the Third Schedule is hereby amended 
to the extent and in the manner specified in the fourth column thereof.  
4.  Savings. —The repeal by thi s Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in which 
the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to;  
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or 
suffered,  or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accruedor incurred, or any remedy or 
proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already g ranted, or the proof of any past act or thing;  
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of 
pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed;  
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, offic e, custom, 
liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
           
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section  2) 
REPEALS  
Year  Act 
No. Short Title  
1 2 3 
1850  18 The Judicial Officers Protection Act, 1850.  
1855  28 The Usury Laws Repeal Act, 1855.  
1857  5 The Oriental Gas Company Act, 1857.  
1867  11 The Oriental Gas Company Act, 1867.  
1871  4 The Coroners Act, 1871.  
1881  16 The Obstruction in Fairways Act, 1881  
1885  18 The Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885.  
1912  13 The Delhi Laws Act, 1912.  
1915  7 The Delhi Laws Act, 1915  
1922  22 The Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, 1922.  
1923  6 The Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act, 1923.  
1934  15 The Sugar -cane Act, 1934.  
1941  12 The Delhi Restriction of Uses of Land Act, 1941.  
1950  74 The Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1950.  
1965  44 The Metal Corporation of India (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1965.  
1974  28 The Coal Mines (Conserva tion and Development) Act, 1974.  
1976  100 The Metal Corporation (Nationalisation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1976.  
1982  71 The Andhra Scientific Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1982.  
1983  17 The Delhi Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1983.  
1994  13 The Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act, 1994.  
2018  1 The Companies (Amendment) Act, 2017.  
2018  8 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2018.  
2018  21 The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 2018. 
2018  23 The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2018.  
2018  26 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Second Amendment) Act, 2018.  
2018  27 The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) 
Amendment Act, 2018.  
 
 Year  Act 
No. Short Title  
1 2 3 
2019  6 The Personal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
2019  8 The Special Economic Zones (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
2019  11 The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
2019  14 The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019. 
2019  24 The Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
2019  26 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
2019  36 The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 2019. 
2019  37 The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 2019.  
2020  19 The Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 
2020.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section  2) 
REPEALS  
Year  Act No.  Short Title  
1 2 3 
2013  5 The Appropriation (Railways) Vote on Account Act, 2013.  
2013  6 The Appropriation (Railways) Act, 2013.  
2013  7 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 2 Act, 2013.  
2013  8 The Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act, 2013.  
2013  9 The Appropriation Act, 2013.  
2013  10 The Appropriation (No. 2) Act, 2013  
2013  15 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 3 Act, 2013.  
2013  16 The Appropriation (No. 3) Act, 2013.  
2013  21 The Appropriation (No. 4) Act, 2013.  
2014  2 The Appropriation (No. 5) Act, 2013.  
2014  3 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 4 Act, 2013.  
2014  4 The Appropriation (Railways) Vote on Account Act, 2014.  
2014  5 The Appropriation (Railways) Act, 2014.  
2014  12 The Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act, 2014.  
2014  13 The Appropriation Act, 2014.  
2014  21 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 2 Act, 2014.  
2014  22 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 3 Act, 2014.  
2014  23 The Appropriation (No. 2) Act, 2014.  
2014  24 The Appropriation (No. 3) Act, 2014.  
2014  38 The Appropriation (No. 4) Act, 2014.  
2015  6 The Appropriation (Railways) Vote on Account Act, 2015.  
2015  7 The Appropriation (Railways) Act, 2015.  
2015  8 The Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act, 2015.  
2015  9 The Appropriation Act, 2015.  
2015  13 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 2 Act, 2015.  
2015  15 The Appropriation (No. 2) Act, 2015.  
2015  24 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 3 Act, 2015.  
2015  25 The Appropriation (No. 3) Act, 2015.  
2016  7 The Appropriation (No. 4) Act, 2015.  
2016  8 The Appropriation (No. 5) Act, 2015.                                              
Year  Act No.  Short Title  
1 2 3 
2016  
2016  14 
15 The Appropriation (Railways) Vote on Account Act, 2016.  
The Appropriation (Railways) Act, 2016.  
2016  19 The Appropriation (Vote  on Account) Act, 2016.  
2016  20 The Appropriation Act, 2016.  
2016  26 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 2 Act, 2016.  
2016  29 The Appropriation (No. 2) Act, 2016.  
2016  46 The Appropriation (No. 3) Act, 2016.  
2016  50 The Appropriation (No. 4) Act, 2016.  
2016  51 The Appropriation (No. 5) Act, 2016.  
2017  8 The Appropriation (Railways) Act, 2017.  
2017  9 The Appropriation (Railways) No. 2 Act, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
                       
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
AMENDMENT  
Year  Act No.  Short Title  Amendment  
1 2 3 4 
2012  12 The Factoring 
Regulation Act, 2011  In section 31A, in sub- section 
(3), for the w ords "that Central 
Government", the words  "that 
Government" shall be 
substituted  
 
______ 
 
--------------------------The Surrogacy Regulation Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF SURROGACY CLINICS  
3. Prohibition and regulation of surrogacy clinics.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF SURROGACY AND SURROGACY PROCEDURES  
4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures.  
5. Prohibition of conducting surrogacy . 
6. Written informed consent of surrogate mother . 
7. Prohibition to abandon child born through surrogacy.  
8. Rights of surrogate child . 
9. Number of oocytes o r human embryos to be implanted . 
10. Prohibition of abortion . 
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF SURROGACY CLINICS  
11. Registration of surrogacy clinics.  
12. Certificate of reg istration . 
13. Cancellation or suspension of registration  . 
14. Appeal.  
15. Establishment of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Registry . 
16. Application of provisions of Assisted Reproductive Technology Act with respect to National 
Registry . 
CHAPTER V  
NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARD AND STATE ASSISTED 
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARDS  
17. Constitution of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board . 
18. Term of office of Members . 
19. Meetings of Board . 
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.  
21. Disqualifications for appointment as Member . 
22. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes .  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board.  
24. Eligibility of Member for re -appointment . 
25. Functions of Board.  
26. Constitution of State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board.  
27. Composition of State Board . 
28. Term of office of members .  
29. Meetings of State Board . 
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Board . 
31. Disqualifications for appointment as member . 
32.  Temporary association of persons with State Board for particular  purposes . 
33. Authentication of orders and other instruments  of State Board.  
34. Eligibility of member for re -appointment . 
CHAPTER VI  
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY  
35. Appointment of appropriate authority . 
36. Functions of appropriate authority . 
37. Powers of appropriate authorities . 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
38. Prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate mothers and children born 
through surrogacy . 
39. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act . 
40. Punishment for not following altruistic surrogacy . 
41. Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act or rules for which no specific punishment is 
provided . 
42. Presumption in the case of surrogacy.  
43. Offence to be cognizable, non -baliable and non -compoundable . 
44. Cognizance of offences . 
45. Certain provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Maintenance of records.  
47. Power to search and seize records, etc . 
48. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
49. Application of other laws not barred.  
50. Power to make rules . 
51. Power to make regulations . 
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
53. Transitional provision.  
54.  Power to remove diff iculties.  
 
 3 
 THE SURROGACY (REGULATION) ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 47 OF 2021  
 
[25th December , 2021.]  
An Act to constitute National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board, State 
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Boards and appointment of appropriate 
authorities for regulation of the practice and process of surrogacy and for matte rs connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Surrogacy 
(Regulation)  Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions . — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “abandoned child” means a child born out  of surrogacy procedure who has been deserted 
by his intending parents or guardians and declared as abandoned by the appropriate authority after 
due enquiry;  
(b) “altruistic surrogacy” means the surrogacy in which no charges, expenses, fees, 
remuneration o r monetary incentive of whatever nature, except the medical expenses and such 
other prescribed expenses incurred on surrogate mother and the insurance coverage for the 
surrogate mother, are given to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representat ive; 
(c) “appropriate authority” means the appropriate authority appointed under Section 35;  
(d) “Assisted Reproductive Technology Act” means the Assisted Reproductive Technology 
(Regulation) Act, 2021;  
(e) “Board” means the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board 
constituted under Section 17;  
(f) “clinical establishment” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Clinical 
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 (23 of 2010);  
(g) “commercial surrogacy” means co mmercialisation of surrogacy services or procedures or its 
component services or component procedures including selling or buying of human embryo or 
trading in the sale or purchase of human embryo or gametes or selling or buying or trading the 
services of surrogate motherhood by way of giving payment, reward, benefit, fees, remuneration or 
monetary incentive in cash or kind, to the surrogate mother or her dependents or her representative, 
except the medical expenses and  such other prescribed expenses incurr ed on the surrogate mother 
and the insurance coverage for the surrogate mother;  
                                                           
1. 25th January , 2021, vide Notification no. S.O.  292(E), dated 20th January , 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,            
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 4 
 (h) “couple” means the legally married Indian man and woman above the age of 21 years and 
18 years respectively;  
(i) “egg” includes the female gamete;  
(j) “embryo” means a deve loping or developed organism after fertilisation till the end of fifty -
six days;  
(k) “embryologist” means a person who possesses any post -graduate medical qualification or 
doctoral degree in the field of embryology or clinical embryology from a recognised university 
with not less than two years of clinical experience;  
(l) “fertilisation” means the penetration of the ovum by the spermatozoan and fusion of genetic 
materials resulting in the development of a zygote;  
(m) “foetus” means a human organism during t he period of its development beginning on the 
fifty-seventh day following fertilisation or creation (excluding any time in which its development 
has been suspended) and ending at the birth;  
(n) “gamete” means sperm and oocyte;  
(o) “gynaecologist” shall hav e the same meaning as assigned to it in the Pre -conception and 
Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994);  
(p) “implantation” means the attachment and subsequent penetration by the zona -free 
blastocyst, which star ts five to seven days following fertilisation;  
(q) “insurance” means an arrangement by which a company, individual or intending couple 
undertake to provide a guarantee of compensation for medical expenses, health issues, specified 
loss, damage, illness or death of surrogate mother and such other prescribed expenses incurred on 
such surrogate mother during the process of surrogac y; 
(r) “intending couple” means a couple who have a medical indication necessitating gestational 
surrogacy and who intend to become  parents through surrogacy;  
(s) “intending woman” means an Indian woman who is a widow or divorcee between the age of 
35 to 45 years and who intends to avail the surroga cy; 
(t) “Member” means a Member of the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Board or a State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board, as the case 
may be;  
(u) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(v) “oocyte” means naturally ovulating oocyte in the female genetic tract;  
(w) “Pa ediatrician” means a person who possesses a post -graduate qualification in paediatrics 
as recognised under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956);  
(x) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(y) “registered medical practitio ner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any 
recognised medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register;  
(z) “regulation” m eans regulations made by the Board under this Act;  5 
 (za) “sex selection” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( o) of Section 2 of 
the Pre -conception and Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 
(57 of 1994) ; 
(zb) “State Board” means the State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board 
constituted under section 26;  
(zc) “State Government” in relation to Union territory with Legislature, means the 
Administrator of the Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution;  
(zd) “surrogacy” means a practice whereby one woman bears and gives birth  to a child for an 
intending couple with the intention of handing over such child to the intending couple after the 
birth;  
(ze) “surrogacy clinic” means surrogacy clinic, centre or laboratory, conducting assisted 
reproductive technology services, invitro f ertilisation services, genetic counselling centre, genetic 
laboratory, Assisted Reproductive Technology Banks conducting surrogacy procedure or any 
clinical establishment, by whatsoever name called, conducting surrogacy procedures in any form;  
(zf) “surrog acy procedures” means all gynaecological, obstetrical or medical procedures, 
techniques, tests, practices or services involving handling of human gametes and human embryo in 
surrogacy;  
(zg) “surrogate mother” means a woman who agrees to bear a child (who i s genetically related 
to the intending couple or intending woman) through surrogacy from the implantation of embryo 
in her womb and fulfils the conditions as provided in sub -clause ( b) of clause ( iii) of Section 4;  
(zh) “zygote” means the fertilised oocyte  prior to the first cell division.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF SURROGA CY CLINICS  
3. Prohibition and regulation of surrogacy clinics. —On and from the date of commencement of 
this Act, — 
(i) no surrogacy clinic, unless registered under this Act, shall conduct or associate with, or help 
in any manner, in conducting activities r elating to surrogacy and surrogacy procedures;  
(ii) no surrogacy clinic, paediatrician, gynaecologist, embryologist, registered medical 
practitioner or any person shall conduct, offer, undertake, promote or associate with or avail of 
commercial surrogacy i n any form;  
(iii) no surrogacy clinic shall employ or cause to be employed or take services of any person, 
whether on honorary basis or on payment, who does not possess such qualifications as may be 
prescribed;  
(iv) no registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, embryologist or any other 
person shall conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself or through any other 
person surrogacy or surrogacy procedures at a place other than a place registered under this Act;  6 
 (v) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, 
embryologist or any other person shall promote, publish, canvass, propagate or advertise or cause 
to be promoted, published, canvassed, propagated or advertised which — 
(a) is aimed at inducing or is likely to induce a woman to act as a surrogate mother;  
(b) is aimed at promoting a surrogacy clinic for commercial surrogacy or promoting 
commercial surrogacy in general;  
(c) seeks or aimed at seeking a woman to act as a surroga te mother;  
(d) states or implies that a woman is willing to become a surrogate mother; or  
(e) advertises commercial surrogacy in print or electronic media or in any other form;  
(vi) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paedi atrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall conduct or cause abortion during the 
period of surrogacy without the written consent of the surrogate mother and on authorisation of the 
same by the appropriate authority concerned:  
Provide d that the authorisation of the appropriate authority shall be subject to, and in 
compliance with, the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);  
(vii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, pae diatrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall store a human embryo or gamete for the 
purpose of surrogacy:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall affect such storage for other legal purposes 
like sperm banks, IVF and me dical research for such period and in such manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(viii) no surrogacy clinic, registered medical practitioner, gynaecologist, paediatrician, 
embryologist, intending couple or any other person shall in any form conduct or cause to be 
conducted sex selection for surrogacy.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF SURROGACY AND SURROGACY PROCEDURES  
4. Regulation of surrogacy and surrogacy procedures .— On and from the dat e of 
commencement of this Act, — 
(i) no place including a surrogacy clinic shall be used or cause to be used by any person for 
conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, except for the purposes specified in clause (ii) and 
after satisfying all the conditions specified in clause (iii);  
(ii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or availed 
of, except for t he following purposes, namely:  
(a) when an intending couple has a medical indication necessitating gestational surrogacy:  
Provided that a couple of Indian origin or an intending woman who intends to avail 
surrogacy, shall obtain a certificate of recommendation from the Board on an application made 
by the said persons in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -clause and item ( I) of sub -clause ( a) of clau se 
(iii) the expression “gestational surrogacy” means a practice whereby a surrogate mother carries 7 
 a child for the intending couple through implantation of embryo in her womb and the child is 
not genetically related to the surrogate mother;  
(b) when it is  only for altruistic surrogacy purposes;  
(c) when it is not for commercial purposes or for commercialisation of surrogacy or 
surrogacy procedures;  
(d) when it is not for producing children for sale, prostitution or any other form of 
exploitation; and  
(e) any other condition or disease as may be specified by regulations made by the Board;  
(iii) no surrogacy or surrogacy procedures shall be conducted, undertaken, performed or 
initiated, unless the Director or in -charge of the surrogacy clinic and the person q ualified to do so 
are satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the following condition s have been 
fulfilled, namely: — 
(a) the intending couple is in possession of a certificate of essentiality issued by the 
appropriate authority, after satisf ying itself, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, about the 
fulfilment of the  following conditions, namely: — 
(I) a certificate of a medical indication in favour of either or both members of the 
intending couple or intending woman necessitating gesta tional surrogacy from a District 
Medical Board.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this item, the expression “District Medical Board” 
means a medical board under the Chairpersonship of Chief Medical Officer or Chief Civil 
Surgeon or Joint Director of Health Services of the district and comprising of at least two 
other specialists, namely, the chief gynaecologist or obstetrician and chief paediatrician of 
the district;  
(II) an order concerning the parentage and custody of the child to be born through 
surrogacy , has been passed by a court of the Magistrate of the first class or above on an 
application made by the intending couple or the intending woman and the surrogate mother, 
which shall be the birth affidavit after the surrogate child is born; and  
(III) an insurance coverage of such amount and in such manner as may be prescribed in 
favour of the surrogate mother for a period of thirty -six months covering postpartum 
delivery complications from an insurance company or an agent recognised by the Insurance 
Regul atory and Development Authority established under the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999);  
(b) the surrogate mother is in possession of an eligibility certificate issued by the appropriate 
authority on fulfilment of the  following conditions, namely: — 
(I) no woman, other than an ever married  woman having a child of her own and between 
the age of 25 to 35 years on the day of implantation, shall be a surrogate mother or help in 
surrogacy by donating her egg or oocyte or otherwise;  
(II) a willing woman shall act as a surrogate mother and be perm itted to undergo 
surrogacy procedures as per the provisions of this Act:  8 
 Provided that the intending couple or the intending woman shall approach the 
appropriate authority with a willing woman who agrees to act as a surrogate mother;  
(III) no woman shall a ct as a surrogate mother by providing her own gametes;  
(IV) no woman shall act as a surrogate mother more than once in her lifetime:  
Provided that the number of attempts for surrogacy procedures on the surrogate mother 
shall be such as may be prescribed; a nd 
(V) a certificate of medical and psychological fitness for surrogacy and surrogacy 
procedures from a registered medical practitioner;  
(c) an eligibility certificate for intending couple is issued separately by the appropriate 
authority on fulfilment of the following conditions, namely: -- 
(I) the intending couple are married and between the age of 23 to 50 years in case of 
female and between 26 to 55 years in case of male on the day of certification;  
(II) the intending couple have not had any surviving ch ild biologically or through 
adoption or through surrogacy earlier:  
Provided that nothing contained in this item shall affect the intending couple who have a 
child and who is mentally or physically challenged or suffers from life threatening disorder 
or fat al illness with no permanent cure and approved by the appropriate authority with due 
medical certificate from a District Medical Board; and  
(III) such other conditions as may be specified by the regulations.  
5. Prohibition of conducting surrogacy .— No pers on including a relative or husband of a 
surrogate mother or intending couple or intending woman shall seek or encourage to conduct any 
surrogacy or surrogacy procedures on her except for the purpose specified in clause ( ii) of section 4.  
6. Written informed consent of surrogate mother .—(1) No person shall seek or conduct 
surrogacy procedures unless he has — 
(i) explained all known side effects and after effects of such procedures to the surrogate mother 
concerned; and  
 (ii) obtained in the pr escribed form, the written informed consent of the surrogate mother to 
undergo such procedures in the language she understands.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the surrogate mother shall have an 
option to withdraw her consent fo r surrogacy before the implantation of human embryo in her womb.  
7. Prohibition to abandon child born through surrogacy. — The intending couple or intending 
woman shall not abandon the child, born out of a surrogacy procedure, whether within India or 
outsid e, for any reason whatsoever, including but not restricted to, any genetic defect, birth defect, 
any other medical condition, the defects developing subsequently, sex of the child or conception of 
more than one baby and the like.  
8. Rights of surrogate child.— A child born out of surrogacy procedure, shall be deemed to be a 
biological child of the intending couple or intending woman and the said child shall be entitled to all 
the rights and privileges available to a natural child under any law for time b eing in force  9 
 9. Number of oocytes or human embryos to be implanted. — The number of oocytes or human 
embryos to be implanted in the uterus of the surrogate mother for the purpose of surrogacy, shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
10. Prohibition of abortion .— No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical 
establishment of any kind shall force the surrogate mother to abort at any stage of surrogacy except in 
such conditions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF SURROGACY CLINICS  
11. Registration of surrogacy clinics. — (1) No person shall establish any surrogacy clinic for 
undertaking surrogacy or to render surrogacy procedures in any form unless such clinic is duly 
registered under this Act.  
(2) Every application for registration  under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the appropriate 
authority in such form, manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
 (3) Every surrogacy clinic which is conducting surrogacy or surrogacy procedures, partly or 
exclusively, ref erred to in clause ( ii) of section 4 shall, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
appointment of appropriate authority, apply for registration:  
Provided that such clinic shall cease to conduct any such counselling or procedures on the expiry 
of si x months from the date of commencement of this Act, unless such clinic has applied for 
registration and is so registered separately or till such application is disposed of, whichever is earlier.  
 (4) No surrogacy clinic shall be registered under this Act, unless the appropriate authority is 
satisfied that such clinic is in a position to provide such facilities and maintain such equipment and 
standards including specialised manpower, physical infrastructure and diagnostic facilities as may be 
prescribed.  
12. Certificate of registration. — (1) The appropriate authority shall after holding an enquiry and 
after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the requirements of this Act and the rules 
and regulations made thereunder, grant a certificate  of registration to the surrogacy clinic, within a 
period of ninety days from the date of application received by it, in such form, on payment of such 
fees and in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where, after the inquiry and after giving an opportuni ty of being heard to the applicant, the 
appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant has not complied with the requirements of this Act 
or the rules or regulations made thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the 
applic ation for registration.  
(3) Every certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of three years and shall be renewed 
in such manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The certificate of registration shall be displayed by the sur rogacy clinic at a conspicuous place.  
13. Cancellation or suspension of registration. — (1) The appropriate authority may, suo motu  or 
on receipt of a complaint, issue a notice to the surrogacy clinic to show cause as to why its registration 
should not be s uspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice.  
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the surrogacy clinic, the appropriate 
authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the provisions of the Act or the rule s or 
regulations made thereunder, it may, without prejudice to any criminal action that it may take against 
such clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it may think fit or cancel its registration, as the 
case may be.  10 
 (3) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), if the appropriate authority is 
of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient to do so in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any surrogacy clinic with out issuing any notice under 
sub-section ( 1). 
14. Appeal.— The surrogacy clinic or the intending couple or the intending woman may, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the communication relating to order of rejection of 
application, suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the appropriate authority under 
section 13 and communication relating to rejection of the certificates under section 4, prefer an appeal 
against such order to — 
(a) the State Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority of a 
State;  
(b) the Central Government, where the appeal is against the order of the appropriate authority 
of a Union territory,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
15. Establishment of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Registry. — 
There shall be established a Registry to be called the National Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Registry for the purposes of registration of surrogacy clinics under this Act.  
16. Application o f provisions of Assisted Reproductive Technology Act with respect to 
National Registry. — The National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Registry 
referred to in section 15 and to be established under section 9 of the Assisted Reproductive 
Techn ology Act shall be the National Registry for the purposes of this Act and the functions to be 
discharged by the said Registry under the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply.  
CHAPTER V  
NATIONAL ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARD AND STATE ASSISTED  
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND SURROGACY BOARDS  
17. Constitution of National Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board. — (1) 
The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board to be kn own as the National 
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions conferred on the Board under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) the Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Chairperson,       
ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Department dealing with the 
surrogacy matter, Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the 
People and one by the Council of States, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) three Members of the Ministries of the Central Government in -charge of Women and Child 
Development, Legi slative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, not below the rank of Joint Secretary, Members, ex officio ; 
(e) the Director General of Health Services of the Central Government, Member, ex officio ; 
(f) ten expert Me mbers to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed and two each from amongst — 
(i) eminent medical geneticists or embryologists;  
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians;  
(iii) eminent social scientists;  11 
 (iv) representa tives of women welfare organisations; and  
(v) representatives from civil society working on women's health and child issues,  
possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed;  
(g) four Chairpersons of the State Boards to be nominated by th e Central Government by 
rotation to represent the States and the Union territories, two in the alphabetical order and two in 
the reverse alphabetical order, Member, ex officio ; and  
(h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Central Gove rnment, in -charge of 
Surrogacy Division in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, who shall be the Member -
Secretary, ex officio . 
18. Term of office of Members. — (1) The term of office of a Member, other than an  ex officio  
Member, shall be — 
(a) in case of election  under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 1 7, three years:  
Provided that the term of such Member shall come to an end as soon as the Member becomes a 
Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the 
House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to be a Member of 
the House from which she was elected; and  
(b) in case of appointment under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 17, three years:  
Provided th at the person to be appointed as Member under this clause shall be of such age as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to 
discharge his functions owing to illness or other incap acity, shall be filled by the Central Government 
by making a fresh appointment within a period of one month from the date on which such vacancy 
occurs and the Member so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the 
person in wh ose place he is so appointed.  
(3) The Vice -Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the 
Chairperson from time to time.  
19. Meetings of Board. — (1) The Board shall meet at such places and times and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum 
at its meetings) as may be determined by the regulations:  
Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in six months.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meet ing of the Board and if for any reason the Chairperson 
is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, the Vice -Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the 
Board.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majo rity of 
the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, 
or in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The Members, other than ex officio  Members, shall receive only compensatory travelling 
expenses for attending the meetings of the Board.  
20. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board. — No act or proceeding of the Board 
shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
21.  Disqualifications for appointment as Member. — (1) A person shall be disqualified for 
being appointed and continued as a Member if, he — 12 
 (a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has becom e physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions 
as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejud icial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is a practicing member or an office -bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, 
having financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially, his function as a Member; or  
(g) is an office -bearer, head ing or representing, any of the professional bodies having 
commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.  
(2) The Members referred to in clause ( f) of section 17 shall not be removed from their office 
except by an order of the Central Government on the g round of their proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government, come to the conclusion that the Member ought 
on any such ground to  be removed.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend any Member against whom an inquiry under sub -section 
(2) is being initiated or pending until the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the 
report of the inquiry.  
22. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes. — (1) The Board 
may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by the 
regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out  any of the provisions 
of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with the Board under sub -section ( 1) shall have a right to take part in the 
discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the Board and 
shall not be a Me mber for any other purpose.  
23. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Board .—All orders and decisions of the 
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments issued by 
the Board shall be authenticated b y the signature of the Member -Secretary of the Board.  
24. Eligibility of Member for re -appointment. — Subject to other terms and conditions of 
service as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a Member shall be eligible for re -appointment 
as such Member:  
Provided that no Member other than an ex officio  Member shall be appointed for more than two 
consecutive terms.  
25. Functions of Board. — The Board shall discharge the following functions, namely:  — 
(a) to advise the Central Government on policy matters relating to surrogacy;  
(b) to review and monitor the implementation of the Act, and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder and recommend to the Central Government, changes therein;  
(c) to lay down the code of conduct to be observed by persons wo rking at surrogacy clinics;  
(d) to set the minimum standards of physical infrastructure, laboratory and diagnostic 
equipment and expert manpower to be employed by the surrogacy clinics;  
(e) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted under the  Act and take appropriate 
steps to ensure their effective performance;  13 
 (f) to supervise the functioning of State Assisted Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy 
Boards; and  
(g) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
 26. Constitution of State Assisted R eproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board. — Each 
State and Union territory having Legislature shall constitute a Board to be known as the State Assisted 
Reproductive Technology and Surrogacy Board or the Union territory Assisted Reproductive 
Technology an d Surrogacy Board, as the case may be, which shall discharge the following functions, 
namely: — 
(i) to review the activities of the appropriate authorities functioning in the State or Union 
territory and recommend appropriate action against them;  
(ii) to mo nitor the implementation of the provisions of the Act, and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder and make suitable recommendations relating thereto, to the Board;  
(iii) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed, in respect of the various a ctivities 
undertaken in the State under the Act, to the Board and the Central Government; and  
(iv) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
27. Composition of State Board. — The State Board shall consist of .— 
(a) the Minister in -charge of Health and Family Welfare in the State, Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary in -charge of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Vice -Chairperson, 
ex officio;  
(c) Secretaries or Commissioners in -charge of the Departm ents of Women and Child 
Development, Social Welfare, Law and Justice and Home Affairs or their nominees, members, ex 
officio;  
(d) Director -General of Health and Family Welfare of the State Government, member, ex 
officio;  
(e) three women members of the State Legislative Assembly or Union territory Legislative 
Council, members, ex officio;  
(f) ten expert members to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, two each from amongst — 
(i) eminent medi cal geneticists or embryologists;  
(ii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians;  
(iii) eminent social scientists;  
(iv) representatives of women welfare organisations; and  
(v) representatives from civil society working on women's health and child issues,  
possessing such qualifications and experiences as may be prescribed;  
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government in -charge of 
Family Welfare, who shall be the Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
28 . Term of office of members. — (1) The term of office of a member, other than an ex officio  
member, shall be .— 
(a) in case of nomination under clause ( e) of section 27, three years:  
Provided that the term of such member shall come to an end as soon as the member becomes a 
Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly, or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council or ceases to be a 
member of the House from which she was elected; and  14 
 (b) in case of appointment under  clause ( f) of section 27, three years:  
Provided that the person to be appointed as member under this clause shall be of such age, as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Any vacancy occurring in the office whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to 
discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, shall be filled within a period of one 
month from the date on which such vacancy occurs by the State Government by making a fresh 
appointment and the member so appointed shall hold office for the r emainder of the term of office of 
the person in whose place he is so appointed.  
(3) The Vice -Chairperson shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the 
Chairperson from time to time.  
 29. Meetings of State Board. —(1) The State Board shall meet at such places and times and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the 
quorum at its meetings) as may be specified by the regulations:  
Provided that the State Board shall meet at leas t once in four months.  
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Board and if for any reason the Chairman 
is unable to attend the meeting of the State Board, the Vice -Chairperson shall preside at the meetings 
of the State Board.  
(3) All ques tions which come up before any meeting of the State Board shall be decided by a 
majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The members, other than ex officio  members, shall receive only compensatory travelling 
expenses for attending the meetings of the State Board.  
30. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of State Board. — No act or proceeding of the 
State Board shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the State Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the State Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
 31. Disqualifications for appointment as member .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being 
appointed and continued as a member if, he  — 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has  been convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the State Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest, as is likely to affect pr ejudicially his functions 
as a member; or  
(e) has so abused his position, as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is a practicing member or an office -bearer of any association representing surrogacy clinics, 
having  financial or other interest likely to affect prejudicially, his functions as a member; or  
(g) is an office -bearer, heading or representing, any of the professional bodies having 
commercial interest in surrogacy or infertility.  
(2) The members referred to in clause ( f) of section 27 shall not be removed from their office 
except by an order of the State Government on the ground of their proved misbehaviour or incapacity 
after the State Government, has, on an inquiry, held in accordance with the procedure pre scribed in 15 
 this behalf by the State Government, come to the conclusion that the member ought on any such 
ground to be removed.  
(3) The State Government may suspend any member against whom an inquiry under sub -section 
(2) is being initiated or pending until  the State Government has passed an order on receipt of the 
report of the inquiry.  
32. Temporary association of persons with State Board for particular  purposes .— (1) The 
State Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be  determined by 
the regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the State Board under sub -section ( 1) shall have a right to take 
part in the discussio ns relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the 
State Board and shall not be a member for any other purpose.  
33 . Authentication of orders and other instruments of State Board .—All orders and decisions 
of the State Board  shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and all other instruments 
issued by the State Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Member -Secretary of the State 
Board.  
34. Eligibility of member for re -appointment .— Subject to th e other terms and conditions of 
service as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for re -appointment 
as such member:  
Provided that no member other than an ex officio  member shall be appointed for more than two 
consecutive te rms. 
CHAPTER VI  
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY  
35. Appointment of appropriate authority .— (1) The Central Government shall, within a period 
of ninety days from the date of commencement of this Act, by notification, appoint one or more 
appropriate authorities for each of the Union territories for the purposes of this Act and the Assisted 
Reproductive Technology Act.  
(2) The State Government shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of commencement of 
this Act, by notification, appoint one or more appropriate authorities for the whole or any part of the 
State for the purposes of this Act and the Assisted Reproductive Technology Act.  
(3) The appropriate authority, under sub -section (1) or sub -section ( 2), shall, — 
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or t he Union territory, consist of — 
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Secretary of the Health and Family Welfare 
Department --Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(ii) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director of the Health and Fami ly Welfare 
Department --Vice Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(iii) an eminent woman representing women's organisation --member;  
(iv) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union territory concerned not below 
the rank of a Deputy Secretary --member; and  
(v) an eminent registered medical practitioner --member:  
Provided that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within one month of the 
occurrence of such vacancy;  
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union territory, be officers of such ot her 
rank as the State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.  16 
  36. Functions of appropriate authority. —The appropriate authority shall discharge th e 
following functions, namely: — 
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a surrogacy clinic;  
(b) to enforce the standards to be fulfilled by the surrogacy clinics;  
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations made 
thereunder and take legal action as per provision of this Act;  
(d) to take appropriate legal action against the use of surrogacy by any person at any place other 
than prescribed, suo motu or brought to its notice, and also to initiate independent investigations in 
such matter;  
(e) to supervise the implementation of the  provisions of this Act and rules and regulations made 
thereunder;  
(f) to recommend to the Board and State Boards about the modifications required in the rules 
and regulations in accordance with changes in technology or social conditions;  
(g) to take actio n after investigation of complaints received by it against the surrogacy clinics; 
and 
(h) to consider and grant or reject any application under clause ( vi) of section 3 and sub -clauses 
(a) to ( c) of clause ( iii) of section 4 within a period of ninety days.  
37. Powers of appropriate authorities .— (1) The appropriate authority shall exercise the powers 
in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of 
the provisions of this Act, and rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(b) production of any document or material object relating to clause ( a); 
(c) search any place suspected to be violating the provisions of this Act, and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder; and  
(d) such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate authority shall maintain the details of registration of surrogacy clinics, 
cancellation of registration, renewal of registration, grant of certificates to the intending couple and 
surrogate mothe rs or any other matter pertaining to grant of license, etc., of the surrogacy clinics in 
such format as may be prescribed and submit the same to the National Assisted Reproductive 
Technology and Surrogacy Board.  
CHAPTER VI I 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
38. Prohibition of commercial surrogacy, exploitation of surrogate mothers and children 
born through surrogacy. — (1) No person, organisation, surrogacy clinic, laboratory or clinical 
establishment of any kind shall. — 
(a) undertake commercial surrogacy, provid e commercial surrogacy or its related component 
procedures or services in any form or run a racket or an organised group to empanel or select 
surrogate mothers or use individual brokers or intermediaries to arrange for surrogate mothers and 
for surrogacy p rocedures, at such clinics, laboratories or at any other place;  
(b) issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distributed or 
communicated, any advertisement in any manner regarding commercial surrogacy by any means 
whatsoeve r, scientific or otherwise;  
(c) abandon or disown or exploit or cause to be abandoned, disowned or exploited in any form, 
the child or children born through surrogacy;  17 
 (d) exploit or cause to be exploited the surrogate mother or the child born through surrogacy in 
any manner whatsoever;  
(e) sell human embryo or gametes for the purpose of surrogacy and run an agency, a racket or 
an organisation for selling, purchasing or trading in human embryos or gametes for the purpose of 
surrogacy;  
(f) import or shal l help in getting imported in, whatsoever manner, the human embryo or human 
gametes for surrogacy or for surrogacy procedures; and  
(g) conduct sex selection in any form for surrogacy.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860), contraventions of 
the provisions of clauses (a) to (g) of sub -section ( 1) by any person shall be an offence punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the expression “advertisement” includes any notice, circular, 
label, wrapper or any other document including advertisement through internet or any other media, in 
electronic or print form and also includes any visible representation made b y means of any hoarding, 
wall-painting, signal light, sound, smoke or gas.  
 39. Punishment for contravention of provisions of Act. — (1) Any registered medical 
practitioner, gynaecologists, paediatrician, embryologists or any person who owns a surrogacy cli nic 
or employed with such a clinic or centre or laboratory and renders his professional or technical 
services to or at such clinic or centre or laboratory, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and 
who contravenes any  of the provisions of this Act (ot her than the provisions referred to in section 38) 
and rules and regulations made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
(2) In case of subsequent or con tinuation of the offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), the name of 
the registered medical practitioner shall be reported by the appropriate authority to the State Medical 
Council concerned for taking necessary action including suspension of registration for a period of five 
years.  
 40.  Punishment for not following altruistic surrogacy. —Any intending couple or intending 
woman or any person who seeks the aid of any surrogacy clinic, laboratory or of a registered medical 
practitioner, gynaecologist, paediat rician, embryologist or any other person for not following the 
altruistic surrogacy or for conducting surrogacy procedures for commercial purposes shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may 
exten d to five lakh rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment 
which may extend to ten years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
41.  Penalty for contravention of provisions of Act or rules for which no specific punishment 
is provided. —Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder for which no penalty has been provided in this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in 
the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees 
for every day during whic h such contravention continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention.  
42. Presumption in the case of surrogacy. — Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), the court shall presume, unless the contrary is pr oved, that the 
women or surrogate mother was compelled by her husband, the intending couple or any other relative, 
as the case may be, to render surrogacy services, procedures or to donate gametes for the purpose 
other than those specified in clause ( ii) of section 4 and such person shall be liable for abetment of 
such offence under section 40 and shall be punishable for the offence specified under that section.  18 
 43. Offence to be cognizable, non -baliable and non -compoundable .— Notwithstanding 
anything conta ined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence under this Act 
shall be cognizable, non -bailable and non -compoundable.  
44. Cognizance of offences. — (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except on a complaint in writing made by -- 
(a) the appropriate authority concerned, or any officer or an agency authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or the appropriate authority; or  
(b) a person includin g a social organisation who has given notice of not less that fifteen days in the 
manner prescribed, to the appropriate authority, of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a 
complaint to the court.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan  Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
45. Certain provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 not to apply. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), Chapter XXI A of the said 
Code relating to plea bargaining shall not apply to the offences under this Act.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
46.  Maintenance of records. — (1) The surrogacy clinic shall maintain all records, charts, forms, 
reports, consent letters, agreements and all the documents under this Act and they shall be preserved 
for a period of twenty -five years or such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted against any surrogacy cli nic, the 
records and all other documents of such clinic shall be preserved till the final disposal of such 
proceedings.  
(2) All such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available for inspection to the 
appropriate authority or to any other perso n authorised by the appropriate authority in this behalf.  
47. Power to search and seize records, etc. — (1) If the appropriate authority has reason to 
believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any surrogacy clinic or any 
other  place, such authority or any officer authorised in this behalf may, subject to such rules as may 
be prescribed, enter and search at all reasonable times with such assistance, if any, as such authority 
or officers considers necessary, such surrogacy clinic  or any other place and examine any record, 
register, document, book, pamphlet, advertisement or any other material object found therein and 
seize and seal the same if such authority or officer has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence 
of the comm ission of an offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to search and 
seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to all action taken by the appropriate authority or any officer 
authorised by it under this Act.  
48. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or the State Government or the appropriate authority or any 
officer authorised by the Central Govern ment or the State Government or by the appropriate authority 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this 
Act. 
49. Application of other laws not barred. — The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
50. Power to make rules .— (1) The Central Government may, by notification and subject to the 
condition of pre -publication, make rules for carrying out the p rovisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for -- 19 
 (a) the prescribed expenses under clauses ( b), (f) and ( q) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2;  
(b) the minimum qualifications for persons employed at a registered surrogacy clinic under 
clause ( iii) of section 3;  
(c) the period and manner in which a person shall store human embryo or gamete under clause 
(vii) of section 3;  
(d) the form and manner of application for  obtaining certificate of recommendation from the 
Board under proviso to sub -clause ( a) of clause ( ii) of section 4;  
(e) the insurance coverage in favour of the surrogate mother from an insurance company and 
the manner of such coverage under item (III) of sub-clause ( a) of clause ( iii) of section 4;  
(f) the number of attempts of surrogacy or providing of gametes under the proviso to item ( III) 
of sub -clause ( b) of clause ( iii) of section 4;  
(g) the form in which consent of a surrogate mother has to  be obtained under clause ( ii) of 
section 6;  
(h) the number of oocytes or embryos to be implanted in the uterus of the surrogate mother 
under section 9;  
(i) the conditions under which the surrogate mother may be allowed for abortion during the 
process of s urrogacy under section 10;  
(j) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for registration and the fee 
payable thereof under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(k) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other standards to be maintained by the 
surrogacy clinics under sub -section ( 4) of section 11;  
(l) the period, manner and form in which a certificate of registration shall be issued under sub -
section ( 1) of section 12;  
(m) the manner in which the certificate of registration shall be renewed and the fee payable for 
such renewal under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(n) the manner in which an appeal may be preferred under section 14;  
(o) the qualifications and experiences of the Members as admissible under clause ( f) of sub -
section ( 2) of sectio n 17;  
(p) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the Members under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 21;  
(q) the conditions under which a Member of the Board eligible for re -appointment under 
section 24;  
(r) the other functions of the Board under clause  (g) of section 25;  
(s) the manner in which reports shall be furnished by the State Assisted Reproductive 
Technology and Surrogacy Board and the Union territory Assisted Reproductive Technology and 
Surrogacy Board to the Board and the Central Government un der clause (iii) of section 26;  
(t) the other functions of the State Board under clause ( iv) of section 26;  
(u) the qualifications and experiences of the members as admissible under clause ( f) of section 
27; 
(v) the age of the person to be appointed as a member, referred to in clause ( f) of section 27, 
under the proviso to clause ( b) of sub -section (1) of section 28;  
(w) the procedures for conducting an inquiry against the members under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 31;  20 
 (x) the conditions under which the members of State Board eligible for re -appointment under 
section 34;  
(y) empowering the appropriate authority in any other matter under clause ( d) of section 36;  
(z) the other powers of appropriate authority under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 7; 
(za) the particulars of the details of registration of surrogacy clinics, cancellation of registration, 
etc., in such format under sub -section ( 2) of section 37;  
(zb) the manner of giving notice by a person under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section  44; 
(zc) the period up to which records, charts, etc., shall be preserved under sub -section (1) of 
section 46;  
(zd) the manner in which the seizure of documents, records, objects, etc., shall be made and the 
manner in which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered under sub -section ( 1) of section 47; 
and 
(ze) any other matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect of which provision is to be made 
by rules.  
51. Power to make regulations. — The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Governmen t, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to provide for. — 
(a) the fulfilment of any other condition under which eligibility certificate to be issued by the 
appropriate authority und er sub -clause ( d) of clause ( v) of section 4;  
(b) the time and place of the meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business at such meetings and the number of Members which shall form the quorum 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(c) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under sub -
section ( 1) of section 22;  
(d) the time and place of the meetings of the State Board and the procedure to be followed for 
the transaction of business at such meetings and the number of members which shall form the 
quorum under sub -section ( 1) of section 29;  
(e) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under sub -
section ( 1) of section 32; and  
(f) any other matter which is re quired to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. — Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Board under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, b efore each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no e ffect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation or notification.  
53. Transitional provision. — Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be provided a 
gestation period of ten months from the date of coming into force of this Act to existing surrogate 
mothers' to protect their well being.  
54. Power to remove difficulties. — (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect t o the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  21 
 Provid ed that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliamen t. 
 
--------------------------The Transgender Persons Protection of Rights Act 2019.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE  TRANSGENDER  PERSONS  (PROTECTION  OF RIGHTS) ACT,  2019  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION  
3. Prohibition against  discrimination.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF IDENTITY OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS  
4. Recognition of identity of transgender person.  
5. Application for certificate of identity.  
6. Issue of certificate of identity.  
7. Change in gender.  
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE MEASURES BY GOVERMENT  
8. Obligation of appropriate Government . 
CHAPTER V  
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PERSONS  
9. Non-discrimination in employment . 
10.  Obligations of establishments . 
11. Grievance redressal mechanism . 
12. Right of residence . 
CHAPTER VI  
EDUCATION, SOCIAL SECURITY AND HEALTH OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS  
13. Obligation of educational institutions to provide inclusive education to transgender persons . 
14. Vocational training and self -employment.  
15. Healthcare facilities . 
CHAPTER VII  
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TRANGENDER  PERSONS  
16. National Council  for Transgender Persons . 
17. Functions of Council . 
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
18. Offences and penalties . 
  2 
 CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
19. Grants by Central Government . 
20. Act not in derogation of any other law.  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
22. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
  3 
 THE  TRANSGENDER  PERSONS  (PROTECTION  OF RIGHTS) ACT,  2019  
ACT NO. 40 OF 2019  
[5th December, 2019.]  
An Act to provide  for protection  of rights  of transgender  persons  and their welfare  and for matters  
connected  therewith  and incidental  thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons 
(Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requir es,— 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means,  — 
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment, wholly or substantially 
financed by that Government, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly or substantially financed 
by that Government, or any local authority, the State Government;  
     (b) “establishment ” means— 
(i) any body or authority established by or under a Central Act or a St ate Act or an authority 
or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a local authority, or a Government 
company as defined in  section 2  of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), and includes a 
Department of the Government; or  
(ii) any company  or body corporate or association or body of individuals, firm, cooperative or 
other society, association, trust, agency, institution;  
(c) “family” means a group of people related by blood or marriage or by adoption made in 
accordance with law;  
(d) “inclusive education ” means a system of education wherein transgender students learn 
together with other students without fear of discrimination, neglect, harassment or intimidation and 
the system of teaching and learning is suitably adapted to meet the lea rning needs of such students;  
(e) “institution ” means an institution, whether public or private, for the reception, care, protection, 
education, training or any other service of transgender persons;  
(f) “local authority ” means the municipal corporation or Municipality or Panchayat or any other 
local body constituted under any law for the time being in force for providing municipal services or 
basic services, as the case may be, in respect of areas under its jurisdiction;  
(g) “National Council ” means the Nat ional Council for Transgender Persons established under 
section 16;  
(h) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
                                                           
1. 10th January, 2020,  vide notification No. S.O. 135(E), dated 1 0th January, 2020, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II,    
sec. 2(ii). 4 
 (i) “person with intersex variations ” means a person who at birth shows variation in his or her 
primary sexual ch aracteristics, external genitalia, chromosomes or hormones from normative standard 
of male or female body;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government under this Act; 
and 
(k) “transgender person ” means a person whose gende r does not match with the gender assigned 
to that person at birth and includes trans -man or trans -woman (whether or not such person has 
undergone Sex Reassignment Surgery or hormone therapy or laser therapy or such other therapy), 
person with intersex vari ations, genderqueer and person having such socio -cultural identities as 
kinner, hijra, aravani  and jogta . 
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION  
3. Prohibition against discrimination .—No person or establishment shall discriminate against a 
transgender person on any of the following grounds, name ly:— 
(a) the denial, or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, educational establishments and 
services thereof;  
(b) the unfair treatment in, or in relation to, employment or occupation;  
(c) the d enial of, or termination from, employment or occupation;  
(d) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, healthcare services;  
(e) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to, access to, or provision or 
enjoyment or us e of any goods, accommodation, service, facility, benefit, privilege or opportunity 
dedicated to the use of the general public or customarily available to the public;  
(f) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right of mov ement;  
(g) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment with regard to the right to reside, 
purchase, rent, or otherwise occupy any property;  
(h) the denial or discontinuation of, or unfair treatment in, the opportunity to stand for or hold 
public  or private office; and  
(i) the denial of access to, removal from, or unfair treatment in, Government or private 
establishment in whose care or custody a transgender person may be.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF IDENTITY OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS  
4. Recognition of identity of transgender person .—(1) A transgender person shall have a right to 
be recognised as such, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person recognised as transgender under sub -section ( 1) shall have a right to self -perceived 
gender  identity.  
5. Application for certificate of identity .—A transgender person may make an application to the 
District Magistrate for issuing a certificate of identity as a transgender person, in such form and manner, 
and accompanied with such documents, as m ay be prescribed:  
Provided that in the case of a minor child, such application shall be made by a parent or guardian of 
such child.  
6. Issue of certificate of identity .—(1) The District Magistrate shall issue to the applicant under 
section 5, a certificate  of identity as transgender person after following such procedure and in such form 
and manner, within such time, as may be prescribed indicating the gender of such person as transgender.  5 
 (2) The gender of transgender person shall be recorded in all officia l documents in accordance with 
certificate issued under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) A certificate issued to a person under sub -section ( 1) shall confer rights and be a proof of 
recognition of his identity as a transgender person.  
7. Change in gender .—(1) After the issue of a certificate under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, if a 
transgender person undergoes surgery to change gender either as a male or female, such person may make 
an application, along with a certificate issued to that effect by the Medical Superin tendent or Chief 
Medical Officer of the medical institution in which that person has undergone surgery, to the District 
Magistrate for revised certificate, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The District Magistrate shall, on receipt of an ap plication along with the certificate issued by the 
Medical Superintendent or Chief Medical Officer, and on being satisfied with the correctness of such 
certificate, issue a certificate indicating change in gender in such form and manner and within such tim e, 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) The person who has been issued a certificate of identity under section 6 or a revised certificate 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to change the first name in the birth certificate and all other official 
documents relati ng to the identity of such person:  
Provided that such change in gender and the issue of revised certificate under sub -section ( 2) shall not 
affect the rights and entitlements of such person under this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE MEASURES BY GOVERMENT  
8. Obligation of appropriate Government .—(1) The appropriate Government shall take steps to 
secure full and effective participation of transgender persons and their inclusion in society.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall take such welfare measures as may be prescribed to protect the 
rights and interests of transgender persons, and facilitate their access to welfare schemes framed by that 
Government.  
(3) The appropriate Government shall formulate welfare schemes and programmes which are 
transgender sensitiv e, non -stigmatising and non -discriminatory.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps for the rescue, protection and rehabilitation of 
transgender persons to address the needs of such persons.  
(5) The appropriate Government shall take appropriate mea sures to promote and protect the right of 
transgender persons to participate in cultural and recreational activities.  
CHAPTER V  
OBLIGATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND OTHER PERSONS  
9. Non-discrimination in employment .—No establishment shall discriminate against any 
transgender person in any matter relating to employment including, but not limited to, recruitment, 
promotion and other related issues.  
10. Obligations of establishments .—Every establishment shall ensure compliance with the 
provisions of this Act and p rovide such facilities to transgender persons as may be prescribed.  
11. Grievance redressal mechanism .—Every establishment shall designate a person to be a 
complaint officer to deal with the complaints relating to violation of the provisions of this Act.  
12. Right of residence .—(1) No child shall be separated from parents or immediate family on the 
ground of being a transgender, except on an order of a competent court, in the interest of such child.  
(2) Every  transgender person shall have — 
(a) a right to re side in the household where parent or immediate family members reside;  
(b) a right not to be excluded from such household or any part thereof; and  6 
 (c) a right to enjoy and use the facilities of such household in a non -discriminatory manner.  
(3) Where any parent or a member of his immediate family is unable to take care of a transgender, the 
competent court shall by an order direct such person to be placed in rehabilitation centre.  
CHAPTER VI  
EDUCATION, SOCIAL SECURITY AND HEALTH OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS  
13. Obligation of educational institutions to provide inclusive education to transgender 
persons .—Every educational institution funded or recognised  by the appropriate Government shall 
provide inclusive education and opportunities for sports, recreation and leisure activities to transgender 
persons without discrimination on an equal basis with others.  
14. Vocational training and self -employment .—The a ppropriate Government shall formulate 
welfare schemes and programmes to facilitate and support livelihood for transgender persons including 
their vocational training and self -employment.  
15. Healthcare facilities .—The appropriate Government shall take the following measures in relation 
to transgender persons, namely: — 
(a) to set up separate human immunodeficiency virus Sero -surveillance Centres to conduct sero -
surveillance for such persons in accordance with the guidelines issued by the National AIDS Contro l 
Organisation in this behalf;  
(b) to provide for medical care facility including sex reassignment surgery and hormonal therapy;  
(c) before and after sex reassignment surgery and hormonal therapy counselling;  
(d) bring out a Health Manual related to sex re assignment surgery in accordance with the World 
Profession Association for Transgender Health guidelines;  
(e) review of medical curriculum and research for doctors to address their specific health issues;  
(f) to facilitate access to transgender persons in hospitals and other healthcare institutions and 
centres;  
(g) provision for coverage of medical expenses by a comprehensive insurance scheme for Sex 
Reassignment Surgery, hormonal therapy, laser therapy or any other health issues of transgender 
persons.  
CHA PTER VII  
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TRANGENDER  PERSONS  
16. National Council for Transgender Persons .—(1) The Central Government shall by notification 
constitute a National Council for Transgender Persons to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The Nat ional Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Union Minister in -charge of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the  Minister of State, in -charge of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in the 
Government, Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Member, ex officio ; 
(d) one representative each from the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs, 
Housing and Urban Affairs, Minority Affairs, Human Resources  Development, Rural Development, 
Labour and Employment and Departments of Legal Affairs, Pensions and Pension ers Welfare and 
National Institute for Transforming India Aayog, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries to the 
Government of India, Members, ex officio ; 7 
 (e) one representative each from the National Human Rights Commission and National 
Commission for Wome n, not below the rank of Joint Secretaries to the Government of India, 
Members, ex officio ; 
(f) representatives of the State Governments and Union territories by rotation, one each from the 
North, South, East, West and North -East regions, to be nominated b y the Central Government, 
Members, ex officio ; 
(g) five representatives of transgender community, by rotation, from the State Governments and 
Union territories, one each from the North, South, East, West and North -East regions, to be 
nominated by the Centr al Government, Members;  
(h) five experts, to represent non -governmental organisations or associations, working for the 
welfare of transgender persons, to be nominated by the Central Government, Members; and  
(i) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in  the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
dealing with the welfare of the transgender persons, Member Secretary, ex officio.  
(3) A Member of National Council, other than ex officio member, shall hold office for a term of three 
years from the date of his nomination.  
17. Functions of Council .—The National Council shall perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) to advise the Central Government on the formulation of policies, programmes, legislation and 
projects with respect to transgender persons;  
(b) to monitor and evaluate the impact of policies and programmes designed for achieving 
equality and full participation of transgender persons;  
(c) to review and coordinate the activities of all the departments of Government and other 
Governmental and non -Governmental Organisations which are dealing with matters relating to 
transgender persons;  
(d) to redress the grievances of transgender persons; and  
(e) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
18. Offences and penalties .—Whoever, — 
(a) compels or entices a transgender person to indulge in the act of forced or bonded labour other 
than any compulsory service for public purposes imposed by Government;  
(b) denies a transgender person the right of passage to a public place or obstructs such person 
from using or having access to a public place to which other members have access to or a right to use;  
(c) forces or causes a transgender person to leave household, village or other place of r esidence; 
and 
(d) harms or injures or endangers the life, safety, health or well -being, whether mental or 
physical, of a transgender person or tends to do acts including causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, 
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse,  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Grants by Central Government. —The Central Government shall, from time to time, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, credit such sums to the National Council as may 
be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  8 
 20. Act not in derogation of any other law .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the appropriate Government or any local authority or any officer of the Gove rnment in respect 
of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act 
and any rules made there under.  
22. Power of appropriate Government to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, 
subject to th e condition of previous publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:— 
(a) the form and manner in which an application shall be made under section 5;  
(b) the procedure, form and manner and the period within which a certificate of identity is issued 
under sub -section (1) of section 6;  
(c) the form and manner in which an application shall be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(d) the form, period and manner for issuing revised certificate under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(e) welfare measures to be provided under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 8;  
(f) facilities to be provided under section 10;  
(g) other functions of the National Council under clause ( e) of section 17; and  
(h) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under su b-section ( 1), shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such mo dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
23. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of  Parliament.  
 
--------------------------The Tribunals Reforms Act 2021.pdf--------------------------
1 
 THE TRIBUNALS REFORMS ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
Last Updated: 20-9-2021  
______________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title  and commencement  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF CHAIRPERSON AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNAL  
3. Qualifications, appointment, etc., of Chairperson and Members of Tribunal.  
4. Removal of Chairperson or Member of Tribunal.  
5. Term of office of Chairperson and Member of Tribunal.  
6. Eligibility for re -appointment.  
7. Salary and allowances.  
CHAPTER III  
AMENDM ENT OF THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT , 1947  
8. Amendment of Act 14 of 1947.  
CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952  
9. Amendment of Act 37 of 1952.  
CHAPTER V  
AMENDMENTS TO THE COPYRIGHT  ACT, 1957  
10. Amendment of Act 14 of 1957.  
CHAPTER VI  
AMENDMENT TO THE  INCOME -TAX ACT , 1961  
11. Amendment of Act 43 of 1961.  2 
 CHAPTER VII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE  CUSTOMS ACT , 1962  
SECTIONS  
12. Amendment of Act 52 of 1962.  
CHAPTER VIII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTS ACT , 1970  
 
13. Amendment of Act 39 of 1970.  
CHAPTER IX  
AMENDMENT TO THE SMUGGLERS AND FOREIGN  EXCHANGE  MANIPULATORS  (FORFEITURE OF  
PROPERTY ) ACT, 1976  
14. Amendment of Act 13 of 1976.  
CHAPTER X  
AMENDMENT TO  THE ADMINISTRATIVE  TRIBUNALS  ACT, 1985  
 
15. Amendment of Act 13 of 1985.  
CHAPTER XI  
AMENDMENT TO THE RAILWAY  CLAIMS  TRIBUNAL  ACT, 1987  
16. Amendment of Act 54 of 1987.  
CHAPTER XII  
AMENDMENT TO THE SECURITIES AND  EXCHANGE  BOARD OF INDIA  ACT, 1992  
17. Amendment of Act 15 of 1992.  
CHAPTER XIII  
AMENDMENT TO THE  RECOVERY OF  DEBTS  AND BANKRUPTCY  ACT, 1993  
18. Amendment of Act 51 of 1993.  
CHAPTER XIV  
AMENDMENTS TO THE AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY  OF INDIA  ACT, 1994  
19. Amendment of Act 55 of 1994 . 
 
 3 
 CHAPTER XV  
AMENDMENT TO THE TELECOM  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY OF INDIA  ACT, 1997  
SECTIONS  
20. Amendment of Act 24 of 1997 . 
CHAPTER XVI  
AMENDMENTS TO THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999  
21. Amendment of Act 47 of 1999 . 
CHAPTER XVII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  INDICATIONS OF  GOODS  (REGISTRATION AND  PROTECTION )  
ACT, 1999  
22. Amendment of Act 48 of 1999 . 
CHAPTER XVIII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROTECTION OF P LANT  VARIETIES  AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS  ACT, 2001  
23. Amendment of Act 53 of 2001 . 
CHAPTER XIX  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS  (LAND AND TRAFFIC ) ACT, 2002  
24. Amendment of Act 13 of 2003 . 
CHAPTER XX  
AMENDMENT TO THE ELECTRICITY  ACT, 2003  
25. Amendment of Act 36 of 2003 . 
CHAPTER XXI  
AMENDMENT TO THE ARMED  FORCE  TRIBUNAL  ACT, 2007  
26. Amendment of Act 55 of 2007 . 
CHAPTER XXII  
AMENDMENT TO THE NATIONAL  GREEN  TRIBUNAL  ACT, 2010  
27. Amendment of Act 19 of 2010 . 
 4 
 CHAPTER XXIII  
AMENDMENT TO THE COMPANIES  ACT, 2013  
SECTIONS  
28. Amendment of Act 18 of 2013 . 
CHAPTER XXIV  
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE  ACT, 2017  
29. Amendment of Act 7 of 2017 . 
CHAPTER XXV  
AMENDMENT  TO THE  CONSUMER  PROTECTION  ACT, 2019  
30. Amendment of Act 35 of 2019 . 
CHAPTER XXVI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Power to amend the Schedule.  
32. Rules to be laid before Parliament.  
33. Transitional provisions.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Repeal and saving.  
       THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
       THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 THE TRIBUNALS REFORMS ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 33 OF 2021  
[13th August , 2021.]  
An Act further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Customs Act, 1962, the Airports 
Authority of India Act, 1994, the Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 and certain other Acts.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th April,  2021.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairperson ” includes Chairperson, Chairman, President and Presiding Officer of a Tribunal;  
(b) “Member ” includes Vice -Chairman, Vice -Chairperson, Vice -President, Account Memb er, 
Administrative Member, Judicial Member, Expert Member, Law Member, Revenue Member and 
Technical Member of a Tribunal;  
(c) “notified date ” means the 4th April, 2021;  
(d) “Schedule ” means the Schedule appended to this Act;  
(e) “Tribunal ” means a Tribunal , Appellate Tribunal or Authority as specified in column ( 2) of 
the First Schedule.  
CHAPTER II  
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF CHAIRPERSON AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNAL  
3. Qualifications, appointment, etc., of Chairperson and Members of Tribunal .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order or decree of any court, or in any law for the 
time being in force, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to 
provide for the qualifications, appointment, s alaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Member of a Tribunal after taking into consideration the 
experience, specialisation in the relevant field and the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that a pe rson who has not completed the age of fifty years shall not be eligible for 
appointment as a Chairperson or Member.  
(2) The Chairperson and the Member of a Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of a Search -cum-Selectio n Committee constituted under sub -section ( 3), in such 
manner as the Central Government may, by rules, provide.  6 
 (3) The Search -cum-Selection Committee, except for the State Administrative Tribunal, shall consist 
of— 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be the Chie f Justice of India or a Judge of Supreme Court nominated 
by him;  
(b) two Members, who are Secretaries to the Government of India to be nominated by that 
Government;  
(c) one Member, who — 
(i) in case of appointment of a Chairperson of a Tribunal, shall be the outgoing Chairperson 
of that Tribunal; or  
(ii) in case of appointment of a Member of a Tribunal, shall be the sitting Chairperson of that 
Tribunal; or  
(iii) in case of the Chairperson of the Tribunal seeking re -appointment, shall be a retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court, to be nominated by the 
Chief Justice of India:  
Provided that in the following cases, such Member shall always be a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of 
India, namely: — 
(i) Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Go vernment under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) ; 
(ii) Debt Recovery Tribunal and Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal established under the 
Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993  (51 of 1993) ; 
(iii) where the Chairperson or the outgoing Chair person, as the case may be, of a Tribunal 
is not a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice or Judge of a High 
Court; and  
(iv) such other Tribunals as may be notified by the Central Government, in consultation 
with the Chairperson of t he Search -cum Selection Committee of that Tribunal; and  
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department under which the 
Tribunal is constituted or established —Member -Secretary:  
Provided that the Search -cum-Selection Committee for  a State Administrative Tribunal shall 
consist of — 
(a) the Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned State —Chairman;  
(b) the Chief Secretary of the concerned State Government —Member;  
(c) the Chairman of the Public Service Commission of the concerned  State —Member;  
(d) one Member, who — 7 
 (i) in case of appointment of a Chairman of the Tribunal, shall be the outgoing Chairman 
of the Tribunal; or  
(ii) in case of appointment of a Member of the Tribunal, shall be the sitting Chairman of 
the Tribunal; or  
(iii) in case of the Chairman of the Tribunal seeking re -appointment, shall be a retired 
Judge of a High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned 
State:  
Provided that such Member shall always be a retired Judge of a High Court nominated by the 
Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned State, if the Chairperson or the outgoing 
Chairperson of the State Administrative Tribunal, as the case may be, is not a retired Chief Justice 
or Judge of a High Court;  
(e) the Secretary or the Principal Secretary of the General Administrative Department of the 
concerned State —Member -Secretary.  
(4) The Chairperson of the Search -cum-Selection Committee shall have the casting vote.  
(5) The Member -Secretary of the Search -cum-Selection Committee shall not have any vote.  
(6) The Search -cum-Selection Committee shall determine the procedure for making its 
recommendations.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order or decree of any court, or in any 
law for the time being in force, t he Search -cum-Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two 
names for appointment to the post of Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, and the Central 
Government shall take a decision on the recommendations made by that Committee, preferably 
within three months from the date of such recommendation.  
(8) No appointment shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or absence of a Member in 
the Search -cum-Selection Committee.  
4. Removal of Chairperson or Member of Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, on the 
recommendation of the Committee, remove from office, in such manner as may be provided by rules, any 
Chairperson or a Member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson or Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such Chairperson or Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest:  8 
 Provided that where the Chairperson or Member is proposed to be removed on any ground specified 
in clauses ( c) to ( e), he shall be informed of the charges against him and g iven an opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges.  
5. Term of office of Chairperson and Member of Tribunal .—Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any judgment, order or decree of any court, or in any law for the time being in force, — 
(i) the Chairperson of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of four years or till he attains the age 
of seventy years, whichever is earlier;  
(ii) the Member of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of four years or till he attains the age of 
sixty -seven years , whichever is earlier:  
Provided that where a Chairperson or Member is appointed between the 26th day of May, 2017 and 
the notified date, and the term of his office or the age of retirement specified in the order of appointment 
issued by the Central Gover nment is greater than that which is specified in this section, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the term of office or age of retirement or both, as the 
case may be, of the Chairperson or Member shall be as specified in his order of  appointment, subject to a 
maximum term of office of five years.  
6. Eligibility for re -appointment .—(1) The Chairperson and Member of a Tribunal shall be eligible 
for re -appointment in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that, in making such re -appointment, preference shall be given to the service rendered by 
such person.  
(2) All re -appointments shall be made in the same manner as provided in sub -section ( 2) of section 3.  
7. Salary and allowances .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  any judgment, order or 
decree of any court, or in any law for the time being in force, and without prejudice to the generality of 
the foregoing power, the Central Government may make rules to provide for the salary of the Chairperson 
and Member of a Tribu nal and they shall be paid allowances and benefits to the extent as are admissible 
to a Central Government officer holding the post carrying the same pay:  
Provided that, if the Chairperson or Member takes a house on rent, he may be reimbursed a house rent 
higher than the house rent allowance as are admissible to a Central Government officer holding the post 
carrying the same pay, subject to such limitations and conditions as may be provided by rules.  
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms  and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
or Member of the Tribunal may be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
CHAPTER III  
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947  
8. Amendment of Act 14 of 1947 .—In section 7D of the Industrial Disp utes Act, 1947, for the words 
and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be governed by the provisions 
of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, be governed by 
the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted . 9 
 CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952  
9. Amendment of Act 37 of 1952 .—In the Cinematograph Act, 1952, — 
(a) in section 2, clause ( h) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 5C, — 
(i) for the word “Tribunal ”, at both the places where it occurs, the words “High Court ” shall 
be substituted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(c) sections 5D and 5DD shall be omitted;  
(d) in section 6, the words and brackets “or, as the case may be, decided by the Tribunal (but not 
including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending before the Tribunal) ” shall be 
omitted;  
(e) in sections 7A and 7C, for the word “Tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(f) in sections 7D, 7E and 7F, the words “the Tribunal, ”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;  
(g) in section 8, in sub -section ( 2), clauses ( h), (i), (j) and ( k) shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENTS TO THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957  
10. Amendment of Act 14 of 1957 .—In the Copyright Act, 1957, — 
(a) in section 2, — 
(i) clause ( aa) shall be omitted;  
(ii) clause ( fa) shall be re -lettered as clause ( faa) and before the clause ( faa) as so re -lettered, 
the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
'(fa) “Commercial Court ”, for the purposes of any State, means a Commercial Court 
constituted under section 3, or the Commercial Division of a High Court constituted under 
section 4, of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015  (4 of 2016) ;'; 
(iii) for clause ( u), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
'(u) “prescribed ” means, — 
(i) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the 
High Court; and  
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;';  
(b) in section 6, — 10 
 (i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “Commercial Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) the words and figures “constituted under section 11 whose decision thereon shall be final ” 
shall be omitted;  
(c) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the words “AND APPELLATE BOARD ” shall be 
omitted;  
(d) sections 11 and 12 shall be omitted;  
(e) in sections 19A, 23, 31, 31A, 31B, 31C, 31D, 32, 32A and 33A, for the words “Appellate 
Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “Commercial Court ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 50, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(g) in section 53A, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “Commercial Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), the words “and the decision of the Appellate Board in this behalf shall 
be final ” shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 54, for the words “Appella te Board ”, the words “Commercial Court ” shall be 
substituted;  
(i) for section 72, the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
72. Appeals against orders of Registrar of Copyrights .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any 
final decision or order of the Registrar of Copyrights may, within three months from the date of 
the order or decision, appeal to the High Court.  
(2) Every such appeal shall be heard by a single Judge of the High Court:  
Provided that any such Judge may, if he so thinks fit, refer the ap peal at any stage of the 
proceeding to a Bench of the High Court.  
(3) Where an appeal is heard by a single Judge, a further appeal shall lie to a Bench of the 
High Court within three months from the date of decision or order of the single Judge.  
(4) In cal culating the period of three months provided for an appeal under this section, the 
time taken in granting a certified copy of the order or record of the decision appealed against shall 
be excluded. ”; 
(j) in sections 74 and 75, the words “and the Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, shall be 
omitted;  
(k) in section 77, the words “and every member of the Appellate Board ” shall be omitted;  
(l) in section 78, in sub -section ( 2),— 11 
 (i) clauses ( cA) and ( ccB) shall be omitted;  
(ii) in clause ( f), the words “and the Appellate Board ” shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER VI  
AMENDMENT TO THE INCOME -TAX ACT , 1961  
11. Amendment of Act 43 of 1961 .—In section 252A of the Income -tax Act, 1961, for the words and 
figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions 
of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be 
governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER VII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962  
12. Amendment of Act 52 of 1962 .—In the Customs Act, 1962, — 
(a) in section 28E, clauses ( ba), (f) and ( g) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 28EA, the proviso shall be omitted;  
(c) in section 28F, sub -section ( 1) shall be omitted;  
(d) in section 28KA, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “Appellate Authority ”, at both the places where they 
occur, the words “High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(e) in section 28L, the words “or Appellate Authority ”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 28M, — 
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “and Appellate Authority ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
(g) in section 129, in sub -section ( 7), for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the 
words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 
II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER VIII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTS ACT, 1970  
13. Amendment of Act 39 of 1970 .—In the Patents Act, 1970, — 
(a) in section 2, in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) clause ( a) shall be omitted;  12 
 (ii) in clause ( u), sub -clause ( B) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 52, the words “Appellate Board or ”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;  
(c) in section 58, — 
(i) the words “the Appellate Board or ”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted;  
(ii) the words “as the case may be ” shall be omitted;  
(d) in section 59, the words “the Appellate Board or ” shall be omitted;  
(e) in section 64, in sub -section ( 1), the words “by the Appellate Board ” shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 71, for the words “Appellate Board ” and “Board ”, wherever they occur, the words 
“High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(g) in section 76, the words “or Appellate Board ” shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 113, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(A) the words “the Appellate Board or ”, wherever they occur, shall be omit ted; 
(B) the words “as the case may be ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 3), the words “or the Appellate Board ” shall be omitted;  
(i) in Chapter XIX, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading “APPEALS ” shall be 
substituted;  
(j) sections 116 and 117 shall be omitted;  
(k) in section 117A, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(l) sections 117B, 117C and 117D shall be omitted;  
(m) in section 117E, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(n) sections 117F, 117G and 117H shall be omitted;  
(o) in section 151, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), the words “or the Appellate Board ”, at both the places where they 
occur, shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “the Appellate Board or the courts, as the case may be ”, 
the words “the courts ” shall be substituted;  
(p) in section 159, in sub -section ( 2), clauses ( xiia), (xiib) and ( xiic) shall be omitted.  
 13 
 CHAPTER IX  
AMENDMENT TO THE SM UGGLERS AND FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANIPULATORS (FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY) 
ACT, 1976  
14. Amendment of Act 13 of 1976 .—In section 12A of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange 
Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976, for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the 
words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of 
the said Act ” shall be substi tuted.  
CHAPTER X  
AMENDMENT TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS ACT, 1985  
15. Amendment of Act 13 of 1985 .—In section 10B of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, for 
the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be  governed by 
the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, 
shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XI  
AMENDMENT TO THE RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNA L ACT, 1987  
16. Amendment of Act 54 of 1987 .—In section 9A of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987, for 
the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by 
the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, 
shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XII  
AMENDMENT TO THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA ACT, 1992  
17. Amendment of Act 15 of 1992 .—In section 15QA of the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
Act, 1992, for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall 
be governed by the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s 
Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XIII  
AMENDMENT TO THE RECOVERY OF DEBTS AND BANKRUPTCY ACT, 1993  
18. Amendment of Act 51 of 1993 .—In the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993, — 
(a) in section 6A, for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017   
(7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures 
“the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” 
shall be substituted;  
(b) in section 15A, for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017   
(7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the prov isions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures 14 
 “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” 
shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XIV  
AMENDMENTS TO THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1994  
19. Amendment of Act 55 of 1994 .—In the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, — 
(a) in section 28A, clause ( e) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 28E, for the word “Tribunal ”, at both the places where it occurs, the words “Central 
Government ” shall be substituted;  
(c) sections 28 -I, 28J and 28JA shall be omitted;  
(d) in section 28K, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(A) for the words “Tribunal in such form as may be prescribed ”, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(B) in the proviso, for the word “Tribunal ”, the words “High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) shall be omitted;  
(e) section 28L shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 28M, the words “or the Tribunal ” shall be omitted;  
(g) in sec tion 28N, in sub -section ( 2), for the word “Tribunal ”, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted;  
(h) in section 33, the words “or the Chairperson of the Tribunal ” shall be omitted;  
(i) in section 41, in sub -section ( 2), clauses ( gvi), (gvii), (gviii) and (gix) shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER XV  
AMENDMENT TO THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997  
20. Amendment of Act 24 of 1997 .—In section 14GA of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
Act, 1997, for the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI  of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall 
be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms 
Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER  XVI 
AMENDMENTS TO THE TRADE MARKS ACT, 1999  
21. Amendment of Act 47 of 1999 .—In the Trade Marks Act, 1999, — 
(a) in section 2, in sub -section ( 1),— 15 
 (i) clauses ( a), (d), (f), (k), (n), (ze) and ( zf) shall be omitted;  
(ii) for clause ( s), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
'(s) “prescribed ” means, — 
(i) in relation to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the 
High Court; and  
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;';  
(b) in sect ion 10, for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted;  
(c) in section 26, for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted;  
(d) in section 46, in sub -section ( 3), for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High 
Court, as the case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(e) in section 47, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, at both the places where they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the word “tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the 
case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 55, in sub -section ( 1), for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High 
Court, as the case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(g) in section 57, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) for the word “tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the 
case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(h) in section 71, in sub -section ( 3), for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High 
Court, as the case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(i) in Chapter XI, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter hea ding “APPEALS ” shall be substituted;  
(j) sections 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 89A and 90 shall be omitted;  
(k) in section 91, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(l) sections 92 and 93 shall be  omitted;  
(m) for section 94, the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 16 
 “94. Bar to appear before Registrar .—On ceasing to hold the office, the erstwhile 
Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or other Members shall not appear before the Registrar. ”; 
(n) sections 95 and 96 shall be omitted;  
(o) in section 97, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(p) in section 98, for the words “Appellate Board ” or “Board ”, wherever they occur, the words 
“High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(q) sections 99 and 100 shall be omitted;  
(r) in section 113, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, at both the places where they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Regi strar or the High Court, as the case may be, ” shall 
be substituted;  
(s) in section 123, the words “and every Member of the Appellate Board ” shall be omitted;  
(t) in sections 124 and 125, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words 
“High  Court ” shall be substituted;  
(u) in section 130, the words “the Appellate Board or ” shall be omitted;  
(v) in section 141, for the words “Appellate Board ”, at both the places where they occur, the 
words “High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(w) in section 144 , for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case 
may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(x) in section 157, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(i) clauses ( xxxi) and ( xxxii ) shall be omitted;  
(ii) in clause ( xxxiii ), for the words “Appellate Board ”, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted.  
CHAPTER XVII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS (REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION)  
ACT, 1999  
22. Amendment of Act 48 of 1999 .—In the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and 
Protection) Act, 1999, — 
(a) in section 2, in sub -section ( 1), clauses ( a) and ( p) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 19, for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case m ay 
be,” shall be substituted;  17 
 (c) in section 23, for the words “and before the Appellate Board before which ”, the words “before 
whom ” shall be substituted;  
(d) in section 27, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) for the word “tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the 
case may be, ” shall be substituted;  
(e) in Chapter VII, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading “APPEALS ” shall be 
substituted;  
(f) in section 31, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 3) shall be omitted;  
(g) sections 32 and 33 shall be omitted;  
(h) in sections 34 and 35, for the words “Appellate Boar d”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(i) section 36 shall be omitted;  
(j) in section 48, — 
(i) for the words “Appellate Board ”, at both the places where they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may be, ” shall 
be substituted;  
(k) in sections 57 and 58, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High 
Court ” shall be substituted;  
(l) in section 63, the words “the Appellate Board or ” shall be omitted;  
(m) in section 72, for the words “Appellate Board ”, wherever they occur, the words “High Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(n) in section 75, for the word “tribunal ”, the words “Registrar or the High Court, as the case may 
be,” shall be substituted;  
(o) in section 87, in sub -section ( 2), clause ( n) shall be omitted.  
 
 
 18 
 CHAPTER XVIII  
AMENDMENTS TO THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS' RIGHTS ACT, 2001  
23. Amendment of Act 53 of 2001 .—In the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 
2001, — 
(a) in section 2, — 
(i) clauses ( d), (n) and ( o) shall be omitted;  
(ii) for clause ( q), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
'(q) “prescribed ” means, — 
(i) in relation to pro ceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the 
High Court; and  
(ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act;';  
(iii) clauses ( y) and ( z) shall be omitted;  
(b) in section 44, the words “or the Tribunal ” shall be omitted;  
(c) in Chapter VIII, for the Chapter heading, the Chapter heading “APPEALS ” shall be 
substituted;  
(d) sections 54 and 55 shall be omitted;  
(e) in section 56, — 
(i) for the word “Tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) sub-section ( 3) shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 57, — 
(i) for the word “Tribunal ”, wherever it occurs, the words “High Court ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 5) shall be omitted;  
(g) sections 58 and 59 shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 89, the word s “or the Tribunal ” shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER XIX  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC) ACT, 2002  
24. Amendment of Act 13 of 2003 .—In the Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 
2002, — 
(a) in section 2, — 
(i) clause (a) shall be omitted;  19 
 (ii) after clause ( d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
'(da) “Court ” means the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and 
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil juris diction;';  
(iii) clause ( l) shall be omitted;  
(b) in Chapter II, in the Chapter heading, the words “AND TRIBUNALS, ETC. ” shall be omitted;  
(c) section 5 shall be omitted;  
(d) for section 14, the following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“14. An appeal from any order passed, or any action taken, excluding issuance or serving of 
notices, under sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by the Highway Administration or an officer 
authorised on its behalf, as the case may be, shall lie to the Court. ”; 
(e) sections 15 and 16 shall be omitted;  
(f) in section 17, for the word “Tribunal ”, at both the places where it occurs, the word “Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(g) section 18 shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 19, for the word “Tribunal ”, at both the places where it occurs, the word “Court ” 
shall be substituted;  
(i) section 40 shall be omitted;  
(j) in section 41, — 
(i) the words “or every order passed or decision made on appeal under this Act by the 
Tribunal ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) the wor ds “or Tribunal ” shall be omitted;  
(k) in section 50, in sub -section ( 2), clause ( f) shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER XX  
AMENDMENT TO THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003  
25. Amendment of Act 36 of 2003 .—In section 117A of the Electricity Act, 2003, for the words and 
figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions 
of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 202 1, shall be 
governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XXI  
AMENDMENT TO THE ARMED FORCE TRIBUNAL ACT, 2007  
26. Amendment of Act 55 of 2007 .—In section 9A of the Armed Force Tribunal Act, 2007, for the 
words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the 20 
 provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall 
be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said  Act” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XXII  
AMENDMENT TO THE NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL ACT, 2010  
27. Amendment of Act 19 of 2010 .—In section 10A of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010, for 
the words and figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by 
the provisions of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, 
shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
AMENDMENT TO T HE COMPANIES ACT, 2013  
28. Amendment of Act 18 of 2013 .—In section 417A of the Companies Act, 2013, for the words and 
figures “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions 
of the section 184 of that Act ”, the words and figures “the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, shall be 
governed by the provisions of Chapter II of the said Act ” shall be substituted.  
CHAPTER XXIV  
AMENDMENT TO THE FINANCE ACT, 2017  
29. Amendment of Act 7 of 2017 .—In the Finance Act, 2017, sections 183 and 184 and the Eighth 
Schedule shall be omitted.  
CHAPTER XXV  
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019  
30. Amendment of Act 35 of 2019 .—In section 55 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019, after  
sub-section ( 1), the following sub -section  shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the qualifications, appointment, 
term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the President and othe r members of the National Commission appointed after the 
commencement of the Tribunal Reforms Act, 2021, shall be governed by the provisions of the said 
Act.”. 
CHAPTER XXVI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Power to amend the Schedule .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule and 
thereupon, the said Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification issued u nder sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued.  21 
 32. Rules to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliame nt, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both  Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
33. Transitional provisions .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being 
in force, any person appointed as the Chairperson or Chairman or President or Presiding Officer or  
Vice -Chairperson or Vice -Chairman or Vice -President or Member of the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, or, 
as the case may be, other Authorities specified in the Second Schedule and holding office as such 
immediately before the notified date, shall, on and from the notified date, cease to hold such office, and 
he shall be entitled to claim compens ation not exceeding three months' pay and allowances for the 
premature termination of term of his office or of any contract of service.  
(2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunals, Appellate Tribunals and other Authorities 
specified in the Second  Schedule appointed on deputation, before the notified date, shall, on and from the 
notified date, stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or Department.  
(3) Any appeal, application or proceeding pending before the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or ot her 
Authorities specified in the Second Schedule, other than those pending before the Authority for Advance 
Rulings under the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , before the notified date, shall stand transferred to 
the court before which it would have been filed had this Act been in force on the date of filing of such 
appeal or application or initiation of the proceeding, and the court may proceed to deal with such cases 
from the stage at which it stood before such transfer, or from any earlier stage, or de novo , as the court 
may deem fit.  
(4) The balance of all monies received by, or advanced to, the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other 
Authorities specified in the Second Schedule and not spent by it before the notified date, shall, on and 
from the notified  date, stand transferred to the Central Government.  
(5) All property of whatever kind owned by, or vested in, the Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or other 
Authorities specified in the Second Schedule before the notified date, shall stand transferred to, on an d 
from the notified date, and shall vest in the Central Government.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Offi cial Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the n otified 
date.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  22 
 35. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation  and Conditions of Service) 
Ordinance, 2021 is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Cinematograph Act, 
1952  (37 of 1952) , the Copyright Act, 1957  (14 of 1957) , the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , the Patents 
Act, 1970  (39 of 1970) , the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994) , the Trade Marks Act, 
1999  (47 of 1999) , the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999  (48 of 
1999) , the Protection of Plant Varieties a nd Farmers' Rights Act, 2001  (53 of 2001)  and the Control of 
National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002  (13 of 2003) , as amended by the said Ordinance, shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of those Acts, as amen ded by 
this Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( e)] 
Sl. 
No. Tribunal/Appellate Tribunal/Board/Authority  Acts 
(1) (2) (3) 
1.  Industrial Tribunal constituted by the  Central 
Government  The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  
(14 of 1947)  
2. Income -tax Appellate Tribunal  The Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961)  
3. Customs, Excise and Service Tax  
Appellate Tribunal  The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 
1962)  
4. Appellate Tribunal  The Smugglers and Foreign 
Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture 
of Property) Act, 1976 (13 of 
1976)  
5. Central Administrative Tribunal  The Administrative Tribunals Act, 
1985 (13 of 1985)  
6. State Administrative Tribunals  The Administrative Tribunals Act, 
1985 (13 of 1985)  
7. Railway Claims Tribunal  The Railway Claims T ribunal Act, 
1987 (54 of 1987)  
8. Securities Appellate Tribunal  The Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 
1992)  
9. Debts Recovery Tribunal  The Recovery of Debts and 
Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (51 of 1993)  
10. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal  The Recovery of Debts and 
Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (51 of 1993)  
11. Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal  The Telecom Regulatory Authority 
of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997)  
12. National Company Law Appellate Tribunal  The Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 
2013)  
13. National Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commission  The Consumer Protection Act, 
2019 (35 of 2019)  
14. Appellate Tribunal for Electricity  The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 24 
 2003)  
15. Armed Forces Tribunal  The Armed Forces Act, 2007 (55 
of 2007)  
16. National Green Tribunal  The National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010 (19 of 2010).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 25 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 33] 
1. Appellate Tribunal under Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952).  
2. Authority for Advance Rulings under Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).  
3. Airport Appellate Tribunal under Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994).  
4. Intellectual Property Appellate Board under Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999).  
5. Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal under Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer’s Rights 
Act, 2001 (53 of 2001).  
__________  
 
