--------------------------The Air Force Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE AIR FORCE ACT,  1950  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Persons subject to this Act.  
3. Termination of application of the Act . 
4. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE AP PLICATION OF ACT IN CERTAIN CASES  
 
5. Application of Act to certain forces under the Central Government.  
6. Special provision as to rank in certain cases.  
7. Commanding Officer of person subject to Air Force law under clause ( d) of section 2.  
8. Officer s exercising powers in certain cases.  
9. Power to declare persons to be on active  service.  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSION , APPOINTMENT  AND ENROLMENT  
10. Commission and appointment . 
11. Ineligibility of aliens for enrolment . 
12. Ineligibility of females for enrolment  or employment.  
13. Procedure before enrolling officer . 
14. Mode of enrolment . 
15. Validity of enrolment . 
16. Persons to be attested.  
17. Mode of attestation . 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE  
SECTIONS  
18. Tenure of service under the Act . 
19. Termination of service by Central Government . 
20. Dismissal, removal or reduction by Chief of the Air staff and other officers . 
21. Power to modify certain fundamental rights in their application to persons subject to this Act . 
22. Retirement, release or discharge . 
23. Certificate on termination of service . 
24. Discharge or dismissal when out of India . 
CHAPTER V  
SERVICE  PRIVILEGES  
25. Authorised deductions only to be made from pay . 
26. Remedy of aggrieved airmen . 
27. Remedy of aggrieved officers . 
28. Immunity from atta chment . 
29. Immunity from arrest for debt . 
30. Immunity of persons attending courts -martial from arrest . 
31. Privileges of reservists . 
32.  Priority in respect of Air Force personnel's litigation . 
33. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws.  
CHAPT ER VI  
OFFENCES  
34. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death.  
35. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.  
36. Offences punishable more severely on active service than at other times.  
37. Mutiny . 
38. Desertion a nd aiding desertion . 
39. Absence without leave . 
40. Striking or threatening superior officer . 
41. Disobedience to superior officer . 3 
 SECTIONS  
42. Insubordination and obstruction.  
43. Fraudulent enrolment . 
44. False answers on enrolment . 
45. Unbecoming condu ct 
46. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct . 
47. III -treating a subordinate  
48. Intoxication . 
49. Permitting escape of person in custody . 
50. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement . 
51. Escape from custody . 
52. Offences to respect of propert y. 
53. Extortion and corruption . 
54. Making away with equipment . 
55. Injury to property . 
56. False accusation . 
57. Falsifying official documents and false declaration.  
58. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
59. Offences relating to courts -martial . 
60. False evidence . 
61. Unlawful detention of pay.  
62. Offences in relation to aircraft and flying  
63. Other offences relating to aircraft and flying.  
64. Disobedience of lawful command of captain of aircraft . 
65. Violation of good order and air force discipl ine. 
66. Miscellaneous offences.  
67. Attempt . 
68. Abetment of offences that have been committed . 
69. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed.  
70.  Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.  
71. Civil offences.  4 
 SECTIONS  
72. Civil offence s not triable by court -martial . 
CHAPTER VII  
PUNISHMENTS  
73. Punishments awardable by court s-martial . 
74. Alternative punishments awardable by court -martial . 
75. Combination of punishments . 
76. Cashiering of officers . 
77. Field pu nishment . 
78. Position of field punishment in scale of punishments . 
79. Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer or a non-commissioned  officer . 
80. Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service . 
81. Punishments otherw ise than by court -martial . 
82. Punishment of persons other than officers and warrant officers . 
83. Requirement of sanction in certain cases . 
84. Limit of punishments under section 82.  
85. Punishments in addition to those specified in section 82 . 
86. Punish ment of officers and warrant officers.  
87. Transmission of proceedings . 
88. Review of proceedings.  
89. Superior air force authority . 
90. Collective fines . 
CHAPTER VIII  
PENAL  DEDUCTIONS  
91. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers.  
92. Deductions from  pay and allowances of airmen . 
93. Computation of time of absence of custody . 
94. Pay and allowances daring trial . 
95. Limit of certain deductions . 
96. Deduction from public money due to a person.  
97.  Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct . 
98. Remission of deductions.  5 
 SECTIONS  
99. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions.  
100. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances.  
101. Period during which a person is deemed t o be a prisoner of war  
CHPATER IX  
ARREST  AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
102. Custody of offenders . 
103. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention . 
104. Inter val between committal and court -martial  
105. Arrest by civil authorities . 
106. Capture of des erters . 
107. Inquiry into absence without leave.  
108. Provost -marshals . 
CHAPTER X  
COURTS -MARTIAL  
109. Different kinds of courts -martial.  
110. Power to convene a general court -martial . 
111. Power to convene a district court -martial . 
112. Contents of warran ts issued under sections 110 and 111.  
113. Power to convene a summary general court -martial.  
114. Composition of general court -martial . 
115. Composition of district court -martial.  
116. Composition of summary general court -martial . 
117. Dissolution of cour t-martial.  
118.  Powers of general and summary general courts -martial.  
119. Powers of district Court -martial.  
120. Prohibition of second trial.  
121. Period of limitation for trial.  
122. Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act.  
123. Place of t rial. 
 6 
 SECTIONS  
124. Choice between criminal court and court -martial . 
125. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender . 
126. Successive trials by a criminal, court and a court -martial . 
CHAPTER XI  
PROCEDURE  OF COURTS -MATRIAL  
127. Presiding Offic er. 
128. Judge Advocate . 
129. Challenges . 
130. Oaths of member, Judge advocate and witness . 
131. Voting by members . 
132. General rule as to evidence.  
133. Judicial notice.  
134. Summoning witnesses . 
135. Documents exempted from production.  
136. Commissions for examination of witnesses . 
137. Examination of a witness on commission.  
138. Conviction of offence not charged.  
139. Presumption as to signatures.  
140. Enrolment paper.  
141. Presumption as to certain documents.  
142. Reference by accused to Government of ficer.  
143. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.  
144. Lunacy of accused  
145. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial . 
146. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section  145. 
147. Release of lunatic accused . 
148. Del ivery of lunatic accused to relatives.  
149. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial . 
150. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.  
151. Powers of court s-martial when certain offences are committed by persons no t sub ject to this Act.  7 
 CHAPTER XII  
CONFIRMATION  AND REVISION  
SECTIONS  
152. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed.  
153. Power to confirm finding and sentence of general court -martial . 
154. Power to confirm finding and sentence of district court -martial.  
155.  Limitation of powers of confirming authority.  
156. Power to confirm finding and sentence of summary general court s- martial . 
157. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.  
158. Confirming of findings and senten ces on board a ship.  
159. Revision of finding or sentence.  
160. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases.  
161. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of court -martial.  
162. Annulment of proceedings . 
CHAPTER XII  
EXECUTION  OF SENTENCES  
163. Fo rm of sentence of death . 
164. Commencement of sentence of transportation or imprisonment.  
165. Execution of sentence of transportation.  
166. Execution of sentence of imprisonment . 
167. Temporary custody of offender . 
168. Execution of sentence of imprisonm ent in special cases . 
169. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place.  
170. Execution of sentence of detention . 
171. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
172. Execution of sentence of fine.  
173. Establishment and regulation of air force pris ons.  
174. Informality or error in the order or warrants.  
175. Power to make rules in respect of prisons and prisoners.  
 8 
 SECTIONS  
176. Restriction of rule -making power in respect to corporal punishment.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PARDONS  REMISSIONS  AND SUSPENSIONS  
177. Pardon and remission.  
178. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission . 
179. Reduction of warrant officer or non -commissioned officer.  
180. Suspension of sentence of transportation, imprisonment or detention.  
181. Orders pending s uspension.  
182. Release on suspension.  
183. Computation of period of suspension . 
184. Order after suspension . 
185. Reconsideration of case after suspension . 
186. Fresh sentence after suspension . 
187. Scope of power of suspension.  
188. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.  
CHAPTER XV  
RULES 
189. Power to make rules . 
190. Power to make regulations . 
191. Publication of rules and regulations in Gazette . 
191A. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
192. [ Repeal ed.]  
CHAPTER XVI  
TRANSITORY  PROVISIONS  
193. Definition of British officer.  
194. Powers of British officer . 
 
 9 
 THE AIR FORCE ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 45 OF 19501 
[18th May , 1950 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the government of the Air Force.  
BE it enacted by Parliament  as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Air Force Act, 1950.  
(2) It shall come into force on such  date2 as the Central Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behal f. 
2. Persons subject to this Act .—The following persons shall be subject to this A ct wherever they 
may be, namely: — 
(a) officers and warrant officers of the Air Force;  
(b) persons enrolled under this Act;  
3[(c) persons belonging to the Regular Air Force R eserve or the Air Defence Reserve or the 
Auxiliary Air Force, in the circumstances specified in section 26 of the Reserve and Auxiliary Air 
Forces Act, 1952  (62 of 1952) ;] 
(d) persons not otherwise subject to air force law, who, on active service, in camp,  on the march, 
or at any frontier post specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf, are 
employed by, or are in the service of, or are followers of, or accompany any portion of the Air Force.  
3. Termination of application of the Act .—Every person subject to this Act under clauses ( a) to ( c) 
of section 2 shall remain so subject until duly retired, discharged, released, removed, dismissed or 
cashiered from the service.  
4. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires. — 
(i) “active service ”, as applied to a person subject to this Act, means the time during which such 
person — 
(a) is attached to, or forms part of a force which is engaged in operations against an enemy, 
or 
(b) is engaged in air force operations  in, or is on the line of march to, a country or place 
wholly or partly occupied by an enemy, or  
(c) is attached to, or forms part of, a force which is in military occupation of any foreign 
country;  
                                                           
1. The Act has been ext dended to Goa, Daman and Diu by  Regulation 12 of and Schedule,  Dadra and Naga r Haveli by   
Regulation 6 of 1963, s. 2 and  the First S chedule Pondicherry by Regulation 7 of 1963, s. 3 and  First S chedule.  
2. 22nd July, 195 0, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 124, dated 22nd July,  see Gazette of India, 1950, Part II, s ec. 4. 
3. Subs. by Ac t 62 of 1952, s. 35, for c lause  (c) (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955) . 
 10 
 (ii) “aircraft ” includes aeroplanes, balloons, l ite balloons, airships,  gliders or other machines for 
flying;  
(iii) “aircraft material ” includes any engines, fittings, guns, gear, instruments or apparatus for use 
in connection with aircraft, and any of its components and accessories and petrol oil, and any other 
substance use d for providing motive power for planes;  
(iv) “Air Force ” means officers and airmen who by their commission, warrant, terms of 
enrolment or otherwise, are liable to render continuously for a term air force service to the Union in 
every part of the world or  any specified part of the world, including persons belonging to1[any Air 
Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force], when called out on permanent service;  
(v) “Air force custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a person according to the usages of the 
service and includes military or naval custody;  
(vi) “Air Force  law” means the law enacted by this Act and the rules made thereunder and 
includes the usages of the service;  
(vii) “Air Force reward ” includes any gratuity or annuity for long service or good co nduct, badge 
pay or pension, and any other Air Force pecuniary reward;  
(viii) “airman ” means any person subject to this Act other than an officer;  
(ix) “air officer ” means any officer of the Air Force above the rank of group captain;  
(x) “air signal ” means  any signal intended for the guidance of aircraft, whether given by flag, 
ground signal, light, wind indicator or in any manner whatsoever;  
(xi) “Chief Legal Adviser ” means a person appointed as such by2 [the Chief of the Air staff] to 
give advice on matte rs relating to air force law and to perform such other duties of a legal character as 
may arise in connection therewith;  
(xii) “civil offence ” means an offence which is triable by a criminal court;  
(xiii) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the  detention of any criminal prisoner under 
the Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1894 ), or under any other law for the time being in force;  
3[(xiv) “Chief of the Air Staff ” means the officer commanding the Air Force;]  
(xv) “commanding officer ” used in relation to a p erson subject to this Act, means the officer for 
the time being in command of the unit or detachment to which such person belongs or is attached;  
(xvi) “court -martial ” means a court -martial held under this Act;  
(xvii) “criminal court ” means a court of ordi nary criminal justice in any part of India,4* * * * *;  
(xviii) “enemy ” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and any person 
in arms against whom it is the duty of any person subject to air force law to act;  
(xix) “the Forces ” means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one or more of 
them; 
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 62 of 1952, s. 35, for “the Indian Air Force Volunteer Reserve” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955).  
2. Subs by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the S chedule , for “Commander -in-Chief”  (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955).  
3. Su bs by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for clause  (xiv) (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955) . 
4. The words “other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act  13 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f . 25-1-1975) . 
 
 11 
 (xx) “non-commissioned officer ” means a person holding a non -commissioned rank or an acting 
non-commissioned rank in the Air Force, and includes any person holding a non -comm issioned rank 
or an acting non -commissioned rank in  1[any Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force] when 
subject to this Act;  
(xxi) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 
(xxii) “offence ” means any act or omission punish able under this Act , and includes a civil 
offence, as hereinbefore defined;  
(xxiii) “officer ” means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer in the Air Force, 
and includes — 
(a) an officer of1[any Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force]  who is for the time being 
subject to this Act;  
(b) in relation to a person subject to this Act when serving under such conditions as may be 
prescribed, an officer of the regular Army or the Navy , 
but does not include a junior commissioned officer, warrant  officer, petty officer or non -commissioned 
officer;  
(xxiv) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(xxv) “provost -marshal ” means a person appointed as such under section 108 and includes any of 
his deputies or assistants or any other p erson legally exercising authority under him or on his behalf;  
(xxvi) “regulation ” includes a regulation made under this Act;  
(xxvii ) “superior officer ”, when used in relation to a person subject to this Act, includes a warrant 
officer and a non -commission ed officer, and as regards persons serving under such conditions as may be 
prescribed, an officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, petty officer and non -commissioned 
officer of the regular Army or the Navy;  
(xxviii ) “unit” includes — 
(a) anybo dy of officers and airmen for which a separate authorised establishment exists;  
(b) any separate body of persons subject to this Act employed on any service and not attached 
to a unit as aforesaid;  
(c) any other separate body of persons composed wholly or partly of persons subject to this 
Act, and specified as a unit by the Central Government;  
(xxix) “warrant officer ” means a person appointed, gazetted or in pay as a warrant officer of the 
Air Force and includes an acting warrant officer, a master warrant o fficer, and a warrant officer 
of1[any Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force] who is for the time being subject to this Act;  
(xxx) 2[all words (except the word “India ”)] and expressions used herein and defined in the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860)  and not hereinbefore defined shall be deemed to have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them by that Code.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1952, s. 35,  for “Indi an Air Force Volunteer Rese rve” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955).  
2. Subs by Act 13 of 1975, s. 2, for “all words” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1975).  
 12 
 CHAPTER II  
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF ACT IN CERTAIN CASES  
5. Application of Act to certain forces under the Central Government .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, apply with or without modi fications, all or any of the provisions of this 
Act to any force raised and main tained in India and suspend the operation of any other enactment for the 
time being applicable to the said force.  
(2) The provisions of this Act so applied shall have effect in respect of per sons belonging to the said 
force as they have effect in respect of persons subject to this Act holding in the Air Force the same or 
equivalent rank as the aforesaid p ersons hold for the time being in the said force. 
(3) The provisions of this Act so applied shall also have effect in respect of persons who are 
employed by, or are in the service of, or are followers of, or accompany any portion of the said force as 
they have effect in respect of per sons subject to this Act under clause ( d) of section 2.  
(4) While any of the provisions of this Act apply to the said force, the Cen tral Government may, by 
notification, direct by what authority any jurisdic tion, powers or d uties incident to the operation of these 
provisions shall be exercised or performed in respect of the said force.  
6. Special provision as to rank in certain cases .—(1) The Central Gov ernment may, by notification, 
direct that any person or class of persons  subject to this Act under clause ( d) of section 2, shall be so 
subject as officers, warrant officers or non -commissioned officers, and may authorise any officer to give a 
like direction and to cancel such direction.  
(2) All persons subject to this Act ot her than officers, warrant officers and non -commissioned officers 
shall, if they are not persons in respect of whom a notification or direction under sub -section ( 1) is in 
force, be deemed to be of rank inferior to that of a non -commissioned officer.  
7. Commanding officer of person subject to air force law under clause (d) of section 2 .—(1) 
Every person subject to this Act, under clause ( d) of section 2, shall, for the purposes of this Act, be 
deemed to be under the commanding officer of the unit, or detach ment, if any, to which he is attached, 
and if he is not so attached under the command of any officer who may for the time being be named as his 
commanding officer by the officer commanding the force with which such person may for the time being 
be serving,  or of any other prescribed officer, or, if no such officer is named or prescribed, under the 
command of the said officer commanding the force.  
(2) An officer commanding a force shall not place a person subject to this Act under clause ( d) of 
section 2 und er the command of an officer of official rank inferior to that of such person if there is present 
at the place where such person is any officer of higher rank under whose command he can be placed.  
8. Officer exercising powers in certain cases .—(1) Whenever  persons subject to this Act are serving 
under an officer commanding any air force formation not in this section specifically named, and being, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, not less than a squadron, the said Government may prescribe the 
office r by whom the powers which, under this Act, may be exercised by air officers in charge of 
commands, and officers commanding groups, wings and squadrons shall, as regards such persons, be 
exercised.  
(2) The Central Government may confer such powers either a bsolutely, or subject to such restrictions, 
reservations, exceptions and conditions as it may think fit.  13 
 9. Power to declare persons to be on active service .—Notwithstanding anything con tained in     
clause ( i) of section 4, the Central Government may, b y notification, declare that any person or class of 
persons subject to this Act shall, with reference to any area in which they may be serving or with 
reference to any provision of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force , be deemed to be o n 
active service within the meaning of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSION , APPOINTMENT  AND ENROLMENT  
10. Commission and appointment .—The President may grant, to such person as he thinks fit a 
commission as an officer or appoint any person as a warrant office r of the Air Force.  
11. Ineligibility of aliens for enrolment .—No person who is not a citizen of India shall, except with 
the consent of the Central Government signified in writing, be enrolled in the Air Force : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sect ion shall bar the enrolment of the subjects of Nepal in the 
Air Force.  
12. Ineligibility of females for enrolment or employment .—No female shall be eligible for 
enrolment or employment in the Air Force, except in such corps, department, branch or other bod y 
forming part of, or attached to any portion of, the Air Force as the Central Govern ment may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf : 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force prov iding for the raising and maintenance of any service auxiliary to the Air Force or any 
branch thereof in which females are eligible for enrolment or employment.  
13. Procedure before enrolling officer .—Upon the appearance before the prescribed enrolling 
officer of any person desirous of being enrolled, the enrolling officer shall read and explain to him, or 
cause to be read and explained to him , in his presence, the conditions of the service for which he is to be 
enrolled; and shall put to him the questions set forth in the prescribed form of enrolment, and shall, after 
having cautioned him that if he makes a false answer to any such question he will be liable to punishment 
under this Act, record or cause to be recorded his answer to each such question.  
14. Mode of enrolment .—If, after complying with the provisions of section 13, the enrolling officer 
is satisfied that the person desirous of being enrolled fully understands the questions put to him and 
consents to the conditions of service, and if such officer  perceives no impediment, he shall sign and shall 
also cause such person to sign the enrolment paper, and such person shall thereupon be deemed to be 
enrolled.  
15. Validity of enrolment .—Every person who has for the space of three months been in receipt of  
pay as a person enrolled under this Act and been borne on the rolls of any unit shall be deemed to have 
been duly enrolled, and shall not be entitled to claim his discharge on the ground of any irregularity or 
illegality in his enrolment or on any other g round whatsoever ; and if any person,  in receipt of such pay 
and borne on the rolls as aforesaid, claims his discharge before the expiry of three months from his 
enrolment, no such irregularity or illegal ity or other ground shall, until he is discharged in  pursuance of 
his claim, affect his position as an enrolled person under this Act or invalidate any proceedings, act or 
thing taken or done prior to his discharge.  
16. Persons to be attested .—The following persons shall be attested, namely: — 14 
 (a) all person s enrolled as combatants;  
(b) all persons selected to hold a non -commissioned or acting non -commissioned rank; and  
(c) all other persons subject to this Act as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
 17. Mode of attestation .—(1) When a person who is to be attested is reported fit for duty, or has 
completed the prescribed period of probation, an oath or affirmation shall be adminis tered to him in the 
prescribed form by his commanding officer in front of his unit or such portion thereof as may be prese nt, 
or by any other prescribed persons.  
(2) The form of oath or affirmation prescribed under this section shall contain a promise that the 
person to be attested will bear true allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law estab lished, and that 
he will  serve in the Air Force and go wherever he is ordered by land, sea or air, and that he will obey all 
commands of any officer set over him, even to the peril of his life.  
(3) The fact of an enrolled person having taken the oath or affirmation directed by th is section to be 
taken shall be entered on his enrolment paper and authenticated by the signature of the officer 
administering the oath or affirmation.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE  
18. Tenure of service under the Act .—Every person subject to this Act s hall hold office during the 
pleasure of the President.  
19. Termination of service by Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules and regulations made thereunder, the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from the service 
any person subject to this Act.  
20. Dismissal, removal or reduction by Chief of the Air Staff and other officers .—(1) 1[The Chief 
of the Air Staff] may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act other than an 
officer.  
(2) 1[The Chief of  the Air Staff] may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks, any warrant officer 
or any non -commissioned officer.  
(3) An officer having power not less than an air officer in charge of a command or equivalent 
commander or any prescribed officer may dis miss or remove from the service any person serving under 
his command other than an officer or a warrant officer.  
(4) On active service, an officer commanding the air forces in the field may reduce to a lower rank or 
to the ranks any warrant officer or non -commissioned officer under his command.  
(5) 1[The Chief of the Air Staff] or an officer specified in sub -section ( 3) may reduce to a lower class 
in the ranks any airman other than a warrant officer or non -commissioned officer.  
(6) The commanding officer o f an acting non -commissioned officer may order him to revert to his 
substantive rank as a non -commissioned officer, or if he had no such substantive rank, to the ranks.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the  Schedule,  for  “the Commander -in-Chief” (w.e.f . 7-5-1955)  15 
 (7) The exercise of any powers under this section shall be subject to the other provisio ns contained in 
this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder.  
21. Power to modify certain fundamental rights in their application to persons subject to this 
Act.—Subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force relating to the Air  Force or to any 
branch thereof, the Central Government may, by notification, make rules a restricting in such manner and 
to such extent as may be specified the right of any person subject to this Act — 
(a) to be a member of, or to be associated in any way with, any trade union or labour union, or 
any class of trade or labour unions or any society, institution or association, or any class of societies, 
institutions or associations;  
(b) to attend or address any meeting or to take part in any demonstration org anised by any body 
of persons for any political or other purposes;  
(c) to communicate with the press or to publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document.  
22. Retirement, release or discharge .—Any person subject to this Act may be reti red, released or 
discharged from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
23. Certificate on termination of service .—Every warrant officer, or enrolled person who is 
dismissed, removed, discharged, retired or released from the  service shall be furnished by his 
commanding officer with a certificate, in the language which is the mother  tongue of such person and also 
in the English language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  
(b) the cause for such terminatio n; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Air Force.  
24. Discharge or dismissal when out of India .—(1) Any person enrolled under this Act who is 
entitled under the conditions of his enrolment to be discharged, or whose discharge is ordered by 
compet ent authority, and who, when he is so entitled or ordered to be discharged, is serving out of India, 
and requests to be sent to India, shall, before being discharged, be sent to India with all convenient speed.  
(2) Any person enrolled under this Act who is  dismissed from the service and who, when he is so 
dismissed, is serving out of India, shall be sent to India with all convenient speed.  
(3) Where any such person as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) is sentenced to dismissal combined with 
any other punishme nt, such other punishment or, in the case of a sentence of transportation, imprisonment 
or detention, a portion of such sentence may be inflicted before he is sent to India.  
(4) for the purposes of this section, the word, “discharge ” shall include release,  and the word 
“dismissal ” shall include removal.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICE  PRIVILEGES  
25. Authorised deductions only to be made from pay .—The pay of every person subject to this Act 
due to him as such under any regulation, for the time being in force, shall be pai d without any deduction 
other than the deductions authorised by or under this or any other Act.  16 
 26. Remedy of aggrieved airmen .—(1) Any airman who deems himself wronged by any superior or 
other officer may, if not attached to a unit or detachment, complain  to the officer under whose command 
or orders he is serving; and may , if attached to a unit or detachment, complain to the officer commanding 
the same.  
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under sub -
section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved airman may complain to such officer's next superior officer, and if 
he thinks himself wronged by such superior officer, he may complain to  1[the Chief of the Air Staff.]  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall m ake as complete an investigation into it as may 
be possible for  giving full redress to the complainant; or, when necessary, refer the complaint to superior 
authority.  
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may from time to time be sp ecified by 
the proper authority.  
(5) The Central Government may revise any decision by a  1[the Chief of the Air staff] under           
sub section  (2), but subject thereto, the decision of  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] shall be final.  
27. Remedy of aggrie ved officers .—Any officer who deems himself wronged by his commanding 
officer or any superior officer and who on due application made to his commanding officer does not 
receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain to the Central  Government in 
such manner as may from time to time be specified by the proper authority.  
28. Immunity from attachment .—The arms, clothes, equipment, accoutrements or neces saries of 
any person subject to this Act shall not be seized , and the pay and allow ances of any such person or any 
part thereof shall not be attached, by direction of any civil or revenue court or any revenue officer, in 
satisfaction of any decree or order enforceable against him.  
29. Immunity from arrest for debt .—(1) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs 
to the Forces be liable to be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil 
or revenue court or revenue officer.  
(2) The judge of any such court or the said officer may examine int o any complaint made by such 
person or his superior officer of the arrest of such person contrary to the provisions of this section, and 
may, by warrant under his hand, discharge the person, and award reasonable costs to the complain ant, 
who may recover th ose costs in like manner as he might have recovered costs awarded to him by a decree 
against the person obtaining the process.  
(3) For the recovery of such costs no court -fee shall be payable by the complainant.  
30. Immunity of persons attending courts -martial from arrest .—(1) No presiding officer or 
member of a court -martial, no judge advocate, no party to any proceeding before a court -martial, or his 
legal practitioner or agent, and no witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend a court -martial 
shall, while proceeding to, attending, or returning from, a court -martial, be liable to arrest under civil or  
revenue process.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the S chedule , for “the Co mmander -in-Chief” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955). 
 17 
 (2) If any such person is arrested under any such process, he may be discharged by order of the    
court -martial.  
31. Privileges of reservists .—Every person belonging to  1[any Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary 
Air Force] shall, when called out for, or engaged in, or returning from, training or service, be entitled to 
all the privileges ac corded by sections 28 and 29 to a person subje ct to this Act.  
32.  Priority in respect of Air Force personnel's litigation .—(1) On the presentation to any court 
by or on behalf of any person subject to this Act of a certificate, from the proper air force authority, of 
leave of absence having been gran ted to or applied for by him for the purpose of prosecuting o r defending 
any suit or other proceeding in such court, the court shall, on the application of such person, arrange, so 
far as may be possible, for the hearing and final disposal of such suit or other proceeding within the 
period of the leave so granted or applied for.  
(2) The certificate from the proper air force authority shall state the first and last day of the leave or 
intended leave, and set forth a description of the case with respect to wh ich the leave was granted or 
applied for.  
(3) No fee shall be payable to the court in respect of the presentation of any such certificate, or of any 
application by or on behalf of any such person, for priority for the hearing of his case.  
(4) Where the cou rt is unable to arrange for the hearing and final disposal of the suit or other 
proceeding within the period of such leave or intended leave as aforesaid, it shall record its reasons for its 
inability to do so, and shall cause a copy thereof to be furnishe d to such person on his application without 
any payment whatever by him in respect either of the application for such copy or of the copy itself.  
(5) If in any case a question arises as to the proper air force authority qualified to grant such 
certificate as aforesaid . Such question shall be at once referred by the court to an officer having power not 
less than a group commander or equivalent commander whose decision shall be final.  
33. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws .—The rights and privil eges speci fied in the 
preceding sections of this Chapter shall be in addition to any others conferred on persons subject to this 
Act or on members of the regular Army, Navy and Air Force generally by any other law for the time 
being in force.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES  
34. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death .—Any person subject to this Act 
who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any garrison, fortress, post, place or guard, com mitted to 
his charge, or which it is his duty to defend, or uses any means to compel or induce any commanding 
officer or other person to commit the said act; or  
                                                           
1. Subs . by the Act 62 of 1952, s. 35 , for “the Air Force Reserve” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1955) . 
 18 
 (b) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to military, naval or air 
force law to abstain from acting against the enemy, or to discourage such perso n from acting against 
the enemy;  or 
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools or 
equipment or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowa rdice; or  
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy or any 
person in arms against the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores or sup plies; or  
(f) treacherous ly or through cowardice sends a flag of truce to the enemy; or  
(g) in time of war or during any air force operation, intentionally occasions a false alarm in 
action, camp or quarters or spreads reports calculated to create alarm or despon dency; or  
(h) in time of action leaves his commanding officer or his post, guard, piquet, patrol or party 
without being regularly relieved or without leave; or  
(i) having been made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the enemy; or  
(j) knowingly  harbours or p rotects an enemy not being a prisoner; or  
(k) being a sentry in time of war or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or  
(l) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the military, naval or air forces of 
India or any forces co -operating therewith or any part of such forces ; or 
(m) treacherously or shamefully causes the capture or destruction by the enemy of any aircraft 
belonging to the forces; or  
(n) treacherously uses any false air signal or alters or interferes with any air sign al; or 
(o) when ordered by his superior officer or otherwise under orders to carry out any air force 
operations, treacherously or shamefully fails to use his utmost exertions to carry such orders into 
effect , 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liabl e to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
35. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death .—Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is taken prisoner, by  want of due precaution, or through disobedience of orders, or wilful 
neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner, fails to rejoin his service when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with or communicates intelligence to the  enemy; 
or having come by the knowledge of any such correspondence or commu nication wilfully omits to 
discover it immediately to his commanding or other superior officer; or  
(c) without due authority sends a flag of truce to the enemy; or  
(d) negligently causes the capture or destruction by the enemy of any aircraft belonging to the 
Government; or  19 
 (e) when ordered by his superior officer, or otherwise under orders to carry out any warlike 
operations in the air, negligently or through other default fails to  use his utmost exertions to carry 
such orders into effect;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Offences punishable m ore severely on active service than at other times .—Any person subject 
to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force to a sentry; or  
(b) breaks into any house or other place  in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, piquet, patrol or post; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quart ers; or spreads reports 
calculated to create unnecessary alarm or despondency; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or countersign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign different from what he re ceived ; or 
(g) without due authority alters or interferes with any air signal;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits any such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits any such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. Mutiny .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes, or conspires , with any other persons to cause, any mutiny in the military, 
naval or air forces of India or any forces co -operating therewi th; or 
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny , does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention to 
commit such mutiny  or any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
commanding or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the military, naval or air forces of India from his duty or 
allegiance to the Union , 
shall, on  conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
38. Desertion and aiding desertion .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall on conviction by court -martial,  20 
 if he commits the offence on active service or when under orders for active service, be liable to 
suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer imp risonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice t o his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
39. Absence without leave .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from proper authority that any unit 
or detachment to which he belongs, has been ordered on active service , fails, without sufficient cause, 
to re-join without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed, at the parade or place ap pointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or  
(f) when in camp or  elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordered to attend there , 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Striking or threatening superior officer .—Any person subject to this Act who com mits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force to, o r assaults his superior officer;  or 
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer , 
shall, or, conviction by court -martial,  21 
 if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is committed on active 
service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to four teen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c), the i mprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
41. Disobedience to superior officer .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execu tion of his office whether the same is given orally or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act ment ioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend t o five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen  years or such less punishment as is in this Act men tioned . 
42. Insubordination and obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him i nto arrest, or uses criminal force to or assaults any such officer; or  
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is no t this superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend him or to have him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the provost -marshal or any person lawfully acting on h is behalf or, when called upon, 
refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a provost -marshal or any person lawfully acting on his 
behalf; or  
(g) uses criminal force to or assaults any person bringing provisions or supplies to the Forces , 
shall, on conv iction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the 
case of the offences specified in clauses( d) and ( e) to two years, and in the case of the offences specified 
in the other clauses to ten years or such less punish ment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Fraudulent enrolment .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) without having obtained a regular discharge from the Air Force or otherwise fulfilled the 
conditions enabling him to enroll or enter, enrolls himself in, or enters the said force or any part of the 
military or the naval forces of India; or  22 
 (b) is concerned in the enrolment in any part of the Forces, of any person when he knows or has 
reason to believe suc h person to be so circumstanced that by enrolling he commits an offence against 
this Act , 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. False answers on enrolment .—Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enr olling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Unbecoming c onduct .—Any officer or warrant officer who behaves in a manner unbe coming his 
position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by court -martial, if he is an officer, be 
liable to be cashiered or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he is a warrant 
officer, be liable to be dismissed or to suffer such less punish ment as is in this Act mentioned.  
46. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, tha t is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself, or intentionally delays his 
cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with in tent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person , 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as i s in this Act mentioned.  
47. Ill-treating a subordinate .—Any officer, warrant officer or non -commissioned of ficer, who uses 
criminal force to or otherwise ill -treats any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or 
position, shall, on conv iction by court -martial, be liable to suffer impris onment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
48. Intoxication .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxica tion, whethe r 
on duty or not, shall, on conviction by court -martial, if he is an officer, be liable to be cashiered or to 
suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he is not an officer, be liable, subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Where an offence of being intoxicated is committed by a person other than an officer when not on 
active service or not on duty, the period  of imprisonment awarded shall not exceed six months.  
49. Permitting escape of person in custody .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when in command of a guard, piquet, patrol or post , releases wi thout proper authority, 
whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge or refuses to 
receive any prisoner or person so committed ; or  23 
 (b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge or whom it is his duty to keep on guard;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted, willfully, to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; a nd if he 
has not acted willfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
50. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any  of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to air force custody fails without reasonable cause to deliver at the 
time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight hours thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
51. Escape from custody .—Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape , shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer impris onment for a term 
which may extend to five years or such less punishment  as is in this Act mentioned.  
52. Offences to respect of property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any military, naval or air 
force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to military, naval or air force law; or  
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such offence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may  extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
53. Extortion and corruption .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority extrac ts from any person money, provisions or services ; 24 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
54. Making away with equipment .—Any pers on subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) makes away with , or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equip ment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Govern ment issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer impris onment for a term which may extend, in the 
case of the offences specified in clause ( a) to ten years , and in the case of the offences specified in the 
other clauses to five years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
55. Injury to property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 54, or any property 
belonging to any military, naval or air force mess, band or institution,  or to any person subject to 
military, naval or air force law, or serving with, or attached to the Air Force, or; 
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Govern ment 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with , ill-treats or loses any animal entrusted to him;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted willfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if  he has 
acted without reasonable excuse to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
56. False accusation .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint under section 26 or section 27 makes any statement affecting the 
character of  any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be 
false, or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to  five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
57. Falsifying official documents and false declaration .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificat e, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; or  25 
 (b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document whic h it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter , knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other advantage o r 
privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting t o make a true entry or document containing a 
true statement;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
58. Signing in blank and  failure to report .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any property of the Government fraud ulently leaves in blank any material part for which 
his signature is a voucher; or  
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which it is his duty to 
make or send;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
59. Offences relating to courts -martial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a court - martial, wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a court -martial to be taken 
or made; or  
(c) refuses to produce  or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a court -
martial to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses when a witness to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of  court -martial by using insulting or threatening language, or by causing 
any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such court; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or  such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
60. False evidence .—Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed bef ore 
any court -martial or other c ourt competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, makes any 26 
 statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
61. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, warrant officer or non -commissioned officer who, 
having received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when 
due, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
62. Offences in relation to aircraft and flying .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences,  that is to say, — 
(a) wilfully or without reasonable excuse damages, destroys or loses any aircraft or aircraft 
material belonging to the Government; or  
(b) is guilty of any act or neglect likely to cause such damage, destruction or loss; or  
(c) without la wful authority disposes of any aircraft or aircraft material belonging to the 
Government; or  
(d) is guilty of any act or neglect in flying, or in the use of any aircraft, or in relation to any 
aircraft or aircraft material, which causes or is likely to cau se loss of life or bodily injury to any 
person; or  
(e) during a state of war, wilfully and without proper occasion , or negligently , causes the 
sequestration, by or under the authority of a neutral State, or the destruction in a neutral State, of any 
aircra ft belonging to the Government;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act men tioned, and, in any other 
case, t o suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
63. Other offences relating to aircraft and flying .—Any person subject to this Act who commits 
any of the following offences, that is to sa y,— 
(a) signs any certificate in relation to an aircraft material belonging to the Government without 
ensuring the accuracy thereof; or  
(b) being the pilot of an aircraft belonging to the Government, flies it at a height less than such 
height as may be spe cified by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff], except while taking off or landing, or in 
such other circumstances as may be specified by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff); or  
(c) being the pilot of an aircraft belonging to the Government, flies it so as to cause, or to be 
likely to cause, unnecessary annoyance to any person;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to tw o 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief”, (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955).  
 27 
 64. Disobedience of lawful command of captain of aircraft .—Any person subject to this Act who, 
whatever his rank, commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) while he is in an air craft disobeys any lawful command given by the captain of the aircraft, 
whether such captain is subject to this Act or not, as respects all matters relating to the flying or 
handling of the aircraft, or affecting the safety thereof; or  
(b) being the captai n of a glider aircraft towed by another aircraft disobeys any lawful command 
given by the captain of the towing aircraft, whether the latter is subject to this Act or not, as respects 
all matters aforesaid;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
65. Violation of good order and air force discipline .—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty 
of any act or omission which though  not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and air force 
discipline shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
66. Miscellaneous offences .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
this command has beaten or otherwise maltreated  or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair 
or market , or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due repara tion made to the injured person 
or to report the case to the proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise,  intentionally insults the religion or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of warrant officer, when off duty, a ppears, without proper author ity, in 
or about camp or c antonments, or in or about , or when going to or returning from, any town or bazar, 
carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains , or agrees to acc ept or attempts to obt ain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment of any 
person , or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgence for any person in the 
service; or  
(f) com mits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punish ment as is in this Act mentioned.  
67. Attempt .—Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 34 to 66 inclusive , and in such attempt does any act towards the commis sion of the offence 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, where no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment 
of such attempt, be liable,  28 
 if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer impris onment for a 
term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment  
as is in this Act mentioned.  
 68. Abetment of offences that have been committed .—Any person subject to this Act who abets 
the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 66 inclusive, shall, on conviction by 
court -martial, if the act abe tted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is 
made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment provided for 
that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
69. Abetmen t of offences punishable with death and not committed .—Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 34, 37 and 
sub-section ( 1) of section 38 shall, on conviction by court -martial, if th at offence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such 
abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in th is Act mentioned.  
70.  Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed .—Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 66 
inclusive and punishable with imprisonment shall, on c onviction by court -martial, if that offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment , and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half 
of the l ongest term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
71. Civil offences .—Subject to the provisions of section 72, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in or beyond India commits any civil offence shall be de emed to be guilty of an offence against this 
Act and, if charged therewith under this section shall be liable to be tried by a court -martial and, on 
conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death or 
with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for the 
offence, by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other c ase, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment other than whipping “assigned 
for the offence by any law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
72. Civil offence s not triable by court -martial .—A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder against a person not subject to military, naval or air force law, or of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder against such a person or of rape in relation to su ch a person , shall not be deemed 
to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tried by a court -martial, unless he commits any 
of the said offences — 
(a) while on active service, or  
(b) at any place outside India, or29 
 (c) at a frontier post sp ecified by the said Government by notification in this behalf.  
1*                         *                             *                         *                           *  
CHAPTER VII  
PUNISHMENTS  
73. Punishments awardable by courts -martial .—Punishments  may be inflicted in respect of 
offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by courts -martial according to the scale 
following , that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years, in resp ect of civil offences;  
(c) imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years;  
(d) detention for a term not exceeding two years in the case of airmen;  
(e) cashiering, in the case of officers;  
(f) dismissal from service;  
(g) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or classification, in the case of warrant officers and 
non-commissioned officers:  
Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in the ranks as 
an airman;  
(h) forfeiture of s eniority of rank, in the case of officers, warrant officers and non -commissioned 
officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the purpose of promotion, in the case of 
any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service;  
(i) forfe iture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed purpose;  
(j) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers, warrant officers and non -commissioned 
officers;  
(k) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not ex ceeding three months for an offence 
committed on active service;  
(l) forfeiture , in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all 
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashie ring or 
dismissal;  
(m) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
74. Alternative punishments awardable by court -martial .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a 
court -martial may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in sections 
34 to 70 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said 
                                                           
1. The Explanation omitted by  Act 13 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f . 25-1-1975) . 
 30 
 sections to be punishable, or, in lieu thereof , any o ne of the punishments lower in the scale set out in 
section 73, regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
75. Combination of punishments .—A sentence of a court -martial may award in addition to, or 
without any one other punishment, the punis hment specified in clause ( e) or clause ( f) of section 73 and 
any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( g) to ( m) of that section.  
76. Cashiering of officers .—An officer shall be sentenced to be cashiered before he is awarded any 
of the puni shments specified in clauses ( a) to ( c) of section 73.  
77. Field punishment .—(1) Where any person subject to this Act and under the rank of warrant 
officer commits any offence on active service, shall be lawful for a court-martial to award for that offence  
any such punishment as is prescribed as a field punishment.  
(2) Field punishment shall be of the character of personal restraint or of hard labour but shall not be 
of a nature to cause injury to life or limb and shall not include flogging.  
78. Position of  field punishment in scale of punishments .—Field punishment shall for the purpose 
of commutation be deemed to stand next below dismissal in the scale of punishments specified in section 
73. 
79. Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer  or non -commissioned 
officer .—A warrant officer or a non -commissioned officer sentenced by a court -martial to transportation, 
imprisonment, detention, field punishment or dismissal from the service shall be deemed to be reduced to 
the ranks.  
80. Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service .—When, on active service, any 
enrolled person has been sentenced by a court -martial to dismissal, or to transportation, imprisonment or 
detention, whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed o fficer may direct that such person may 
be retained to serve in the ranks and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of transportation, 
imprisonment or detention, if any.  
81. Punishments otherwise than by court -martial .—Punishments may, also be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons , subject to this Act without the intervention of a court -martial and in 
the manner stated in sections 82 and 86.  
82. Punishment of persons other than officers and warrant officers .—Subject to the provis ions of 
section 84, a commanding officer or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, 
specified by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff], may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject 
to this Act otherwise than as an o fficer or warrant officer who is charged with an offence under this Act 
and award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the following punishments, that is to  
say,— 
(a) detention up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) confinement to the camp up to fou rteen days;  
(c) extra guards or duties not exceeding three in number:  
(d) deprivation of acting rank;
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 19  of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Commander -in Chief” (w.e.f. 7-5-1955 ). 31 
 (e) forfeiture of badge pay;  
(f) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(g) fine up to fourteen days' pay in any one month;  
(h) penal deductions under clause  
(g) of section 92;  
(i) admonition;  
(j) any prescribed field punishment up to twenty -eight days, in the case of a person on active 
service.  
83. Requirement of sanction in certain cases .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
punishments mentione d in section 82 shall not be inflicted in respect of an offence under any of the 
sections 34, 35 and 36 when committed on active service or under any of the sections 37, 38, 40, 42  (f) 
and ( g), 43, 47, 52, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66( a), (b) and ( c) and 71 except w ith the previous sanction in writing 
of an officer having power to convene a district court -martial.  
(2) The said punishments may be awarded without such sanction in the case of any offence other than 
an offence under section 34 or section 71, committed by  persons who have not been enrolled as 
combatants.  
84. Limit of punishments under section 82 .—(1) An Award of punishment under section 82 shall 
not include field punishment in addition to one or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( a) and 
(b) of t hat section.  
(2) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of 
the said section, the punishment specified in clause ( b) or clause ( c) shall take effect only at the end of the 
punishment specified in clau se (a). 
(3) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses ( a) and ( b) are awarded to a 
person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not exceed in the aggreg ate forty -two days.  
(4) The punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c), (e), (g) and ( j) of section 82 shall not be 
awarded to any person who is of the rank of non -commissioned officer or was, at the time of committing 
the offence for which he is punis hed, of such rank.  
(5) The punishment s specified in clause ( f) of the said section shall not be awarded to any person 
below the rank of a non -commissioned officer.  
85. Punishments in addition to those specified In section 82 .—1[The Chief of the Air Staff] may, 
with the consent of the Central Government, specify such other punishments as may be awarded under 
section 82 in addition to or without any of the punishments specified in the said section, and the extent to 
which such other punishments may be awarded . 
86. Punishment of officers and warrant officers .—An officer having power to convene a general 
court-martial or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by  1[the 
Chief of the Air Staff] may, in the prescribed, manner  proceed against an officer below the rank of 
squadron leader or warrant officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act, and award one o r more 
of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief”(w.e.f. 7-5-1955 ). 32 
 (a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them  whose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding twelve months, 
but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a court -martial;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowance until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good but subject to the right of the accused specified in clause ( a); 
(d) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence under 
clause ( e) of section 42 in so far as it consists of neglect to obey flying orders or under section 62 or 
section 63.  
87. Transmission of proceedings .—In every case in which punishment has been a warded under 
section 86,  certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the 
officer awarding the punishment, to a superior air force authority as defined in section 89.  
88. Review of proceedings .—If any punishment  awarded under section 86 appears to a superior air 
force authority as defined in section 89 to be illegal, unjust or excessive, such authority may cancel, vary 
or remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstance s of the 
case.  
89. Superior air force authority .—For the purposes of sections 87 and 88,  a “superior air force 
authority ” means — 
(a) in the case of punishments awarded by a commanding officer, any officer superior in 
command to such commanding officer;  
(b) in the case of punishments awarded by any other authority, the Central Government,  1[the 
Chief of the Air Staff] or other officer specified by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff].  
90. Collective fines .—(1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon forming part of  the equipment 
of a unit or detachment is lost or stolen, the officer commanding such unit or detachment may, after 
obtaining the report of a Court of inquiry, impose a collective fine upon the warrant officers,                
non-commissioned officers and  men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his judgment, should be 
held responsible for such loss , or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENAL  DEDUCTIONS  
91. Deductions  from pay and allowances of officers .—The following penal deductions may be 
made from the pay and allowances of an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given to his commanding officer and has been approved by the 
Central Government;  
(b) all pay and allowances for everyday while he is in custody or under suspension from duty on a 
charge for an offence of which he is afterwards convicte d by a criminal court or a court -martial or by 
an officer exercising authority under section 86;  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 1 9 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955).  
 33 
 (c) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required  to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by the court -martial 
by whom he is convicted of such offence, or by an officer exercising authority under section 86; 
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by a court -martial or an officer exercising authority under 
section 86 to be forfeited or stopped;  
(f) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court or a court -martial exercising 
jurisdiction under sectio n 71; 
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of public or service property 
which, after due investigation, appears to the Central Government to have been occasioned by the 
wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government if the officer is found by 
a court of inquiry constituted by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] in this behalf, to have deserted to the 
enemy, or while in enemy hands, to have served with, or  under the orders of, the enemy or in any 
manner to have aided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy 
through want of due precaution or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having 
been taken prisoner  by the enemy to have failed to rejoin his service when it was possible to do so;  
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government to be paid for the maintenance of his 
wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the costs of any relief given by the said 
Government to the said wife or child.  
92. Deductions from pay and allowances of airmen .—Subject to the provisions of section 95, the 
following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an airman, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without leave, or as a 
prisoner of war, and for every day of transportation or imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, or 
a court -martial, or of detention, or field punishment awarded by  a court -martial or an officer 
exercising authority under section 82;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afte rwards convicted by a criminal c ourt or a court -martial, or on a charge of a bsence 
without leave for which he is afterwards awarded detention or field punish ment by an officer 
exercising authority under section 82;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence under this Act 
committed by him;  
(d) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer 
attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or i mprudence, such sum as may be 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955).  
 34 
 specified by order of the Central Government or by such officer as may be specified by that 
Government;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by a court -martial or by an officer exercising authority under 
section 82 or section 86 to be forfeited or stopped;  
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being taken prisoner by, or while in 
the hands of, the enemy;  
(g) any su m required to make  good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property as may be 
awarded by his commanding officer;  
(h) any sum require to pay a fine awarded by a crimi nal court, a court -martial exercising 
jurisdiction under section 71, or an officer exercising authority under section 82 or section 90.  
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for 
the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief 
given by the said Government to the said wife or child.  
93. Computation of time of absence of custody .—For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b) of     
section 92 — 
(a) no person s hall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another, for six consecutive 
hours or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be r eckoned as absence or custody for a day if 
such absence or custody prevented the absen ce from fulfilling any air force duty which was thereby 
thrown upon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upwards may be reckoned as a bsence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the person was absent or in custody;  
(d) a period of absence, or imprisonment, which commences before and ends after midnight may 
be reckoned as a day.  
 
94. Pay and allowances du ring trial.—In the case of any person subject to this Act who is in 
custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence, the prescribed officer may direct that 
the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pendin g the result of his 
trial in the charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause ( b) of sections 91 and 92.  
95. Limit of certain deductions .—The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person 
made under clauses ( e) and ( g) to (i) of section 92 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal, 
exceed in any one month one -half of his pay and allowances for that month.  
96. Deduction from public money due to a person .—Any sum authorised by this Act to be 
deducted from the p ay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to him other than a pension.  35 
 97. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct .—Where the conduct  
of any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of the enemy, is to 
be inquired into under this Act or any other law,  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] or any officer authorised by 
him may order that the whole or any part  of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld 
pending the result of such inquiry.  
98. Remission of deductions .—Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be remitted in such manner, and to such extent, and by such author ity, as may from time to time be 
prescribed.  
99. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions .—In the case of all 
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and allowances have been forfeited under 
clause ( h) of section 91 or clause ( a) of section 92, but in respect of whom a remission has been made 
under section 98, it shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities out of 
such pay and allowances for any dependants of such persons, a nd any such remission shall in that case be 
deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances.'  
100. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances .—It shall be 
lawful for proper provision to be ma de by the prescribed authorities for any dependant s of any person 
subject to this Act, who is a prisoner of war or is missing, out of his pay and allowances.  
101. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war .—For the purposes of 
sections 99 and 100, a person shall be deemed to continue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of 
any inquiry into has conduct such as is referred to in section 97, and if he is cashiered or dismissed from 
the service in consequence of such conduct, until t he date of such cashiering or dismissal.  
 
CHA PTER IX  
ARREST  AND PROCEEDINGS  BEFORE  TRIAL 
102. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into air force custody.  
(2) Any such person may be ordered in to air force custody by any superior officer.  
(3) Any officer may order into air force custody any officer, though he may be of a higher rank, 
engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder.  
103. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention .—(1) It shall be  the duty of every 
commanding officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without the charg e being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to 
him to be impracticable with due regard to the public service.  
(2) Every case of a person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty eight hours, and the 
reason thereof shall be  reported by the commanding officer to the air or other officer to whom application 
would be made to convene a general or district court -martial for the trial of the person charged.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955).  
 36 
 (3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section  (1), Sundays and public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules a providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in air force custody, pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence committed by him.  
104. Inter val between committal and court -martial .—In every case where any such person as is 
mentioned in section 102 and as is not on active service remai ns in such custody for a longer period than 
eight days, without a court -martial for his trial being ordered to assemble, a special report giving reasons 
for the delay shall be made by his commanding officer in the manner prescribed; and similar report shal l 
be forwarded every eight days until a court -martial is assembled or such person is released from custody.  
105. Arrest by civil authorities .—Wherever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of any 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to air force custody of such person upon receipt 
of a written application to that effect signed by his commanding officer.  
106. Capture of des erters .—(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the commanding 
officer of the unit or detachment to which he belongs, shall give written information of the desertion to 
such civil authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistanc e towards the capture of the 
deserter; and such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like 
manner as if he were a person for whole apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate; and 
shall deliver the d eserter, when apprehended, into air force custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him without delay bef ore the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
107. Inquiry into absence without  leave .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from his duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a Court of inquiry shall, as so on as 
practicable, be assembled, and such Court shall, on oath or affirmation administered. In the prescribed 
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property of the 
Government entrusted to his care, or in a ny arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or 
necessaries, and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due authority, or other sufficient cause, the 
Court shall declare such absence and the period thereof, and the said deficiency, if an y; and the 
commanding officer of the unit to which the person belongs shall enter in the court -martial book of the 
unit a record of declaration.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the 
purpos es of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
108. Provost -marshals .—(1) Provost -marshals may be appointed by  1[the Chief of the Air Staff], or 
by any prescribed officer.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief”, (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955)  
 37 
 (2) The duties of a provost -marshal are to take charge of persons confined for any offe nce, to preserve 
good order and discipline, and to prevent breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to, the 
Air Force.  
(3) A provost -marshal may at any time arrest and detain for trial any person subject to this Act who 
commits, or is charge d with, an offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in 
pursuance of the sentence awarded by a court -martial, or by an officer exercising authority under section 
82 but shall not inflict any punishment on his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), a provost -marshal shall be deemed to include a 
provost -marshal appointed under the Army Act or the Navy -Act and any person legally exercising 
authority under him or on his behalf.  
CHAPTER X  
COURTS -MARTIAL  
109. Different kinds of courts -martial .—For purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of 
courts -martial, that is to say, — 
(a) general courts -martial . 
(b) district courts -martial.  
(c) summary general courts -martial.  
110. Power to convene a general court -martial .—A general court -martial may be con vened by the 
Central Government or  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] or by any officer empowered in this behalf  by warrant 
of1[the Chief of the Air Staff].  
111. Power to convene a district court -martial .—A district court -martial may be con vened by an 
officer having power to convene a general court -martial, or by any officer empow ered in this behalf by 
warrant of any such officer.  
112. Contents of warrants issued under sections 110 and 111 .—A warrant issued under section 
110 or section 111 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may 
think fit.  
113. Power to convene a summ ary general court -martial .—The following authorities shall have 
the power to convene a summary general court -martial, namely: — 
(a) an officer empowered in this behalf by an order of the Central Government or of  1[the Chief 
of the Air Staff];  
(b) on active service, the officer commanding the forces in the field, or any officer empowered by 
him in this behalf;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief”, (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955)  
 38 
 (c) an officer commanding any detached portion of the Air Force on active service when, in his 
opinion, it is not practicable with due regard to discip line and the exigencies of the service, that an 
offence should be tried by a general court -martial.  
114. Composition of general court -martial .—A general court -martial shall consist of not less than 
five officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than three whole years and of whom not 
less than four are of a rank not below that of flight -lieutenant.  
115. Composition of district court -martial .—A district court -martial shall consist of not less than 
three officers, each of whom has held a commis sion for not less than two whole years.  
116. Composition of summary general court -martial .—A summary general court -martial shall 
consist of not less than three officers . 
117. Dissolution of court -martial .—(1) If a court -martial after the commencement of a trial is 
reduced below the minimum number of Officers required by this Act, it shall be dis solved.  
(2) If on account of the illness of the judge advocate or of the accused before the finding , it is 
impossible to continue the trial, a court -martial shall  be dissolved.  
(3) The officer who convened a court -martial may dissolve such court -martial if it appears to him that 
the exigencies of the service or the necessities of discipline render it impossible or in expedient to 
continue the said court -martial  
(4) Where a court -martial is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
118.  Powers of general and summary general courts -martial . —A general or summary general 
court - martial shall have power to try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable there in 
and to pass any sentence authorised thereby.  
119. Powers of district court-martial .—A district court -martial shall have power to try any person 
subject to this Act other than an officer or warrant officer for any offence made pu nishable therein, and to 
pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death, transportation, or imprisonment 
for a term exceeding two years.  
120. Prohibition of second trial .—When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a court -martial or by a criminal court, or has been dealt with under section 82 
or section 86, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a court -martial or dealt with 
under the said sections.  
121. Period of l imitation for trial .—(1) Except as provided by sub -section (2), no trial by court -
martial of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a 
period of three years from the date of such offence.  
(2) The provisions  of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of desertion or fraudulent 
enrolment or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37.  
(3) In the computation of the period of time mentioned in sub -section ( 1), any time spent by such 
person as a prisoner of war, or in enemy territory, or in evading arrest after the commission of the 
offence, shall be excluded.  39 
 (4) No trial for an offence of desertion, other than desertion on active service or of fraudulent 
enrolment shall be commenced if the person in question, not being an officer, has subsequently to the 
commission of the offence, served continuously in an exemplary manner for not less than three years with 
any portion of the Air Force.  
122. Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act.—(1) Where an offence under this Act 
had been committed by any person while subject to this Act and he has ceased to be so subject , he may be 
taken into and kept in air force custody, and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be 
so subject.  
(2) Except as provided by sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), any such person shall not be tried for an offence, 
unless his trial commences within six months after he had ceased to be subject to this Act.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not appl y to the trial of any such person for an offence of 
desertion or fraudulent enrolment or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall affect the jurisdiction of a civil court to try any offence 
triable by such court as well as by a court -martial.  
(5) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a court -martial to transportation or 
imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is cashiered or 
dismissed from the Air  Force, or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this Act and he may be kept, 
removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.  
(6) When a person subject to this Act it sentenced by a court -martial to death, this Act shall appl y to 
him till the sentence is carried out.  
123. Place of trial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.  
124. Choice between criminal court and court -martial .—When a  criminal court and a court -
martial have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of1[the Chief of the Air 
Staff], the officer commanding any group, wing or station in which the accused prisoner is serving of 
such other off icer as may be prescribed to decide before which court the proceedings shall be instituted, 
and, if that officer decides that they should be insti tuted before a court -martial, to direct that the accused 
person shall be detained in Air force custody.  
125. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offende r.—(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referr ed to in section 124 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest Magistrate to be proceeded, against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings pending a reference to the Central Government . 
(2) In every such case the said officer s hall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted for the determination of the Central Government whose order upon such referenc e shall be 
final.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s . 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief”, (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955)  
 40 
 126. Successive trials by a criminal, court and a court -martial .—(1) A person convicted or 
acquitted by a court -martial may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, be tried again by 
a criminal court for the same offence, or  on the same facts.  
(2) If a person sentenced by a court -martial under this Act or punished under section 82 or section 86 
is afterwards tried and convicted by a criminal court for the same offence or on the same facts, that court 
shall in awarding punishm ent have regard to the punishment he may already have undergone for the said 
offence.  
CHAPTER XI  
PROCEDURE  OF COURTS -MATRIAL  
127. Presiding Officer .—At every general, district or summary general court -martial the senior 
member shall be the presiding office r. 
128. Judge Advocate .—Every general court -martial shall, and every district or summary general 
court -martial may, be attended by a Judge Advocate, who shall be either an officer belonging to the 
department of the Chief Legal Adviser or if no such officer  is available, an officer approved by the Chief 
Legal Adviser or any of his deputies.  
129. Challenges .—(1) At all, trials by general, district or summary general courts -martial, as soon as 
the court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and memb ers shall be read over to the accused 
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any officer sitting on the court.  
(2) If the accused objects to any such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to, s hall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged officer decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection sh all be allowed and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner by another officer, subject to the same right of the accused to object.  
(4) When no challenge is made, or when challenge has been made and disall owed or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
130. Oaths of member, Judge advocate and witness .—(1) An oath or affirmation in t he prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of every court -martial and to the Judge advocate before 
the commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evidence before a court -martial shall be examined after being duly sworn or 
affirmed i n the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the court -martial is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speaking the 
truth, he does not understa nd the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
131. Voting by members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision 
of a court -martial shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes 
on eithe r the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  41 
 (2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a general court -martial without the concurrence of at least 
two-thirds of the members of the court. 
(3) No sentence of death shall be  passed by a summary general court -martial without the concurrence 
of all the members.  
(4) In matters other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.  
132. General rule as to evidence .—The Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , shall subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a court -martial.  
133. Judicial notice .—A court -martial may take judicial notice of any matter within the general air 
force knowledge of the members.  
134. Summoning witnesses .—(1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a court -martial the 
Judge advocate or the commanding officer of the accused person, may, by sum mons under his hand, 
require the attendance at a time and place to be mentioned in the su mmons, of any person either to give 
evidence or to produce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness amenable to air force authority, the summons shall be sent to his 
commanding officer and such officer shall serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be or reside, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required in the court of such magistrate.  
(4) When  a witness is required to produce any particular document or other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.  
135. Documents exempted from production .—(1) Nothing in section 134 shall be deemed to affect  
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of  any district magistrate, chief presidency 
magistrate, High Court or court of session, wanted for the purpose of any court -martial such magistrate or 
court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to deliver such document to suc h 
person as such magistrate or court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any commissioner of police 
or district superintendent of police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause search to be made for and to detain such document pending the 
orders of any such district magistrate, chief presidency magistrate or High Court or Court of Session.  
136. Commissions for examination of witnesses .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by court -
martial, it appears to the court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and 
that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconve nience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreason able such court may address the 
Chief Legal Adviser in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witness may be issued.  42 
 (2) The Chief Legal Adviser may then, if he thinks necessar y, issue a commission to any district 
magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such witness resides to take the 
evidence of such witness.  
(3) The Magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the d istrict magistrate, he 
or such magistrate of the first -class as he appoints, in this behalf, shall proceed to the place where the 
witness is or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, 
and may for this purpos e exercise the same powers, as in trials of warrant -cases under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , or any corresponding law in force i n 1[the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir],  
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in Chapter XL of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , or of 
any corresponding law in force in  1[the State of Jammu and Kashmir].  
(5) In this and the next succeeding section, the expres sion “Chief Legal Adviser ” includes a Deputy 
Chief Legal Adviser.  
137. Examination of a witness on commission .—(1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any 
case in which a commission is issued under section 136 may respectively forward any interrogator ies in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magis trate or officer executing the 
commission shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such magistrate or offi cer by counsel or 
except in the case of an accused person  in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and re -
examine, as the case may be , the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 136 has been duly executed, it shall be re turned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Chief Legal Adviser.  
(4) On receipt of a commission and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3) the Chief Legal Adviser 
shall forward the same to the court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such court has 
been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the accused person, and the commission, the 
return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the accused person, 
and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the prosecutor or the 
accused, and shall form part of the proceed ings of the court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 136 the trial may be adjour ned for a 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commis sion. 
138. Conviction of offence not charged .—(1) A person charged before a court -martial with 
desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absen t without leave.  
(2) A person charged before a court -martial with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being 
absent without leave.  
(3) A person charged before a court -martial with using criminal force -may be found guilty of assault.  
(4) A person cha rged before a court -martial with using threatening language may be found guilty of 
using insubordinate language.  
                                                           
1. Subs by A.O. (No. 3), 1956, for “a Part B State”  (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955) . 43 
 (5) A person charged before a court -martial with any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) and ( d) of section 52 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have 
been charged.  
(6) A person charged before a court -martial with an offence punishable under section 71 may be 
found guilty of any other offence of which he might have been found guilty if the pr ovisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , were applicable.  
(7) A person charged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act may on failure of proof 
of an offence having been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment , be found 
guilty of the same offence as having been committed in circumstances involving a less severe 
punishment.  
(8) A person charged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of 
having attempted or abetted the  commission of that offence , although the attempt or abetment is not 
separately charged.  
139. Presumption as to signature .—In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an office r in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
140. Enrolment paper .—(1) Any enrolment paper pu rporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall , in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions which he is therein represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment paper.  
141. Presumption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, return or other document re spect ing the 
service of any person in, or the cashiering, dismissal or discharge of any person from, any portion of the 
Air Force, or respecting the circumstance of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any portion 
of the Forces, if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or  1[the Chief of the 
Air Staff], or by any prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return or other 
document.  
(2) An Army, Navy or Air Force List or Gazette purporting to be  published by authority shall be 
evidence of the status and rank of the officers or warrant officers therein mentioned, and of any 
appointment held by them and of the unit or branch of the services to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any se rvice book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in pursuance of air force duty and purports to be signed by the com manding 
officer or by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of th e facts 
therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any service book purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer 
having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the “Commander -in Chief”  (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955) . 44 
 (5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a char ge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act, or any portion of the Air Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate 
purporting to be signed by such officer, or by the commanding officer of that portion of the Air Force, or 
by the commanding officer of the unit, or detachment to which such person belongs, as the case may be, 
and stating the fact, date and place of such surre nder or apprehension, and the manner in which he was 
dressed, shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of or has been appre hended by, a police 
officer nor below the rank of an officer -in-charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place if such surrender or apprehe nsion and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government upon any matter or thing duly submitted  to him for examination or 
analysis and report may be used as evidence in any proceeding under this Act.  
142. Reference by accused to Government officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, overstaying leave or not rejoining when wa rned for service, the person tried states in his 
defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence and refers in support thereof to 
any officer in the service, of the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to pr ove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedings until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have t he same effect as if made on oath before the court.  
(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply, or if the court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and  order a 
fresh trial.  
143. Evidence of previous convictions and general character .—(1) When any person subject to 
this Act has been convicted by a court -martial of any offence, such court -martial may inquire into and 
receive and record evidence of any prev ious convictions of such person, either by a court -martial or by a 
criminal court or any previous award of punishment under section 82 or section 86 and may further 
enquire into and record the general character of such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, court -martial books or other official records, and it shall not be neces sary to give notice 
before trial to the person t ried that evidence as to his previous convictions or character will be received.  
144. Lunacy of accused .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a court -martial, it appears to the 
court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapabl e of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the court shall record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presidi ng officer of the court shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer.  45 
 (3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section  (2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the sam e or another court -martial for 
the offence with which he was charged.  
(4) A confirming officer confirming a finding in any case so reported to him under sub -section ( 2) 
shall order the accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall  report the case for 
the orders of the Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4) the Central Government may order the accused person 
to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
145. Subsequent fitn ess of lunatic accused for trial .—Whe re any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under 
detention under section 144, the officer command ing a unit or detachment within th e area of whose 
command the accused is in custody or is detained, or any other officer prescribed in this behalf, may.  — 
(a) If such person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 144, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 144, on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub -
section on a certificate of any two or  more of the visitors of such asylum that he is capable of making 
his defence , 
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another court -martial for the offence with which he 
was originally charged, or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a crimi nal court.  
146. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 145 .—A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 145 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
147. Release of lunatic accused .—Wher e any person is in custody under sub -section  (4) of        
section 144 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section. — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, or  
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 145 that, in the judgment of such officer or authority such 
person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released, or detained in custody, or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
148. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives .—Where any r elative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 144 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Govern ment may upon application 
by suc h relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 
delivered shall be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or any other person, 
and be produced for the inspection of such offi cer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  46 
 149. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial .—When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to h ave been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a court -martial during a trial, the court may make such 
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of th e trial, and if the 
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, 
order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
150. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed .—(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any court -martial, the court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence 
of such court -martial or any authority superior to such officer, may make such order as it or he thinks fit 
for the disposal by destruction, con fiscation, delivery to any person, claiming to be entitled to possession 
thereof, or otherwise of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, or regard -
ing which any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used fo r the com mission of any 
offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority 
making the same may, whet her the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and  such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him u nder the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , or any corresponding law in force in  1[the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir].  
(3) In this section the term “property ” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to  have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or ex change whether immediately or otherwise.  
151. Powers of court -martial when certain offences are committed by persons not sub ject to this 
Act.—Any trial by a court -martial under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and the 
court -martial shall be deemed to be a Court within the meaning of sections 480 and 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
CONFIRMATION  AND REVISION 
152. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed .—No finding or sentence of a general, 
district or summary general court -martial shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided 
by this Act.  
153. Power to confirm finding and sente nce of general court -martial .—The findings and 
sentences of general courts -martial may be confirmed by the Central Government, or by any officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government.  
                                                           
1.Subs . by A.O.(No.3), 1956, for “a Part B State”  (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955) . 
 47 
 154. Power to confirm finding and sentence of di strict court -martial .—The findings and 
sentences of district court -martial may be confirmed by any officer having power to convene a general 
court -martial or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of such officer.  
155.  Limitation of powers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under section 153 or 
section 154 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think 
fit. 
156. Power to confirm finding and sentence of summary general court s-martial .—The f indings 
and sentences of summary general courts -martial may be confirmed by the convening officer or if he so 
directs, by an authority superior to him.  
157. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences .—(1) Subject to 
such restrict ions, reservations or conditions as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 153 
or section 154 and to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), a confirming authority may, when 
confirming the sentence of a court -martial, mitigate or remit th e punishment thereby awarded, or 
commute that punishment for any punishment or punish ments lower in the scale laid down in section 73.  
(2) A sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of imprisonment or detention 
for a term exceeding the term of transportation awarded by the court.  
(3) A sentence of imprisonment shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a term 
exceeding the term of imprisonment awarded by the court.  
158. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship .—When any person subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced by a court -martial while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as not 
confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been t ried at the port of disembarkation.  
159. Revision of finding or sentence .—(1) Any finding or sentence of a court -martial may be once 
revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the court, if so directed by the 
confirming authority, m ay take additional evidence.  
(2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause ther eof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the court shall proceed with the revision, provided that, if a general court -martial, it still consists of 
five officers, or, if a summary general or district court - martial, of three officers.  
160. Alter ation of finding or sentence in certain cases .—(1) Where a finding of guilty by a court -
martial, which has been confirmed, is found for any reason to be invalid or cannot be supported by the 
evidence, the authority which would have had power under section 177 to commute the punishment 48 
 awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid, may substitute a new finding and pass a sentence 
for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such findi ng could have been validly made by 
the court -martial on the charge and unless it appears that the court -martial must have been satisfied of the 
facts establishing the offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a court -martial which has been confirmed not bein g a sentence passed 
in pursuance of a new finding substituted under sub -section ( 1), is found for any reason to be invalid, the. 
authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of the punishment awarded by , the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted under this sec tion. 
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, un der this section shall for the pur poses of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a 
court -martial.  
161. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of court -martial .—(1) Any person subj ect to this 
Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by a court -martial may present a petition to the 
officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such court -martial, and the 
confirming authority may take such steps a s may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the 
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the 
order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a f inding or sentence of a 
court -martial which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government,  1[the Chief of 
the Air Staff] or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such finding or 
sentence, and the Central  Government,  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] or other officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
162. Annulment of proceedings . —The Central Government,  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] or any 
prescribed officer may annul t he proceedings of any court -martial on the ground that they are illegal or 
unjust.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955).  
 49 
 CHAPTER XII I 
EXECUTION  OF SENTENCES  
163. Form of sentence of death .—In awarding a sentence of death, a court -martial shall, in its 
discretion, direct that the offender shall  suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
164. Commencement of sentence of transportation or imprisonment .—Whenever any person is 
sentenced by a court -martial under this Act to transportation, imprisonment or detention the term of his 
sentence shall, whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day on which the 
original proceedings were signed by the presiding officer.  
165. Execution of sentence of transportation .—Whenever any sentence of transportation is passed 
under this Act or whenever any sentence of death be commuted to transportation, the commanding officer 
of the person under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the 
prescribe d form to the officer -in-charge of the civil prison in which such person is to be confined and 
shall arrange for his dispatch to such prison with the warrant.  
166. Execution of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Whenever any sentence of imprison ment is 
passed under this Act or whenever any sentence of death or transportation is commuted to imprisonment, 
the confirming officer or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in 
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4), direct either that the sentenc e shall be carried out by confinement in a military or 
air force prison or that it shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1) the commanding officer of the person 
under sentence or such o ther officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer -in-charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his 
dispatch to such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence  of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months, the officers 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) may direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in air force 
custody instead of in a civil or military or air force prison.  
(4) On active  service, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the officer commanding the forces in the field may from time to time, appoint.  
167. Temporary custody of offender .—Where a sentence of transportation or imprison ment i s 
directed to be undergone in a civil prison, the offender may be kept in military or air force custody or in 
any other fit place, till such time as it is possible to send him to a civil prison.  
168. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .— Whenever, in the opinion of an air 
or other officer commanding a group, any sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for 
special reasons , conveniently be carried out in a military or air force prison or in air force custody in 
accordance w ith the provisions of section 166 such officer may direct that such sentence or portion of 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit place.   50 
 169. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place .—A person under sentence of tra nspor tation or 
imprisonment may, during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board a ship, aircraft, or 
otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is necessary for his safe conduct and removal.  
170. Execution of sentence of detention .—Whenever  any sentence of detention is passed under this 
Act, or whenever any sentence of death, transportation or impris onment is commuted to detention, the 
sentence shall be carried out by detaining the offender in any military or air force detention barracks, 
detention cells or other military or air force custody; and when the sentence is to be carried out by 
detention in any military or air force detention barracks, the commanding officer of the person under 
sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed s hall forward a warrant in the prescribed form to the 
officer -in-charge of the detention barracks in which the person under sentence is to be detained and shall 
forward the person under sentence to such detention barracks with the warrant.  
171. Communicatio n of certain orders to prison officers .—Whenever an order if duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil, military or air force prison or detained in a military or air force  detention barracks, a warrant in 
accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order, or his staff officer, or such 
other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison or detention barracks in which 
such per son is confined.  
172. Execution of sentence of fine .—When a sentence of fine is imposed by a court -martial under 
section 71 whether the trial was held within India or not, a copy of such sentence, signed and certified by 
the confirming officer may be sent to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause 
the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,              
1898  (5 of 1898) , or any corresponding law in force in  1[the State of Jammu and  Kashmir], for the levy of 
fines as if were a sentence of fine imposed by such Magistrate.  
173. Establishment and regulation of air force prisons .—The Central Government may set apart 
any building or part of a building, or any place under its control, as a n air force prison or detention 
barracks for the confinement of persons sentenced to imprisonment or detention under this Act.  
174. Informality or error in the order or warrants .—Whenever a person is sentenced to 
transportation, imprisonment or detention u nder this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or 
manner in which he might be confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursu ance of this Act, the 
confinement of such person shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of any informality  or error in 
or as respects the order, warrant or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof 
such person was brought into or is confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document 
may be amended accordingly.  
                                                           
1. Subs by the A.O.(N o. 3), 1956, for “a Part B State”  (w.e.f. 7 -5-1955)  51 
 175. Power to make rules in respect of prisons and prisoners .—The Central Government may 
make rules providing. —(a) for the government, management and regulation of ai r force prisons and 
detention barracks;  
(b) for the appointment, removal and power of inspectors, visitors, governors and officers thereof;  
(c) for the labour of prisoners undergoing confinement therein, and for enabling such prisoners 
or, persons to earn by special industry and good conduct; a remission of a portion of their sentence;  
(d) for the safe  custody of such prisoners or persons and the maintenance of discipline among 
them and the punishment, by personal correction, restraint or otherwise, of offences committed by 
them; 
(e) for the application to air force prisons or detention barracks of any of the provisions of the 
Prisons Act, 1894 ( 9 of 1894), relating to the duties of officers of prisons and the punishment of 
persons not being prisoners;  
(f) for the admission into any prison, at proper times and subject, to proper restrictions, of 
person's  with whom prisoners may desire to communicate and  for the consultation by prisoners under 
trial' with their legal advisers without the presence as far as possible of any third party within hearing 
distance.  
176. Restriction of rule -making power in respect  to corporal punishment .—Rules made under 
section 175 shall not authorise corporal punishment to be inflicted for any offence, nor render the 
imprisonment more severe than it is under any law for the time being in force relating to civil prisons in 
India.  
 
CHAPTER XIV  
PARDONS  REMISSIONS  AND SUSPENSIONS  
177. Pardon and remission .—When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a court -
martial of any offence, the Central Government,  1[the Chief of the Air Staff], an air or other officer 
commanding a  group or the prescribed officer, may — 
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the per son or 
remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded; or  
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or  
(c) commute such punish ment for any less punishment or punishments mentioned in this Act:  
Provided that a sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of impris onment 
for a term exceeding the term of transportation awarded by the court; and a sentence of impr isonment 
shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a term exceeding the term of imprisonment so 
awarded;  
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the per son on 
parole.
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule, for  “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955 ). 52 
 178. Cancellation of conditional p ardon, release on parole or remission .—(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sen tence of, the court shall be carried into 
effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of transportation, imprisonment or deten tion is carried into effect under 
the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
179. Reduction of warrant officer or non -commissioned officer .—When under the provi sions of 
section 79 a warrant officer or a non -commissioned officer is deemed to be reduced to the ranks, such 
reduction shall, for the purpose of section 177, be treated as a punishment awarded by a sentence of a 
court -martial.  
180. Suspension of sentence of transportation, imprisonment or detention .—(1) Where a person 
subject to this Act is sentenced by a court -martial to transportation, imprisonment or detention, the 
Central Government,  1[the Chief of the Air Staff] or any officer empowered to convene a general or a 
summary general court -martial may  suspend the sentence whether or not the offender has already been 
committed to prison or to air force custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that, until the orders of such auth ority or officer have been obtained, the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to air force custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections  (1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted . 
181. Orders pending suspension .—A confirming officer may, when confirming any sen tence 
referred to in section 180, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to air force custody until 
the orders of the authority or officer specified in sect ion 180 have been obtained.  
182. Release on suspension .—Where a sentence is suspended under section 180, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  
183. Computation of period of suspension .—Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspensi on shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
184. Order after suspension .—The authority or officer specified in section 180, at any time while a 
sentence is suspended, order — 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpired portion  of the sentence, or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
185. Reconsideration of case after suspension .—(1) Where a sentence has been sus pended, the case 
may at any time, and shall, at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authorit y or 
officer specified in section 180, or by any air or other officer not below the rank of squadron leader duly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 180.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule  “the Commander -in-Chief” ( w.e.f. 7-5-1955 ) 53 
 (2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to h im that the conduct of 
the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 180.  
186. Fresh sentence after suspension .—Where an offender, while  a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sente nced for any other offence, them — 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or  more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or air force custody for the unexpired portion of 
the previous sentence, but both sentences shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of  less than three months and is not sus pended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 184 or section 185, continue to be suspended.  
187. Scope of power of suspension .—The powers conferred by sections 180 and 184 shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
188. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal .—(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a court -martial, and such other sentence is suspended 
under section 180, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or officer 
specified in section 180.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 184, the punishment of dismissal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER XV  
RULES 
189. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
carrying into effect the provisions of th is Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub -section ( 1), the rules made 
thereunder may provide for — 
(a) the removal, retirement, release or discharge from the service of persons subject to this Act;  
(b) the amount and inci dence of fines to be imposed under section 90;  
(c) the specification of the punishment which may be awarded as field punishments under 
sections 77 and 82;  
(d) the assembly and procedure of courts of inquiry, the recording of summaries of evidence and 
the a dministration of oaths or affirmations by such courts; 
(e) the convening and constituting of court -martial and the appointment of prosecu tors at trials by 
court -martial;  
(f) the adjournment, dissolution and sitting of court -martial;  54 
 (g) the procedure to be observed in trials by court -martial and the appearance of legal 
practitioners thereat;  
(h) the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against the findings and sentences 
of court -martial:  
(i) the carrying into effect of sentences of court -martial;  
(j) the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to court -martial, 
transportation, imprisonment and detention;  
(k) the constitution of authorities, to decide for what persons, to what amounts and in what 
manner, provis ion should be made for dependents under section 100 and the due carrying out of such 
decisions;  
(l) the relative rank of the officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers, petty officers 
and non -commissioned officers of the regular Army, Navy an d Air Force when acting together;  
(m) any other matter directed by this Act to be prescribed.  
190. Power to make regulations .—The Central Government may make regulations for all or any of 
the purposes of this Act other than those specified in section 189.  
191. Publication of rules and regulations in Gazette .—All rules and regulations made under this 
Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and, on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act.  
1[191A. Laying of rules and regulations be fore Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation 
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in t wo or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions afore said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or r egulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under 
that rule or regulation.]  
192. [Repeal .][Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957  (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 17-9-1957).  
CHAPTER XVI  
TRANSITORY  PROVISIONS  
193. Definition of “British officer .—(1) In this Ch apter “British officer ” means a person of non -
Indian domicile holding a commission in His Majesty's Air Force and serv ing in the Air Force.  
(2) The expression “superior officer ” in this Act shall be deemed to include a British officer.  
194. Powers of Brit ish officer .—A British officer shall have all the powers conferred by this Act on 
an officer of corresponding rank or holding a corresponding appointment.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule ( w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE AJMER TENANCY AND LAND RECORDS ACT, 1950  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Repeal.  
3. Savings.  
4. Definitions.  
5. Power of landlord and tenant to act through agent.  
CHAPTER II  
PRIMARY RIGHTS  
6. Primary rights of tenant.  
7. Prohibition of certain acts.  
8. Prohibition against deprivation of certain rights.  
9. Certain rights of landlord.  
CHAPTER II I 
Niji jot  
10. Definition.  
11. Application for demarcation.  
12. Order of demarcation of niji jot.  
13. Demarcation.  
14. Status of tenant of niji jot.  
15. Succession to niji jot . 
16. Collector‟s powers to let to tenants.  
CHAPTER IV  
CLASSES OF TENANTS  
17. Classes of tenants.  
18. Occupancy tenants.  
19. Exproprietary tenants.  
20. Acquisition of exproprietary rights.  
21. Relinquishment of exproprietary rights.  
22. Hereditary tenants.  
23. Land in which hereditary rights shall not accrue.  
24. Non -occupancy tenants.  
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
DEVOLUTION, TRANSFER, EXTINOTION, DIVISION, EXCHANGE AND ACQUISITION  
Devolution and transfer of tenancies  
SECTION S 
25. Interest of a tenant, if heritable and transferable.  
26. Prohibition against certain kind of transfer or sub -lease.  
27. Right to sub -let. 
Extinction of tenancies  
28. Tenancy, when extinguished.  
29. Life tenancy of female, when extinguished.  
30. Rights of sub -tenant on extinction of tenant‟s interest.  
31. Vacating of holding on extinction of right.  
32. Possession of land not vacated.  
Division, exchange and acquisition of holdings  
33. Division of holdings.  
34. Co -tenant‟s right to claim division of produce.  
35. Right of tenant in land received in exchange.  
36. Exchange of land for consolidat ion of cultivated area.  
37. Acquisition of land by the landlord for certain purposes.  
38. Decision of certain disputes arising out of acquisition proceedings.  
39. Reinstatement of tenant ejected under section 37.  
40. Acquisition of proprietary right by tenant.  
CHAPTER VI  
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TENAN CIES 
Lease s 
41. Right to written lease and procedure to obtain it.  
42. Registration of leases.  
Declaration of rights  
43. Declaration of rights in certain cases.  
Improvements  
44. Right of certain tenants to make improvements.  
45. Right of non -occupancy tenants to make improvements.  
46. Right of landlord to make Improvement.  
47. Provision when both landlord and tenant want to make the same improvement.  
48. Restrictions on making improvement.  
49. Com pensation for improvement, when permissible.  
50. Determination of compensation.  
  3 
 SECTION S 
51. Works benefiting other land.  
52. Disputes as regards improvements.  
Trees 
53. Right of tenant paying fixed money rent to plant tree.  
54. Right of a tenant paying batai  or bighori  to plant tree . 
55. Tenant‟s rights in tree existing at the commencement of the Act . 
56. Decision of disputes regarding trees.  
Surrender and abandonment  
57. Surrender by tenant.  
58. Abandonment.  
59. Taking possession of holding surrendered or abandoned.  
60. Dispute arising out of surrender and abandonment of land.  
CHAPTER VII  
PREMIA AND OTHER LEVIES  
61. Acceptance of premium; how far permissible.  
62. Lag, neg and cess.  
CHAPTER VIII  
RENT AND ITS RECOVERY  
PART I.—Basic rent of tenants  
63. Liability for payment of rent.  
64. Scale of rent for different classes of tenants.  
65. Status and liability of person permitted to retain possession.  
PART II—Payment and recovery of rent  
General provisions  
66. Hypothecation of produce towards payment of rent. 
67. Procedure when produce is attached by civil or revenue court.  
68. Right of landlord to collect rent from cultivator.  
69. No cartage allowed.  
70. Presumption as to payment by tenant and application of such payment.  
71. Modes of making payment of m oney rent.  
72. Right to get receipt.  
73. Penalty for not issuing proper receipt . 
74. Obligation of Chief Commissioner to print and supply books of receipt.  
75. Penalty for non -production of receipt book with counterfoils.  
76. Rights and liabilities in resp ect of produce.  
77. Application for officer to make division.  
78. Application for kuta. 
79. Procedure on application . 4 
 SECTION S 
80. Collector to publish return of current prices.  
81. Assessment of  bighori  by court.  
82. Commutation of batai  rent into bighori  in certain cases.  
83. Payment of commuted rent.  
Arrears  
84. Rent when and how payable.  
85. Claim for arrears of rent. 
86. Interest in cases of arrears of rent.  
87. Landlord‟s power to charge irrigation dues . 
88. Method of recovering sayar.  
89. Realisation of sayar  as arrears of revenue.  
PART III.—Emergency provision  
90. Recovery of arrears in the event of general refusal to pay.  
PART IV.—Payment of revenue by biswa dars to jagirdars and muafidars  
91. Application of certain sections to biswadars . 
CHAPTER IX  
EJECTMENT OF TENANTS  
General  
92. Arrears deemed satisfied when tenant is e jected.  
93. Decree for arrears, how executed.  
94. Adjustment of arrears and compensation on ejectment.  
95. Entry of landholder on land from which tenant is ordered to be e jected.  
Grounds of ejectment  
96. Grounds of ejectment.  
97. Special grounds of ejectment of non -occupancy tenants.  
98. Procedure in ejectment for decreed arrears.  
99. Procedure for ejectment on other grounds.  
100. Application for ejectment of non -occupancy tenant.  
101. Procedure on application.  
Remedies for wrongful ejectment  
102. Remedies for wrongful ejectment.  
103. Procedure on application.  
Ejectment of person occupying land without title  
104. Ejectment of person occupying land without title .  
105. Proced ure on application.  
106. Consequences of failure to file application under section 102 or 104.  
107. No separate relief claimable, if not claimed in revenue court.  5 
 CHAPTER X  
COMPENSATION AND PENALTIES  
SECTION S 
108. Tenant‟s right to claim inquiry for illegal exaction and other matters.  
109. Power to award compensation in proceedings for arrears of rent.  
110. Prosecution of landholder for illegal exaction.  
111. Compensation for exaction by landholder and for false complaint by tenant.  
112. Penalty for h abitual infringement of rights of tenant.  
113. Penalty for illegal entry on a holding.  
114. Compensation, how reali sable.  
CHAPTER XI  
GRANTS  
115. Exemption of muafidar . 
116. Interpretation.  
117. Grant which cannot be resumed.  
118. Grounds on which certain grants may be resumed.  
119. How to deal with resumable grant.  
120. Application of certain Chapters and sections to grantees.  
121. Grants, how far transferable.  
122. Void transactions.  
123. Power to hear cases of grantees.  
CHAPTER XII  
PREPARATION OF RECORD -OF-RIGHTS AND DETERMINATION AND MODIFICATION OF RENT AND  
RENT -RATES  
124. Applicability of Part III.  
PART I.—Preparation and maintenance of maps and records  
125. Power to form and alter Patwaris  circles . 
126. Appointment of patwaris.  
127. Appointment  of girdawars . 
128. Cadre and pay of girdawars  and patwaris . 
129. Girdawars  and patwaris  to be public servants.  
130. Maintenance of maps and fieldbooks.  
131. Obligation of owners as to boundary marks.  
132. Record -of-rights.  
133. Contents of certain registers.  
134. Registers of revenue -paying, revenue -assigned and revenue -free villages.  
135. The annual registers.  
136. Obligation to furnish information necessary for compilation of certain record -of-rights.  6 
 SECTION S 
137. Decision of disputes.  
138. Inquiry into cases.  
139. Certain decisions, no bar to civil suit.  
140. Value of entries and decisions in contested cases.  
141. Appointment and punishment of lambardars  and patels.  
PART II. —Record and rent -rate operations and the appointment of officers  
142. Record and rent -rate operations.  
143. Powers of the record officer, assistant record officer and rent -rate officer.  
144. Sanctioned rates.  
145. Duration of rent -rates.  
Procedure in determining cash rent -rates  
146. Circle and soil classification.  
147. Basis of rates for hereditary tenants.  
148. Provision for rates in special cases.  
149. Procedure in publishing and sanctioning rates.  
150. Civil suit relating to record -of-rights and certain other matters barred.  
PART III.—Commutation, abatement, enhancement, and determination of rent  
151. Commutation of rent from kind to cash.  
152. Commutation of rent from cash to kind.  
153. Grounds of abatement of fixed money rent.  
154. Ground of enhancement of fixed money rent.  
155. Order for determination, comm utation or variation of rent, when to take effect.  
156. Joinder of parties in cases relating to variation of rent.  
157. Determination of rent on partial ejectment.  
158. Rent, how calculated for commutation, variation or determination.  
159. Meaning of “subs tantial” in certain sections.  
160. Basis of variation of rent in certain cases.  
161. Period for which rent is not liable to modification.  
162. Applications for variation of rent, by whom to be entertained.  
CHAPTER XII I 
EXTRAORDINARY AND EMERGENCY PROVISIONS  
163. Provision of rent and revenue in an emergency.  
164. Remission or suspension of rent in agricultural calamities.  
165. Bar to collection of rent remitted or suspended.  
166. Period of suspension to be excluded in computing period of limitation . 
167. Remission for calamity by court decreeing claim for arrears.  7 
 SECTION S 
168. Jurisdiction of certain courts excluded in cases of remission and suspension of rent or revenue.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PROCEDURE AND JURISDICTION OF COURTS  
General provisions  
169. Cases cognizable by revenue courts.  
170. Procedure of revenue courts.  
171. Application of Indian Limitation Act, 1908.  
172. Limitation in cases under this Act.  
173. Payment of court -fees under this Act.  
Subordination of courts  
174. Subordination of courts.  
Powers of courts and places for holding courts  
175. Place of sitting of revenue courts.  
176. Chief Commissioner‟s power to confer powers.  
177. Collector‟s power to place assistant commissioner in charge of subdivision.  
178. Collector‟s powers to authorise  certain courts to entertain and dispose of  applications.  
179. Powers of revenue courts to refer cases for investigation and report.  
180. Powers of Chief Commissioner to create shamlat  committee and courts.  
Confirmation of orders  
181. Decree or order to be final in certain circumstances.  
182. Submission to confirming court.  
183. Form of decree or order to be submitted for confirmation.  
184. Procedure for confirmation.  
Review  
185. Review by the Chief Commissioner.  
186. Review by other courts.  
Revision  
187. Revision.  
Transfer of cases  
188. Power to transfer cases.  
189. Power of collector to transfer and withdraw cases.  
190. Sub -divisional officer‟s power to transfer cases.  
191. Power of record officer to transfer and withdraw cases.  
192. Transfer of cases by  the district judge.  
Question of proprietary right in revenue court  
193. Dispute as regards ownership of land.  
  8 
 SECTION S 
194. Procedure when plea of proprietary right raised in revenue court.  
Question of tenancy right in civil courts  
195. Procedure when plea of tenancy raised in civil court.  
Conflict of jurisdiction  
196. Reference to Judicial Commissioner.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
197. Provision for injunction and appointment of receiver.  
198. Cases i n which legal practition ers may appear.  
199. Persons who may appear before a revenue court.  
200. Costs in revenue courts.  
201. Power of revenue court to summon persons.  
202. Mode of service of summons or notice.  
CHAPTER XVI  
POWER TO MAKE RULES  
203. Power to make rules.  
CHAPTER XVII  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
204. Reinstatement of tenant ejected before commencement of this Act.  
205. Provision for pending and other cases.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  9 
 THE AJMER TENANCY AND LAND RECORDS ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1950  
[10th May, 1950 .] 
An Act to declare and amend the law relating to agricultural tenancies, record -of-rights and 
certain other matters in Ajmer . 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act  may be called the Ajmer Tenancy and 
Land Records Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Ajmer.  
(3) It shall come into force at once, except Part III of Chapter XII which shall come into force on such 
date as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Repeal .—(1) The Ajmer -Merwara Agrarian Relief (Second) Ordinance, 1949 ( 30 of 1949), is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) When this Act or any portion thereof comes into force in Ajmer, so much of any Act , Regulation 
or notification in force therein, or any condition of a jagir  or istimrari sanad, as is inconsistent with this 
Act or with such portion, shall be deemed to have been repealed or superseded by this Act or by such 
portion, as the case may be.  
3. Savings .—Any rule, notification, proclamation and order issued, authority and power conferred, 
lease granted, right acquired, liability incurred, rent fixed, and any other thing done under any Act, 
Ordinance, Regulation or notification, or under any jagir  or istimrari sanad,  as the case may be, shall, in 
so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been respectively issued, 
conferred, granted, acquired, incurred, fixed and done under this Act.  
4. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(1) all words and expressions used to denote the possessor of any right title or interest, whether the 
same be proprietary or otherwise, shall be deemed to include the predecessors a nd successors in right, title 
or interest of such person;  
(2) “agricultural year ” means the year commencing on the first day of June and ending on the       
thirty -first day of May next following;  
(3) “agriculturist ” means a person who earns his livelihood  wholly o r principally — 
(a) by the cultivation of land personally, or through servants or by hired labour, or  
(b) as artisan or field -labourer, paid in cash or kind for work connected with agriculture, and 
includes — 
(i) a landlord whose interest in the stable land of the village does not exceed 120 acres, and  
(ii) a tenant who sub -lets his land in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
Explanation. —An agriculturist who, without any intention of changing his profession  as such, 
temporarily ceases to so earn his livelihood, or who if prevented from so earning his livelihood by age or 
bodily infirmity, or by absence due to service in the military, naval or air forces of India, or by 
confinement in prison, does not thereby  cease to be an agriculturist;  
(4) “assistant commissioner ” includes an additional assistant commissioner and an extra assistant 
commissioner;  
(5) “batai ” means division of the produce on the threshing -floor;  
(6) “bighori ” means money rent per bigha  of lan d; 10 
 (7) “biswadar ” means — 
(a) any person who is recorded as plot -proprietor in the settlement khewat  of 1874 and is 
continuously so recorded since, or who, but for an error or omission, would have been so 
continuously recorded; or  
(b) any  member of the proprietary body who becomes an owner of land under section 7 of the 
Ajmer Land and Revenue Regulation, 1877 ( 2 of 1877), or  
(c) any person who becomes, or is declared, a biswadar under the provisions of this Act, and 
includes a person admit ted to the occupation of land under a lease guaranteeing hereditary rights of 
ownership and enjoyment on condition of his permanently developing such land by sinking a well or 
otherwise, and who accordingly developed such land and was, before the commencem ent of this Act, 
recorded as plot proprietor thereof in the khewat ; 
(8) “cess” means a cess declared payable under sub -section ( 2) of section 62;  
(9) “collector ” means the collector of Ajmer or any other office appointed by the Chief Commissioner 
to discharge the functions of a collector under this Act, and includes an additional collector;  
(10) “confirming court ” means a court to which the record of a case it sub mitted in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act for confirmation of any decree or order passed therein;  
(11) “decree ” means an order which is drawn up in the form of a decree as prescribed;  
(12) “holding ” means a parcel or parcels of land held under o ne lease, engagement or grant or, in the 
absence of such lease, engagement or grant, under one tenure, and in section 26 includes a well on a 
holding;  
(13) “improvement ” means, with reference to a tenant ‟s holding, — 
(i) a dwelling house erected on the holding by the tenant for his own occupation, or a cattle -shed, 
or a store -house or any other construction for agricultural purposes, erected or set up by him on his 
holding, and  
(ii) any work which adds materially to the value of the holding and is consis tent with the purpose 
for which it was let, and which, if not executed on the holding, is either executed directly for its 
benefit or is, after execution, made directly beneficial to it, and, subject to the foregoing provisions of 
this clause, includes — 
(a) the construction of a well, water channel, and other work for the supply or distribution of 
water for agricultural purposes,  
(b) the construction of any work for the drainage of land, or for the protection of land from 
floods, or from erosion or other da mage by water,  
(c) the reclaiming, clearing, enclosing, levelling, or terracing of land,  
(d) the erection in the immediate vicinity of the holding, otherwise than on the village site, of 
a building required for the convenient or profitable use or occupatio n of the holding,  
(e) the construction of a tank or other work for the storage of water for agricultural        
purposes, and  
(f) the renewal or reconstruction of any of the foregoing works, or such alterations therein, or 
additions thereto, as are not of the nature of mere repairs:  
Provided that such clearance, water channel, levelling, embankment, enclosure, temporary 
well or other work as is made in the ordinary course of cultivation and without incurring any 
special expenditure shall not be deemed to be  an improvement;  
Explanation. —A work which benefits several holdings may be deemed to be an improvement 
with respect to each of such holdings;  11 
 (14) “istimrari estate ” means an estate in respect of which an istimrari sanad  has been granted           
by the Chief Commissioner before the commencement of the Ajmere Land and Revenue           
Regulation, 18 77 (2 of 1877); and 
“istimrardar ” means the person to whom such sanad has been granted, or any other person who 
becomes entitled to the istimrari  estate in succession to him in accordance with the provisions of the said 
Regulation;  
(15) “jagirdar ” means a person to whom the revenue of any land has been assigned under a  sanad  
issued by the Chief Commissioner before the commencement of the Ajmere Land and Revenue 
Regulation, 1877;  
(16) “khudkasht ” means land cultivated by a proprietor as such, either himself, or by servants or by 
hired labour;  
(17) “kuta” means an estimate or appraisement of the standing crop;  
(18) “lag” means — 
(a) a levy in cash imposed on a tenant — 
(i) on the occasion of a ceremony in the family of the landlord or the tenant, or  
(ii) by way of tax on a well or plough or as fee for settlement of rent accounts; or  
(b) any other levy in cash over and above the rent pay able by a tenant, but does not include a fee 
specified in the First Schedule or an assessment leviable, or a local rate payable under any law for the 
time being in force in the State;  
(19) “land” means land which is let or held for the raising of crops or garden produce, or for purposes 
subservient thereto, and includes land covered by water used for the purpose of growing singhara  or other 
producer but does not include land for the time being occupied by a building or appurtenant thereto, other 
than a buil ding which is an improvement;  
(20) “landholder ” means the person to whom rent is, or, but for a contract, express or implied, would 
be, payable, and includes shamlat committee created or recognised under the provisions of section 180;  
(21) “landlord ” means  the proprietor of a village, or of a share or specified plot therein, and 
includes — 
(i) in case of land in respect of which an istimrari sanad  has been granted, any person by whom 
an estate, a village, or a portion of an estate or village is held, whether  under a separate engagement to 
pay revenue or otherwise;  
(ii) a jagirdar ; and  
(iii) a trustee, a manager, a superintendent, a mutawalli , or a body of persons appointed to 
administer a religious endowment, a trust, or waqf  property, or the shamlat deh  land of a village;  
Explanation. —In clauses ( 20) and ( 21), the word “landholder ” or “landlord ” shall include — 
(i) a mortgagee with possession,  
(ii) a lessee of proprietary right, and  
(iii) in case of property of which superintendence has been assumed by th e Court of Wards under 
section 6 of the Ajmere Government Wards Regulation, 1888 ( 1 of 1888) or which has been attached 
under section 82 of the Ajmere Land and Revenue Regulation, 1877 ( 2 of 1877), the collector;  
(22) “lease ” includes the counterpart of a lease;  
(23) “legal practitioner ” means any person who is, for the time being enrolled as an advocate or 
pleader by the Judicial Commissioner of Ajmer;  
(24) “minor ” means a person who, under section 3 of the Indian Majority Act , 1875 ( 9 of 1875), has 
not attained majority;  12 
 (25) “muafi ” means a definite portion of land held revenue -free under a sanad  issued by the Chief 
Commissioner, and a “muafidar ” means the holder of such muafi ; 
(26) “neg” means — 
(a) a levy in kind imposed on a tenant as — 
(i) seri, sawai -batti or any other kind of levy made on the division of the produce of a 
holding, or  
(ii) kasas  (dishes) of food or sweetmeats given on the occasion of marriage or any other 
ceremon y or the money equivalent there of; or  
(b) any other levy in kind over and above the rent payable by a tenant;  
(27) “order ” means the formal expression of a decision of an y authority under this Act;  
(28) “parabund -barani ” means enclosed low lying land, the cultivation of which depends on the 
rainfall and the silt deposited thereon by the inflow of water from the catchment area;  
(29) “pay”, “payable ” and “payment ”, when use d with reference to r ent, include “deliver ”, 
“deliverable ” and “delivery ”; 
(30) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(31) “produce of a holding ” means a crop or any other produce of the land standing on the holding, or 
which has been grown on the holding and has been reaped or gathered, and is deposited on the holding or 
on a threshing floor;  
(32) “State ” means the State of Ajmer;  
(33) “rent” mean s whatever is paid or payable in money or kind, or partly in money and partly in 
kind, by a tenant on account of the use or occupation of land held by him;  
(34) “registered ” means registered under any law for the time being in force for the registration of  
documents;  
(35) “revenue court ” means all or any of the following authorities when acting under this Act or any 
rule made thereunder, namely, — 
(i) the Chief Commissioner,  
(ii) the collector,  
(iii) a record officer, an assistant record officer and a rent -rate officer,  
(iv) a sub -divisional officer,  
(v) an assistant commissioner,  
(vi) a tahsildar , 
(vii) a naib-tahsildar  empowered by the collector under clause ( b) of section 178, and  
(viii) a person or a body of persons invested with powers to hear and dispose of cases under 
clause ( a) or ( b) of section 180;  
(36) “revenue ” means land revenue;  
(37) “sayar ” means whatever is payable by a lessee or licensee on account of the right of gathering 
produce, forest rights, fisheries or the use of water for irrigation from artificial sources; and includes a fee 
specified in the First Schedule;  
(38) “stable land ” means land which, because of facilities of irrigation, quality of the soil or other 
advantage s, is capable of being regularly cultivated, and is demarcated as stable land by the rent -rate 
officer, or any other authority, appointed for the purpose, and, subject to the foregoing provisions, 
includes — 
(i) land in the bed of a tank or nadi which dries  up in time for the rabi sowing, and  
(ii) mal, gormia  or parabund -barani : 13 
 Provided that, until such time as demarcation is made, the provisions regarding demarcation shall 
not be deemed to be a part of this clause;  
Explanation. —A land which is capable of being regularly cultivated shall not cease to be so regarded 
if, in any year, it has been left fallow, or could not be cultivated on account of failure of rainfall or for any 
other reason;  
(39) “sub-tenant ” means a person who hold s land from the tenant thereof, or from a rent -free grantee, 
or from a grantee at a favourable rate of rent, and by whom rent is, or, but for a contract express or 
implied, would be, payable;  
(40) “tenant ” means a person who holds land of another person an d is, or, but for a contract express or 
implied, would be, liable to pay rent for such land to such other person and, except when a contrary 
intention appears, includes a sub -tenant, but does not include — 
(a) a person to whom a tenancy holding is transferr ed otherwise than under the provisions of this 
Act, 
(b) except as otherwise provided, a rent -free grantee, a grantee at a favourable rate of rent or a 
holder of village service grant, and  
(c) a person to whom only the right to cut grass or to graze cattle is granted, whether with or 
without consideration; and  
(41) “year of settlement ” means, with reference to any area of the State, any year or period between 
November 1940 and June 1947 during which the record or settlement operations were in force in such 
area.  
5. Power of landlord and tenant to act through agent .—Anything which is by this Act required or 
permitted to be done by a landlord or a tenant may be done by his authorised agent, and, in the absence of 
evidence of a contrary intention, in dealings between a landlord and a tenant such agent shall be deemed 
to be acting under the authority  of his principal:  
Provided that, except as provided in section 198, a legal practitioner or his clerk or employee, or a 
petition -writer shall not act as authorised agent of such landlord or tenant.  
Explanation. —In this sectio n “authorised agent ” includes a kamdar  of a jagirdar  or istimrardar.  
CHAPTER II  
PRIMARY RIGHTS  
6. Primary rights of tenant .—A tenant, other than a sub -tenant, shall have a right — 
(i) subject, in the case of clause ( a), or ( b), to the provisions of the First Schedule and to the 
payment of fee, if any, specified therein — 
(a) to possess, in the village in which his holding is situated, a site on which he may build one 
residential house for himself and his family and, when necessary, to repair and rebuild i t, to sell 
the materials of such house and, with the written consent of the landlord, to transfer the right of 
residence therein to any tenant of such village;  
Explanation. —In this clause „residential house ‟ shall include a cattleshed, and a store -house 
for stocking fodder, manure and agricultural implements.  
(b) to use the waste -land of the village for grazing and , pasturing his cattle and other domestic 
animals and for threshing corn;  
(ii) when rent is paid by batai  or bighori,  to allow only prescribed weights and measures to be 
used for determining such rent; and  
(iii) where in any area bighori  is charged at customary rate, to grow cotton at such rate on not 
more than one -fourth of the irrigable area of his holding.  
  14 
 7. Prohib ition of certain acts .—(1) A tenant shall not be — 
(i) ejected from his holding otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act; or  
(ii) evicted from his residential house, other than a house which is an improvement, merely 
because he has surrendered, or has been ejected from his holding in the village; or  
(iii) compelled to render any service, or to allow the use of his cattle or agricultural implements, 
to his landholder, with or without remuneration.  
(2) The provisions of this section an d of sections 6 and 62 shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to 
a rent -free grantee, a grantee at a favourable rate of rent, a holder of village service grant, and an artisan 
or a village -workman paid in cash or kind, for work connected with agricult ure as they apply to a 
hereditary tenant.  
8. Prohibition against deprivation of certain rights .—(1) Notwithstanding any custom or contract 
to the contrary, every lease or agreement between a land -holder and a tenant, whether made before or 
after the commen cement of this Act, which purports, or would operate, to prohibit or restrict a tenant from 
acquiring, exercising or enforcing any right conferred on, or secured to, him by this Act, shall be void to 
the extent of such prohibition or restriction.  
(2) When land, not previously cultivated, has been reclaimed by, or at the expense of, the landholder 
and let to a tenant, or has been let to a tenant in order that it should be reclaimed by him or at his expense, 
then for a period of twelve years after such land w as let, nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as 
affecting any condition of a contract which relates to payment of rent or to enhancement, abatement or 
variation of rent of such land, or which provides that, during any period for which such land is  to be held 
free of rent or on favourable terms, the tenant is liable to ejectment for breach of any such condition.  
Explanation. —When land has remained uncultivated for a period of fi ve years, it shall, for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 2), be deemed to be  land not previously cultivated.  
9. Certain rights of landlord .—Subject , in case of clause ( iii), to the conditions of an istimrari 
sanad  and to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, a landlord shall have a right — 
(i) where in any area bighori  is charged at customary rate and cotton is grown on more than     
one-fourth of the irrigable area of the holding of a tenant, to charge rent on the land in excess of the 
one-fourth area on which cotton is grown at a rate specified in the second pr oviso to section 64;  
(ii) at all reasonable times, to enter, or depute his servant, agent or surveyor to enter, upon any 
land comprised in his estate for the purpose of surveying and measuring such land or for any other 
lawful purpose; and  
(iii) if he has a proprietary interest in an  istimrari  estate, to open of work a mine or grant a lease 
for the purpose, or to undertake, or to issue a licence to any other person to undertake, prospecting 
work for discovering new sources of supply of minerals.  
CHAPTER II  
Niji jot  
10. Definition .—Niji jot means khudkasht demarcated under the provision of this Chapter.  
11. Application for demarcation .—(1) If, at the commencement of this Act, the proprietor of a 
village or a part thereof or a specific area therein, was cultiv ating any land as  khudkasht , he may, within 
six months of such commencement , apply to the sub -divisional officer for demarcation of such khudkasht 
a niji jot. 
(2) With his application, the applicant shall file a list, giving the area and survey number or other 
description of the khudkasht  to be so demarcated and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
12. Order of demarcation of niji jot .—(1) On the receipt of such application the sub -divisional 
officer shall issue a proclamation calling upon all persons who claim an interest in such land to file 
objections, if any, within the period specified in such proclamation.  15 
 (2) If, after hearing the objections, if any, and making such further inquiry as he deems fit, the         
sub-divisional officer is satisfied that the land to be demarcated as  niji jot  has been held by the applicant 
as his khudkasht  since the agricultural year beginning on the first day of June, 1948, he shall pass an order 
for the demarcation of such land as  niji jot and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order 
passed by him to the collector.  
13. Demarcation .—The sub -divisional officer shall have the demarcation made on the spot and shall 
prepare and place on record a map, indicating the plo ts demarcated as niji jot.  
14. Status of tenant of niji jot .—A landlord may let his niji jot  subject to the same restrictions as 
apply to sub -letting by a hereditary tenant under section 27:  
Provided that if such landlord lets his land which is niji jot  in contravention of the provisions of this 
section, such land shall cease to be niji jot  and the person to whom the land is so let shall become 
hereditary tenant thereof.  
15. Succession to niji jot .—On the death of the holder of niji jot,  the niji jot  rights shall devolve in 
accordance with the law which regulates the succession of proprietary right in such land.  
16. Collector ’s powers to let to tenants .—If the collector is satisfied that the landlord of an estate or 
village, without good reason, keeps lar ge areas of h is niji jot  and other culturable  land uncultivated, or 
that an emergency has arisen for bringing under cultivation land which has not been previously cultivated 
or, if previously cultivated, has remained uncultivated for more than three years, he may,  
(i) with the previous sanction of th e Chief Commissioner, take possession of such land, and  
(ii) notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, allot it for cultivation on such 
terms and conditions as may be prescribed, and  
the person to whom the land is so allotted shall, u nless he is the landlord at such land, be deemed to have 
been admitted as tenant within the meaning of clause ( b) of section 22:  
Provided that, while giving his sanction under clause ( i), the Chief Commissioner may exempt from 
its operation any land which is used as pasture land or threshing -floor, or for some other purpose for the 
benefit of the public.  
CHAPTER IV  
CLASSES OF TENANTS  
17. Classes of tenants .—There shall be, for the purposes of this Act, the following clauses of tenants, 
namely, — 
(a) occupanc y tenants;  
(b) exproprietary tenants;  
(c) hereditary tenants; and  
(d) non -occupancy tenants.  
18. Occupancy tenants .—Every person — 
(a) other than a person to whom the provi sions of section 7 of the Ajmere  Land and Revenue 
Regulation, 1877 ( 2 of 1877) apply, who, before the commencement of this Act, was admitted to the 
occupation of land and who has, before such commencement, sunk a well, reclaimed or otherwise 
developed such land, or  
(b) who was recorded in the year of settlement as tenant wi th a permanent right of tenancy 
(mazara -i-mustaqil ) and has continued in possession since,  
shall be called an occupancy tenant.  
19. Exproprietary tenants .—Every person who — 
(a) is, at the commencement of this Act, an exproprietary  tenant in accordance with the 
provisions of the Ajmere Land and Revenue Regulation, 1877   (2 of 1877) , or 
(b) acquires exproprietary rights in accordance with the provisions of this Act,  
shall be called an exproprietary tenant.  16 
 20. Acquisition of expropri etary rights .—(1) If the whole of the interest of a sole proprietor of a 
village or of a specific area thereof is transferred, either by foreclosure or sale in execution of a decree or 
order of a civil or revenue court, or by voluntary alienation, otherwis e than ( a) by gift or ( b) by exchange 
of specific areas between co -sharers of the village, he shall become an exproprietary tenant of the whole 
of his khudkasht in such village or area which he has cultivated continuously for three years or more at 
the date of such transfer, and shall be entitled to hold the same at a rate payable by an exproprietary tenant 
under sections 63 and 64.  
(2) If a part only of the inter est of a sole proprietor of a village or of a specific area thereof is so 
transferred, or where there are two or more co -sharers in the proprietary interest of a village or of specific 
area thereof, and such transfer relates to the whole or part of the pro prietary interest of some of them, 
exproprietary rights shall accrue in so much of khudkasht  so cultivated as appertains or corresponds to the 
part of the interest so transferred and, unless by mutual agreement the transferor and the transferee have 
demarc ated the area in which exproprietary rights have accrued, and fixed the rent, not higher than the 
rent specified in sections 63 and 64, the sub -divisional officer shall, in the course of mutation proceedings 
or, if more convenient, in a separate proceeding , started on his own motion, or on the application of the 
exproprietary tenant or the landlord, or on the report of the patwari,  demarcate such area and declare the 
rent in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) A mortgage shall be deemed t o be a voluntary alienation within the meaning of sub -section ( 1), if 
it has the effect of transferring proprietary possession of the land mortgaged from the mortgagor to the 
mortgagee but not otherwise.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section ( 1), (2) or (3), exproprietary rights shall not accrue in 
grove -land, or in land transferred for any purpose inconsistent with the existence of a right of cultivation 
therein.  
(5) After disposing of the case for demarcation of the exproprietary area and declaratio n of rent 
thereon under sub -section ( 2), the sub -divisional officer shall submit the record of the case for 
confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
21. Relinquishment of exproprietary rights .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section (2), an 
agreement for the relinquishment of exproprietary rights shall be void, whether such agreement was 
entered into before or after such rights accrued.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the first proviso to section 57, where the land transferr ed 
by mortgage of the kind specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 20 consists wholly of a specific area of 
khudkasht of three or more years, the mortgagor may, by simultaneous agreement in writing, waive his 
exproprietary rights, and in that case the mort gaged land shall, if the mortgagor redeems the mortgage 
within ten years of the date of the transfer, be restored to him unencumbered with any tenancy rights.  
22. Hereditary tenants .—Subject to the provisions of section 23, every person who — 
(a) is, at the commencement of this Act, a tenant of land, not being an exproprietary tenant, an 
occupancy tenant or a sub -tenant, or  
(b) is, after the commencement of this Act, admitted as a tenant otherwise than as a sub -tenant, or 
otherwise than as a tena nt to whom niji jot  is let in accordance with the provisions of section 14, or  
(c) under the provisions of this Act, acquires hereditary rights, shall be called a hereditary tenant.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the word “sub-tenant ” shall not include a person who 
holds land from a relation, dependant or servant of the landholder or, in an estate mentioned in the Second 
Schedule, from a transferee of an interest in a holding or part thereof, whether the transfer was made 
before or aft er the commencement of this Act, unless such relation, dependant, servant or transferee 
proves to the satisfaction of the court that he is a genuine tenant of such land or such holding or part 
thereof.  
23. Land in which hereditary rights shall not accrue .—Notwithstanding anything in this Act, 
hereditary rights shall not accrue in — 
(i) unstable land, or  17 
 (ii) grove -land, pasture -land, bir, or land, covered by water, used for the purpose of growing 
singhara  or other produce, or  
(iii) land used for casual or oc casional cultivation in the bed of a river or a stream, or  
(iv) land acquired or held for a public purpose or for a work of public utility, or  
(v) the khudkasht  of a landlord who is serving in the military, naval or air forces of India, so long 
as he remains in such service and for two years after the cessation of such service:  
Provided that where there are several co -sharers in such khudkasht  and not all of them  are in such 
service, the provisions of this clause shall apply only when the co -sharers who are not in such service 
belong to one or more of the following classes, namely, females, minors, lunatics, idiots or persons 
incapable of cultivating by reason of blindness or physical infirmity, or confinement in prison.  
24. Non-occupancy tenants .—All tenants other than occupancy tenants, exproprietary tenants and 
hereditary tenants shall be non -occupancy tenants.  
CHAPTER V  
DEVOLUTION, TRANSFER, EXTIN CTION, DIVISION, EXCHANGE AND ACQUISITION  
Devolution and transfer of tenancies  
25. Interest of a tenant, if heritable and transferable .—The interest of a n occupancy tenant, an 
exproprietary  tenant, a hereditary tenant find a non -occupancy tenant is heritable, but is not transferable, 
otherwise than by sublease as hereinafter provided, or by transfer or surrender to a co -tenant.  
26. Prohibition against certain kind of transfer or sub -lease .—(1) No tenant shall sub -let, or 
otherwise transfer, the whole or any portion of his holding in consideration of a debt, whether reserving or 
not reserving rent to be paid periodically.  
(2) No sub -tenant shall sub -let the whole or any portion of his holding.  
27. Right to sub -let.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 26 and sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) of this 
section, a tenant may sub -let the whole or any portion of his holding.  
(2) No occupancy, exproprietary  or hereditary tenant shall sub -let the whole or any portion of his 
holding— 
(a) to a person other than an agriculturist, or  
(b) for a term exceeding three years:  
Provided that a period of not less than three years shall intervene between the expiry of one  sub-
lease and the beginning of the next sub -lease.  
(3) No non -occupancy tenant, other than a sub -tenant, shall sub -let the whole or any portion of his 
holding for a term exceeding one year.  
(4) The rent payable by a sub -tenant to an occupancy, an expropri etary, a hereditary or a                
non-occupancy tenant shall be an amount not exceeding one and one -fifth of rent payable by such tenant 
to his land -holder:  
Provided that the restrictions imposed by clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) on sub -letting of a h olding or 
portion thereof shall not apply when the lessor is a female, a minor, a lunatic, an idiot, or a person 
incpabale of cultivating by reason of blindness, or any physical infirmity, or service in the military, naval 
or air forces of India, or confin ement in prison:  
Provided further that, in the case of a holding held jointly by more persona than one, the provisions of 
the first proviso shall not apply unless all such persons belong to one or more of the categories specified 
therein.  
  18 
 Extinction of tenancies  
28. Tenancy, when extinguished .—The interest of a tenant in his holding or part thereof, as the case 
may be, shall be extinguished — 
(a) when he dies, leaving no heir entitled to inherit; or  
(b) when his ejectment is ordered; or  
(c) subject  to the provisions of sections 57 and 58, when he surrenders or abandons the       
holding; or  
(d) when his land is acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ( 1 of 1894); or  
(e) when he is deprived of possession of his holding otherwise than in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and has not applied for recovery of possession within the period of limitation 
specified in section 102 or 104, as the case may be; or  
(f) when the mortgage referred to in section 21 has been redeemed by the mortg agor as provided 
in that section; or  
(g) when he acquires, or succeeds to, the entire proprietary right in his holding, or where the 
holder of the entire proprietary right over a holding inherits or otherwise acquires the tenancy rights 
in such holding:  
Provided that no order of ejectment which is submitted for confirmation under the provisions of this 
Act shall extinguish the tenancy, until such order has become final.  
29. Life tenancy of female, when extinguished .—Notwithstanding anything contained in sec tion 28, 
the surrender of her holding by a female tenant with life interest shall not extinguish her tenancy, unless 
such surrender is made with the written consent of nearest reversioner.  
30. Rights of sub -tenant on extinction of tenant ’s interest .—(1) Subjects to the provisions of       
sub-section ( 2), the extinction of the interest of a tenant shall operate to extinguish the interest of any       
sub-tenant holding under him.  
(2) When the right of a tenant in any land is extinguished under the provisions of clause ( g) of      
section 28 the sub -tenant, if any, of such land shall become a hereditary tenant.  
31. Vacating of holding on extinction of right .—Except as otherwise provided in this Act, when the 
interest of a tenant or sub -tenant is exti nguished he shall vacate his holding, but shall have, in respect of 
the removal of any crop the same rights as a tenant would have upon ejectment in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.  
32. Possession of land not vacated .—(1) If a sub -tenant, to who m the provisions of section 31 apply, 
does not vacate the holding, the person entitled to possession of such holding shall, on application to the 
tahsildar be put in possession thereof.  
(2) The tahsildar  shall, after deciding the dispute, if any, arising b etween the parties, submit the 
record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
Division, exchange and acquisition of holdings  
33. Division of holdings .—(1) A division of a holding shall be effected — 
(a) by agreement between the co -tenants; or  
(b) by the order of the tahsildar , passed on an application under this section by a co -tenant against 
the others and the landholder:  
Provided that no such agreement shall be binding on the landholder, unless he agrees thereto in 
writing:  
Provided further that no such application shall be entertained if, as a results of division, the area of the 
share of a co -tenant is reduced to less than ten acres . 19 
 (2) If the holding to be divided is assessed to fixed money rent, the d ivision shall be accompanied by 
the distribution of rent payable in respect of each portion of the holding so divided.  
(3) After deciding the case, the tahsildar  shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of the 
order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
34. Co-tenant’s right to claim division of produce .—(1) In case of a holding to which the second 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 33 applie s, the tahsildar  may, on the application of a co -tenant, 
specify the share of such co -tenant in the produce of such holding and depute an officer to divide the 
produce in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 3) of section 77 which shall, mutatis 
mutandis , apply to such proceedings.  
(2) The order of the tahsilda r under sub -section ( 2) shall not affect the right of a co -tenant to obtain a 
declaration in respect of his share in such holding under clause (ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 43.  
35. Right of tenant in land received in exchange .—A landlord may, with the consent of a tenant, 
give in exchange land which is not let, for any land held by such tenant, and such tenant shall have the 
same right in the land so received by him in exchange a s he had in the land given in exchange.  
36. Exchange of land for consolidation of cultivated area .—(1) A person, who wishes to 
consolidate the area which he cultivates, may apply to lie sub -divisional officer to exchange the whole or 
any portion of such ar ea for land cultivated by another person.  
(2) If, on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 2), the sub -divisional officer is satisfied that 
reasonable grounds exist, he shall grant such application, either in whole or in part, and shall allot to suc h 
other person land which is cultivated by the applicant and which is approximately equal in value to, and 
of the same quality as, the land received by the applicant:  
Provided that, to such extent as any land to be exchanged is not approximately equal in v alue and of 
the same quality,  the sub -divisional officer shall  award monetary compensation to balance the advantages 
and disadvantages, collect such compensation as arrears of revenue, and pay it to the person s entitled.  
(3) After the order passed under su b-section ( 2) is complied with, each person shall have, in respect of 
the land which he receives in exchange, the same right as he had in the land which he gives in exchange.  
(4) No order of exchange shall be passed under this section — 
(a) in respect of land which is cultivated by a non -occupancy tenant, or is burdened with any 
lease, mortgage or other encumbrance; or  
(b) between persons who are not landlords, or tenants of the same landlord, or who do not stand 
to one another in the relation of landlord and tenant.  
(5) After deciding the case, the sub -divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation of the 
order passed by him to the collector:  
Provided that, if any area is under record operations, all applications under this section  relating to 
such area shall be filed in the court of the record officer.  
(6) If the application is decided by the record officer, the record shall be submitted for confirmation 
of the order passed by him to the Chief Commissioner.  
37. Acquisition of land by the landlord for certain purposes .—(1) A landlord may apply to the 
collector to acquire for him land held by a tenant for any of the following purposes, namely, — 
(a) for farming on improved lines; or  
(b) for making any water -course, reservoir or tank fo r irrigation purposes; or  
(c) for opening or working a lime -stone, kankar or other mineral quarry; or  
(d) for undertaking, or allowing any other person to undertake, prospecting work to discover new 
sources of supply of mines and minerals; or  
(e) for the proper working or developing of a mine or mining industry.  20 
 (2) The landlord shall, in case of an application under clause ( a), and may, in case of an application 
under any other clause, file a list of his plots available in the same or in a neighbouri ng village, out of 
which the tenant may make a selection in exchange for the land applied for.  
(3) On getting such application, the collector shall issue a proclamation calling upon persons who 
claim any interest in such land, either as proprietor or other wise, to file objections, if any, within the 
period specified in the proclamation.  
(4) If the collector is satisfied that reasonable grounds exist, he shall order the acquisition of the land 
applied for, or such part thereof as he deems fit settle the question of compensation in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 5) and ( 7) and order the ejectment of the tenant from the land acquired.  
(5) The collector, before passing an order of ejectment under sub -section ( 4), shall proceed as 
follows:— 
(i) if an agreement, which in the opinion of the collector is not unfair is arrived at, he shall give 
effect to it; and  
(ii) failing such agreement he shall — 
(a) in case of an application under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), give to the tenant an option to 
select plots included in the list and allot to him, out of the plots so selected, an area of land 
approximately equal in value to, and of the same quality as, the land acquired; and  
(b) in case of an application under clause ( b), (c), (d) or ( e) of sub -section ( 1), give to the 
tenant an option to select plots included in the list, if one is filed under sub -section ( 2), and allot 
to him, out of the plots so selected, an area of land approximately equal in value to, and of the 
same quality as, the land acquir ed, but if the tenant claims monetary compensation only or if no 
list is filed under sub -section ( 2), the collector shall award to the tenant monetary compensation 
for his interest in such land; and  
(c) to such extent as the land given in exchange under su b-clause ( a) or ( b) is not 
approximately equal in value and of the same quality, award monetary compensation to balance 
the advantages and disadvantages.  
(6) If any land is allotted to the tenant under sub -section ( 5), he shall have the same right in such land 
as he had in the land from which he is ordered to be ejected.  
(7) If as a result of an order of acquisition, the interest of any person, other than the tenant of the land 
to be acquired, is adversely affected, the collector shall award to such person monetary compensation for 
the loss suffered by such person in consequence of such order.  
(8) After deciding the case, the collector shall submit the record for confirmation of the order passed 
by him to the Chief Commissioner.  
(9) The amount of monetary co mpensation awarded under this section shall be recovered as arrears of 
revenue and paid to the person entitled.  
38. Decision of certain disputes arising out of acquisition proceedings .—(1) If, in the course of 
proceedings under section 37, a question of pr oprietary right arises, the collector shall decide the dispute 
and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the Chief Commissioner : 
Provided that the collector may, if he deems fit, instead of deciding such dispute, gran t to any party a 
certificate declaring that the matter is fit to be determined by a civil court and dismiss the application for 
acquisition of land.  
(2) The person to whom such certificate is granted may, within three months of the grant thereof, 
institute  a suit to establish his right in a court of competent jurisdiction, and such court may, upon the 
production of such certificate, entertain such suit.  
(3) Where a party, to whom such certificate has been granted, fails to institute a suit within the time 
allowed, he shall be deemed to have instituted such suit and lost it.  21 
 (4) The dismissal of an application under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) shall be no bar to the 
entertainment of a second application for acquisition filed by the landlord, if — 
(i) in the civil suit, instituted under the provisions of the said proviso, the question of proprietary 
right is determined in his favour; or  
(ii) in case a certificate to file a suit has been granted to a person other than the landlord, no such 
suit has been fi led within the period allowed under sub -section ( 2). 
39. Reinstatement of tenant ejected under section 37 .—(1) When a tenant is ejected under          
section 57, he shall, on application made to the sub -divisional officer, be entitled to be reinstated in the 
land acquired on the conditions specified in sub -section ( 3), if the person for whom the land was 
acquired— 
(a) does not, within two years from the date of such ejectment, use it for the purpose for which it 
was acquired; or  
(b) uses  it for any other purpose within a period of five years from the date of such ejectment.  
(2) Such application shall be made — 
in case of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), within six months of the expiry of the period of two     
years; and  
in case of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), within six months of the land being used for any other 
purpose.  
(3) The sub -divisional officer, on receiving such application, shall, if the con ditions specified in     
clause ( a) or ( b) of sub -section ( 1) are satisfied, reinstate the ejected tenant in the land acquired with the 
same rights and liabilities and at the same rate of rent as at the date of ejectment on condition that such 
tenant, before his reinstatement, restores to the person from whom the land was acquired the land or 
money or both awarded to him by way of compensation under section 37.  
(4) After the decision of the case, the sub -divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation 
of the order passed by him to the collector.  
40. Acquisition of proprietary right by  tenant .—(1) If a tenant, other than a non -occupancy tenant, 
desires to acquire proprietary right in his holding, he may apply, in the prescribed form, to the collector 
for acquisition of such right:  
Provided that no such application shall lie in respect o f a part of a holding.  
(2) On receipt of application under sub -section ( 1), a notice shall be served on the landlord and a copy 
thereof shall be affixed in a prominent place in the village, stating that the tenant of such holding has 
applied for an order o f acquisition, and that the landlord or any other person interested in such proceeding 
may file any objections within one month of the affixation of such notice.  
(3) The collector , after deciding the objections filed, shall, if he finds the applicant entitled to 
acquisition, assess the amount of — 
(a) compensation on account of the holding which shall be twelve times the annual rental value of 
such holding, calculated at sanctioned r ates applicable to hereditary tenants;  
(b) compensation for any improvement, if any, made by the landlord on such holding; and  
(c) the revenue payable on such holding in the manner prescribed; and  
pass an order that, on payment of such compensation within the period allowed by the collector, the 
tenant shall become the biswadar of his holding and shall be liable to pay the revenue assessed thereon.  
(4) After the decision of the case, the collector shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of 
the order passed by him to the Chief Commissioner.  
(5) The landlord shall, after the tenant has become biswadar, be entitled to claim reduction in the 
revenue payable by him as prescribed.  22 
 CHAPTER VI  
GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TENAN CIES 
Lease s 
41. Right to written lease and procedure to obtain it .—(1) The tenant of holding shall be entitled 
to receive, from his landholder, a written lease, consistent with the provisions of this Act, drawn up in the 
prescribed form.  
(2) If the lease is not issued to  the tenant, or it does not contain the particulars required to be stated 
therein, or contains particulars which the tenant does not accept as correct, he may make an application to 
the tahsildar  and claim the lease in the proper form.  
(3) Along with his application the tenant shall file three copies of the draft lease in the prescribed 
form, stating therein all the particulars in accordance with the terms settled between him and his 
landholder, and shall verify each copy as a plaint.  
(4) The tahsildar  shall, on receipt of the application, issue notice accompanied by a copy of the lease 
to the landholder to file objections, if any, within the period specified therein.  
(5) If the landholder appears and admits the correctness of the lease, or , after due service of the 
notice, does not appear, the tahsildar  shall sign and date the lease, put his official seal on it and deliver it 
to the tenant.  
(6) If the landholder files an objection, the tahsildar  shall decide it, and, if the tenant is entitl ed to a 
lease, deliver the lease in the manner provided by sub -section ( 5). 
(7) If the lease  is delivered to the tenant under sub -section ( 5) or ( 6), a true copy thereof shall be 
furnished to the landholder and a copy of such lease shall be placed on the r ecord of the case.  
(8) The tahsildar  shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him 
under sub -section ( 6) to the sub -divisional officer.  
(9) A lease so delivered shall be deemed to be registered under the Indian Registratio n                     
Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908) and the terms thereof, in so far as they are consistent with the provisions of this 
Act, shall be binding on the parties thereto.  
42. Registration of leases .—(1) A lease for a period exceeding one year, or from year to year, or for 
reclaiming any land shall be made by a registered instrument only.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the parties to such lease may, in lieu of 
registering the sam e, obtain the attestation thereto of a girdawar , a naib-tahsildar,  or a tahsildar,  within 
whose jurisdiction the land leased is situated in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 4). 
(3) Such instrument shall be presented for attestation in duplica te. 
(4) The attesting officer shall, after satisfying himself as to the identity of the parties and the 
execution of the instrument, make, sign and date an endorsement thereon to the effect that he has so 
satisfied himself, and shall deliver one copy to th e lessor and the other to the lessee:  
Provided that no such instrument shall be accepted for attestation, unless it is presented within four 
months of its execution.  
(5) An  instrument so attested shall be deemed to be registered within the meaning of the I ndian 
Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908).  
Declaration of rights  
43. Declaration of rights in certain cases .—(1) In case of doubt or dispute, the landholder or the 
tenant may apply for a declaration as to any of the following matters: — 
(i) the rent payable or any other particulars prescribed for the lease;  
(ii) the right of a person claiming to be a tenant or a joint tenant of a holding, or the specification 
of his share in such holding;  23 
 (iii) question of status of a tenant;  
(iv) whether a part icular plot is — 
(a) niji jot,  or 
(b) stable or unstable land.  
(2) Such application shall be filed in the court of the sub -divisional officer who shall decide the 
dispute in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and submit the record of the case for confirmation 
of the order passed by him to the collector.  
Improvements  
44. Right of certain tenants to make improvements .—An occupancy, an exproprietary or a 
hereditary tenant may make any improvement, but he shall not construct a tank unless he has obtain ed the 
written consent of the landholder.  
45. Right of non -occupancy tenants to make improvements .—No non -occupancy tenant shall 
make any improvement except with the written consent of his landholder:  
Provided that, if such tenant is a sub -tenant, he shall  not make any improvement unless — 
(a) it is an improvement which his landholder could himself have made; and  
(b) he has obtained the written consent of his landholder.  
46. Right of landlord to make Improvement .—(1) A landlord may, with the sanction of the          
sub-divisional officer, make an improvement on, or affecting, the holding of a tenant:  
Provided that no such sanction shall be required if the tenant of such holding is a non -occupancy 
tenant, or the improvement which the landlord desires to make is a well.  
(2) If the sub -divisional officer refuses to give sanction, he shall submit the record of the case for 
confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
47. Provision when both landlord and tenant want to make the same improvement .—(1) If both 
the landlord and the tenant want to make the same improvement which they are entitled to make under 
this Act, the sub -divisional officer shall, on application, allow the tenant to execute the work within a 
specified period and may, on reasonable cau se being shown, extend such period from time to time:  
Provided that the total period of such extensions shall not exceed six months.  
(2) If the tenant fails to execute the work within such period or extended period, the landlord shall 
have the right to make such improvement.  
48. Restrictions on making improvement .—Nothing in this Chapter shall -entitle a tenant or a 
landholder to make an improvement on, or detrimental to, any land, not included in the holding to be 
benefited by such improvement, unless he  is in possession of such land as owner, or has obtained the 
written consent of the landlord and of the tenant, if any, of such land.  
49. Compensation for improvement, when permissible .—A tenant who has made a work of the 
kind to which the provisions of clause ( 13) of section 4 apply, whether such work was made before or 
after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to claim compensation — 
(a) if an order of ejectment is passed against him; or  
(b) if he has been wrongfully ejected from his land and  has not recovered possession thereof:  
Provided that in case of a dwelling house mentioned in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( 13) of section 4, the 
tenant may, instead of claiming compensation, sell or remove the materials thereof or, with the written 
consent of  the landlord and within such period as the court deciding the claim for compensation may 
specify, transfer the right of residence therein to any tenant of the village:  24 
 Provided further that except in case of such dwelling house, compensation shall not be payable for 
any work made more than thirty years prior to the date on which the order of ejectment was passed or the 
tenant was wrongfully ejected.  
50. Determination of compensation .—When, under any provision of this Act, a court has to 
determine the amoun t of compensation due on account of an improvement, it shall have regard — 
(a) to the amount by which the value or the produce of the holding, or the value of that produce, 
is increased by the work,  
(b) to the condition of such work and the probable duration of its effect,  
(c) to the extent or benefit to which the landholder or the tenant may be entitled under          
section 51, and  
(d) to the labour and capital required for the making of such work, allow ing for— 
(i) any reduction or remission of rent or any other advantage allowed to the tenant by the 
landholder in consideration of the work,  
(ii) any assistance given to the tenant by the landholder in money, material or labour, and  
(iii) in the case of re clamation or of conversion of unirrigated to irrigated land, the length of 
time during which the party claiming compensation has had the benefit of the improvement.  
51. Works benefiting other land .—(1) If a tenant has made an improvement on land from which  he 
is ejected, the landholder shall, on payment of compensation, if awarded, become the owner of th e work, 
but the tenant shall be  entitled to the benefit of the work in respect of the land remaining in his possession 
to the same extent and in the same ma nner as it was hitherto benefited thereby.  
(2) If a tenant has made an improvement on land which remains in his possession after he is ejected 
from the other portion of his holding, the landholder shall, in accordance with the conditions laid down by 
the c ourt, be entitled to the benefit of such work in respect of the land from which the tenant has been 
ejected to the same extent and in the same manner as it was hitherto benefited thereby.  
52. Disputes as regards improvements .—If a question arises between a tenant and his landholder — 
(a) as to the right to make an improvement; or  
(b) as to whether a work contravenes the provisions of section 48; or  
(c) as to whether a particular work is an improvement; or  
(d) as to the right to the benefit of an improvement under section 51,  
the sub -divisional officer shall, on the application of either party, decide the question and submit the 
record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
Trees 
53. Right of tenant paying fixed money rent to plant tree .—A tenant, other than a non -occupancy 
tenant, who pays fixed money rent may plant on his Molding any tree:  
Provided that — 
(a) he shall not plant any tree in such a way as to diminish the value of any land, not included in 
his holding; and  
(b) he shall, in the absence of a written agreement to the contrary, continue to be liable to pay the 
full rent of the holding.  
54. Right of a te nant paying batai  or bighori  to plant tree .—A tenant, other than a non -occupancy 
tenant, who pays rent by batai,  or bighori  or partly by batai  and partly by bighori,  may plant any tree with 
the written consent of his landlord on such terms as may be settled between them:  
Provided that he shall not plant any tree in such a way as to diminish the value of any land, not 
included in his holding.  25 
 55. Tenant’s rights in tre e existing at the commencement of the Act .—(1) Any tree standing at the 
commencement of this Act on the holding of a tenant, not being a sub -tenant, shall vest in such tenant, if 
he has continuously been in possession of such holding for not less than twel ve years immediately before 
such commencement.  
(2) If a tree does not vest in such tenant under sub -section ( 1), he may— 
(i) if such tree hinders the cultivation of the folding, fell it with the previous sanction of the 
tahsildar  and after notice in writing to the landlord or his agent, and deliver the timber thereof to such 
landlord or agent; or  
(ii) appropriate such tree and pay to the landholder such price as the tahsildar  may, on the 
application of the tenant, fix.  
(3) The  tahsildar  shall, if the order giving or refusing sanction for felling, such tree or fixing the price 
thereof is passed in a contested case, submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by 
him to the sub -divisional officer.  
56. Decisio n of disputes regarding trees .—If a dispute arises between a landlord and a tenant as to 
the right to plant any tree, or the manner of planting it, or regarding the ownership of any tree, the dispute 
shall, on the application of either party, be decided by  the sub -divisional officer who shall submit the 
record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
Surrender and abandonment  
57. Surrender by tenant .—Subject to the provisions of section 29, a tenant, not bound by a lease or 
other agreement to continue to occupy any holding in the following year, may — 
(i) by means of a registered letter, sent to his landholder before the first day of March in any year, 
notify his intention to surrender his holding at the end of the agricultural year, whether such holding, 
is or is not held by a sub -tenant; and  
(ii) surrender his holding by giving up possession thereof accordingly:  
Provided that an exproprietary tenant shall not surrender his holding of any part thereof except to his 
own landholder, and unless ( a) a period of two years has elapsed from the date of accrual of the 
exproprietary rights, and ( b) such tenant has obtained the previous sanction of the collector:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall affect any a rrangement by which a tenant, other than 
an exproprietary tenant, and the landholder may agree to the surrender of the whole or any portion of the 
holding.  
58. Abandonment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) a tenant  who ceases to 
cultivate his holding and leaves the neighbourhood, shall not lose his interest in such holding, if he leaves 
in charge thereof a person responsible for payment of the rent as it falls due and gives written notice to the 
landholder of such arrangement.  
(2) If the person so left in charge is a person — 
(a) on whom, in the event of the tenant ‟s death, the tenant ‟s interest would devolve, or  
(b) who is to manage the holding for the benefit of the person on whom in the event of the 
tenant ‟s death, the tenant ‟s interest would devolve,  
the tenant shall, on the expiry of a period of seven years, lose his interest in his holding unless he, within 
such period, resumes cultivation thereof, and such interest shall devolve on the person on whom the 
interest of the tenan t would devolve in the event of his death.  
(3) If the person so left in charge is not a person mentioned in sub -section ( 2), the tenant shall, on the 
expiry of a period of three years, be deemed to have abandoned his holding, unless within such period he 
resumes cultivation thereof.  
(4) A tenant who ceases to cultivate and leaves the neighbourhood, other wise than in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to have abandoned his holding . 
59. Taking possession of holding surrendered or abandoned .—A landholder may enter upon, and 
occupy, the land surrendered or abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  26 
 60. Dispute arising out of surrender and abandonment of land .—(1) If a dispute arises as to — 
(a) the right of a tenant to surrender his holding or part thereof, or  
(b) the right of a landholder to enter upon and occupy the land under the provisions of section 59,  
either party may, within three months from the date of such dispute, apply to the  tahsildar for decision.  
(2) The tahsildar shall decide the dispute and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the 
order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
CHAPTER VII  
PREMIA AND OTHER LEVIES  
61. Acceptance of premium; how far permissible .—No landholder shall accept a premium for 
admitting a person to a holding:  
Provided that this prohibition shall not apply to a landlord who confers biswadari right in any waste 
or unimproved land or common land of a village.  
62. Lag, neg and cess .—(1) Notwiths tanding any custom or contract to the contrary, no lag, or neg, 
by whatever name called or known, shall, in addition to the rent of the holding, be levied on, or recovered 
from, a tenant:  
Provided that this prohibition shall not apply to a village developm ent cess levied under                 
sub-section ( 2). 
(2) The Chief Commissioner may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, declare that 
the tenants of any village shall be liable to pay a village development cess, not exceeding two and a half 
per cent, of the rental to be applied for such purposes, and to be collected and disbursed in such manner, 
as may be prescribed in this behalf.  
(3) In case of doubt, the Chief Commissioner may determine whether any levy is a levy prohibited by 
sub-section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VIII  
RENT AND ITS RECOVERY  
PART I.—Basic rent of tenants  
63. Liability for payment of rent .—Every occupancy, exproprietory, hereditary or non -occupancy 
tenant shall be liable to pay rent in accordance with the provisions of section 64:  
Provided that if, at the commencement of this Act, a lower rent is payable by a tenant, or, after such 
commencement, a lower rent is agreed upon between him and his landholder, he shall be liable to pay 
such rent only.  
64. Scale of rent for different classes  of tenants .—Subject to the provisions of section 63, a tenant 
shall be liable to pay rent in accordance with the following scale: — 
 
(a) a hereditary or a non -occupancy tenant, other than a 
sub-tenant  one-fifth of the produce of his holding;  
(b) an occupancy tenant  one-sixth of the produce of his holding ; 
(c) an exproprietary tenant  one-eight h of the produce of his holding : 
Provided that if in any area bighori  at customary rate is payable for any crop, a tenant may elect to 
pay such rate for su ch crop:  
Provided further that if a tenant grows cotton, or a crop in which cotton predominates, on more than 
one fourth of the irrigable area of his holding, the rent of such excess area shall be payable at double the 
bighori at customary rates.  27 
 Explanation. —In this section the expression “produce of his holding ” shall not include the straw 
chaff ( bhusa ) of the rabi or the dry stalks of kharif crop.  
65. Status and liability of person permitted to retain possession .—Notwithstanding anything 
contain ed in section 106, a person occupying any vacant land in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act shall, if permitted in writing by the landlord to retain possession of such land, become a hereditary 
tenant thereof and shall be liable to pay rent in acc ordance with the provisions of sections 63 and 64.   
PART II—Payment and recovery of rent  
General provisions  
66. Hypothecation of produce towards payment of rent .—The produce of every holding, whether 
sub-let or not, shall be deemed to be hypothecated of the landlord for the rent payable in respect of such 
holding and, until the demand for such rent has been satisfied, no other claim on such produce shall be 
enforced by sale in execution of a decree of a civil or revenue court, o r otherwise.  
67. Procedure when produce is attached by civil or revenue court .—(1) If the produce of any 
holding is attached by an order of a civil or revenue court, such court shall give notice of such attachment 
to the landlord who may apply to such court to sell the produce and p ay to him, out of the proceeds of the 
sale thereof, any arrears of rent due in respect of such holding up to the date of the attachment.  
(2) If such court, on inquiry, finds the landlord's claim to the whole or any part of the rent to be 
proved, it shall s ell the produce or such portion thereof as it may deem fit, and apply the proceeds of the 
sale, in the first instance, to satisfy such claim.  
68. Right of landlord to collect rent from cultivator .—(1) If the rent of a holding which is sub -let, 
or is left i n charge of another person under section 58, is payable to the landlord by batai, he may collect 
such rent from the sub -tenant or such person:  
Provided that if any rent is so collected by the landlord, the sub -tenant may deduct such rent from any 
rent paya ble by him to his landholder.  
(2) If any conflict arises between the claims of the landlord and the tenant of such holding to collect 
rent from the sub -tenant the claim of the landlord shall prevail.  
69. No cartage allowed .—When rent is paid by batai,  the landholder shall not claim or receive any 
additional quantity of the produce or its money equivalent for cartage to his own residence or to any 
market place.  
70. Presumption as to payment by tenant and application of such payment .—If a tenant makes a 
payment to his landholder, the payment shall, in the absence of a direction to the contrary, be deemed to 
have been made on account of rent, and shall be credited to any year, instal ment or holding, specified by 
the tenant:  
Provided that no such payment sh all be applied to the discharge of an arrear of rent which has been 
outstanding for more than two years at the date of such payment.  
71. Modes of making payment of money rent .—(1) A payment of a money rent may be made by a 
tenant to his landholder, either direct or by money order:  
Provided that the acceptance by a landholder of a sum paid by money -order shall not , by itself or by 
virtue of any thing written on the money -order form, be deemed to constitute an admission by him as to 
the amount of rent payable or due on account  of any particular year, instal ment or holding, or an 
admission that the payer is a tenant.  
(2) When such rent is sent by money order, in the case of acceptance, the payee ‟s receipt and in the 
case of refusal, the endorsement of such refusal on the money -order form, duly stamped by the post 
office, shall be admissible in evidence without formal proof and shall, until the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be a correct record of such acceptance or refusal.  28 
 72. Right to get receipt .—(1) Every tenant, lessee or licensee who makes payment on account of 
rent, sayar or premium shall be entitled to obtain forthwith from the landholder a written receipt signed 
by the landholder or his agent.  
(2) The landholder shall, from a book printed under s ection 74, give a separate receipt for each sum 
paid on account of rent, sayar  or premium, and shall prepare and retain a counterfoil of each receipt given 
by him.  
73. Penalty for not issuing proper receipt .—If a receipt is not issued in the prescribed fo rm, or does 
not contain substantially the particulars required to be stated therein, or if a joint receipt for rent, sayar or 
premium has been given in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 72, it shall be 
presumed, until the contrar y is proved, to be an acquittance in full of all demands for rent, sayar, or 
premium, as the case may be, up to the date on which the receipt was given.  
74. Obligation of Chief Commissioner to print and supply books of receipt .—The Chief 
Commissioner shall  cause to be printed and kept for sale to landholders, at all  tahsil headquarters, books 
of receipts with counterfoils in the prescribed form at a rate, not exceeding the actual cost of production, 
plus five per cent, thereon to cover incidental charges.  
75. Penalty for non -production of receipt book with counterfoils .—If, in any proceeding under 
this Act between a landholder and a tenant in which the payment of rent, sayar or premium is in dispute, 
the landholder, when ordered by the court to produce the b ook of receipts with counterfoils which he is 
required to retain under section 72, fails to produce it, the court may accept the plea of the tenant 
regarding such payment as correct or may make any presumption against the landholder which it 
considers reas onable.  
76. Rights and liabilities in respect of produce .—(1) When rent is payable by batai,  the tenant shall 
have a right to the exclusive possession of the crop and to cut and harvest it in due course of husbandry 
without any interference on the part of the landholder, but shall not be entitled to cut any portion of the 
produce of his holding or to remove it from the threshing -floor at such time or in such manner as to 
prevent the due division thereof at the proper time.  
(2) If a landholder prevents a ten ant from tending, cutting, gathering or storing the crop, or otherwise 
interferes with harvesting operations, he shall be liable, on the complaint of the tenant, to pay to him such 
sum, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as may be awarded as compensation an d such sum shall be 
recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the tenant.  
(3) Such complaint shall be made in writing to the sub -divisional officer who shall inquire into, and 
decide, the case and submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by  him to the collector.  
(4) If the tenant cuts or removes any portion of the produce of his holding, contrary to the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1), such produce shall, for the purpose of determining the share of the landholder, be 
deemed to be equal to that  of the best crop of the same kind grown at that harvest on similar land in the 
neighbourhood.  
77. Application for officer to make division .—(1) When the rent of any land is payable by batai , 
the tenant may, when the crop is ripe, apply to the tahsildar, requesting that an officer be deputed to make 
the division and, subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, the tahsildar  shall, within ten days of such 
payment, depute an officer for the purpose.  
(2) The officer so deputed shall proceed to the spot on a day of which notice shall be given to the 
landholder and the tenant, cause the crop to be cut or gathered, and stored, and, after such inquiry as he 
deems fit, get the produce divided in accordance with the shares to which the parties may be respectively 
entitled.  
(3) The weighment charges or other expenses, if any, incurred in making the division shall be borne 
by the parties in proportion to their shares in the produce.  
  29 
 (4) In making the division, such officer shall take the assistance of assessors to be appointed, as 
nearly as may be, in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 79, draw up a 
note specifying the share of produce delivered to each party and other necessary particulars, explain such 
note to the parties and ass essors, get it signed by them and submit it with his report to the tahsildar.  
(5) Such officer shall not allow any levy prohibited by sub -section ( 1) of section 62 to be charged at 
the time of batai , and in his report to the tahsildar  he shall state that no such levy was charged.  
(6) If either the landholder or the tenant is dissatisfied with the division he may, within fifteen days of 
such division, complain in writing to the tahsildar  who shall inquire into the matter and, if necessa ry, pass 
a decree for money in favour of the party entitled, and submit the record of the case for confirmation of 
the decree or order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer If no such complaint is made, the tahsildar 
shall confirm the note of the off icer deputed.  
(7) The sub -divisional officer may confirm, amend or set aside the decree of order or pass such other 
order as he deems fit.  
(8) A decree for money passed under sub -section ( 6) or ( 7) shall, if against the tenant, be deemed to 
be a decree for  arrears of rent and, if against the landholder, be realised in accordance with the provisions 
of sections 88 and 89.  
78. Application for kuta.—If, by an agreement between a landholder and his tenant, the batai rent of 
a holding is payable in cash by kuta,  either party may apply in the prescribed form to the tahsildar  to 
depute an officer to make the kuta.  
79. Procedure on application .—(1) On receipt of an application under section 78, and on payment 
of the prescribed fee, the tahsildar shall, within ten days of such payment, issue a written notice to the 
landholder and the tenant to attend on such date and at such time and place as may be specified in the 
notice, and shall depute an officer by whom the kuta shall be made.  
(2) On the day,  and at the time and place, so fixed, such officer shall attend and call upon each party 
to appoint a resident of the neighbourhood as an assessor to assist him.  
(3) If any party fails to attend, or refuses to appoint an assessor, sum officer shall appoint  an assessor 
on his behalf and shall, with the assistance of the assessors so appointed, make the kuta and deliver an 
award in the prescribed form and submit the same with a report of the proceedings to the tahsildar.  
(4) The tahsildar  shall issue notice t o the parties to file objections, if any, to the award within fifteen 
days of the date of service of such notice and shall, after hearing such objections and making such 
inquiry, as he considers necessary, accept or modify such award and submit the record of the case for 
confirmation of the order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
(5) The sub -divisional officer may, after further inquiry, if necessary, confirm or modify the award.  
(6) After the award has become final, the tahsildar  shall assess the money value of the rent payable to 
the landholder and pass a decree for arrears of rent against the tenant.  
80. Collector to publish return of current prices .—Within one month of the end of harvesting 
operations in a tahsil,  or as soon th ereafter as may be, the collector shall prepare, in the prescribed 
manner, a return of market prices current at the harvest time of all food and non -food crops grown in such 
tahsil  and the return so prepared shall be accepted for assessing the money value of the produce of a 
holding in cases triable under this Act:  
Provided that if, in any area, the Central Government has fixed any price for any agricultural produce 
such price shall be accepted for making such assessment.  
81. Assessment of  bighori  by court .—(1) In case of bighori— 
(a) if the landholder or the tenant neglects to measure the area sown at the proper time, or  
(b) if there is a dispute about the extent of the area sown, the length of the measuring chain, or the 
manner of measurement of such area,  30 
 either party may make an application to the tahsildar,  requesting that a measurer be appointed to measure 
such area.  
With the application, the applicant shall deposit such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) of section 79 shall apply to an application made under 
this section, as if for the words “kuta” and “officer ”, wherever they occur in such sub -sections, the words 
“measurement ” and “measurer ” respectively were substituted.  
(3) On receipt of the measurer's award, the tahsildar  shall issue notice to the parties to file objections, 
if any, within fifteen days of the date of service of such notice and, after hearing such objections, pass a 
decree for the arrears of rent found due, and submit the record of the case for con firmation of the decree 
passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
82. Commutation of batai  rent into bighori  in certain cases .—(1) Where a tenant, other than a       
non-occupancy tenant, has heretofore paid his rent by batai, or partly by bighori  and partly by batai, he 
may, apply to the sub -divisional officer to commute his rent paid by batai  into bighori.  
(2) The sub -divisional officer shall, in accordance with the table of rates prepared in the prescribed 
manner, declare the bighori  which such tenant shall be liable to pay.  
83. Payment of commuted rent .—The rent commuted under the provisions of section 82 shall 
become payable from June next following the date of the order and shall remain in force for three 
agricultural years unless,  at the end of such period, the landlord and the tenant, by a joint application 
made to the sub -divisional officer, get the period extended for any term agreed upon between them.  
Arrears  
84. Rent when and how payable .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the rent of a tenant shall 
be payable as follows: — 
(i) in case of batai  or bighori— 
(a) as agreed upon between the tenant and the landholder,  
(b) in the absence of any such agreement, according to local custom, and  
(ii) in cas e of fixed money rent, in  insta lments pro portionate to the revenue insta lments payable 
one month before the dates appointed for th e payment of the revenue instal ments.  
(2) Rent, or any instal ment thereof, not paid by due date, shall be deemed to be in arrears.  
85. Claim for arrears of rent .—(1) If rent, which is payable by batai  or bighori , is in arrears, or if 
the tenant has, without sufficient cause, failed to cultivate his holding, the landholder may, within two 
years of the date on which rent became payable, ap ply to the tahsildar  for the recovery of arrears of rent.  
(2) An application for the recovery of fixed money -rent shall be made to the tahsildar  within two 
years of the date on which such rent became payable.  
(3) For purposes of the assessment of the rent recoverable under sub -section ( 1)— 
(i) in case of batai, the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 76 shall apply, and  
(ii) in case of batai  or bighori, the entire area of the holding of the defendant shall, in the absence 
of evidence to the contrary, be deemed to have been actually cultivated during the period to which the 
claim relates.  
(4) The tahsildar  shall decide the case and submit the record for confirmation of the decree passed by 
him to the sub -divisional officer.  
86. Interest in cases of arre ars of rent .—When a court passes a decree for arrears of rent under the 
provisions of this Chapter, it shall allow interest on the amount decreed from the date of such decree till 
the date of its satisfaction at the rate of one anna per rupee per annum sim ple interest unless, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, it disallows the interest or allows interest at a lower rate.  31 
 87. Landlord ’s power to charge irrigation dues .—If a landlord has constructed a tank, whether 
before or after the commencement of this  Act, he shall, subject to the rules made by the Chief 
Commissioner, be entitled to charge irrigation dues from persons irrigating land from such tank, at such 
rates as may be prescribed.  
88. Method of recovering sayar .—(1) A landlord to whom any sum is due on account of sayar  may, 
on an application to the tahsildar, recover the same by attachment and sale of the property of the defaulter 
with the exception of the following: — 
(a) the necessary wearing apparel, cooking utens ils, beds and bedding of the defaulter, and of his 
wife and children and such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be 
parted with by any woman;  
(b) his implements of husbandry and such cattle and seed grain as may, in the opini on of the 
court, be necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood as an agriculturist; and  
(c) houses and other buildings belonging to the defaulter and actually occupied by him or used by 
him as a cattle -shed.  
(2) If, in the course of any proceeding under sub -section ( 1), any claim is preferred to, or any 
objection is made to the attachment of, any property by any person, whether a party to such proceeding or 
not, the tahsildar  shall decide the dispute and submit the record of the case for confirmatio n of the order 
passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
89. Realisation of sayar  as arrears of revenue .—(1) If, in the opinion of the tahsildar  the arrears of 
sayar  cannot be recovered under section 88, he may move the sub -divisional officer to sanctio n the 
collection of such arrears as arrears of revenue.  
(2) The sub -divisional officer may, if he is satisfied that such arrears cannot be recovered under 
section 88, direct the tahsildar  to recover such arrears as arrears of revenue.  
(3) Any arrears of sayar recovered under section 88 or under this section shall be paid by the 
tahsildar to the person entitled.  
PART III.—Emergency provision  
90. Recovery of arrears in the event of general refusal to pay .—(1) In case of any general refusal 
to pay rent or any demand on account of sayar  to persons entitled to collect the same in any area, the 
Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that such rent or demand may be 
recovered in ac cordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(2) In any area to which a notification made under sub -section ( 1) applies, a landholder entitled to 
collect such rent or demand may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, apply in writing to the tahsildar to recover the same, and the 
tahsildar  shall , after satisfying himself that the amount claimed is due, recover file same with costs as 
arrears of revenue and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the orders pa ssed, and the action 
taken, by hi m to the collector.  
(3) The collector may, aft er examining the record, order that, after deducting from the amount 
recovered the collection charges which shall not ordinarily exceed seven per cent, of the amount so 
recovered, the balance shall be made ever to the person entitled:  
Provided that the tot al amount deducted as court -fee under section 178 and collection charges shall 
not, in the aggregate, exceed fourteen and a half per cent, of the amount so recovered.  
(4) No order passed under this section shall debar a landholder from recovering, under th e provisions 
of this Act, any amount due to him which has not been recovered under this section.  
PART IV.—Payment of revenue by biswa dars to jagirdars and muafidars  
91. Application of certain sections to biswadars .—(1) The provisions of sections 62, 66, 67, 69 to 
77, 81, 87 to 90 and 108 to 112 shall apply to a biswadar  in relation to a  jagirdar or a muafidar, as if in 
such sections for the word „tenant ‟, the word ‘biswadar’ and for the word „landlord ‟ or „landholder ‟ the 
word „jagirdar’ or ‘muafidar’, as the ease may be, and for the word “rent” the words “revenue payable by 
a biswadar ”, were substituted.  32 
 (2) The amount of a decree for arrears of revenue passed against a biswadar, if not satisfied within 
thirty days of the date when such decree becomes final shall, on the application of the decree -holder, be 
recovered by the tahsildar  as arrears of revenue and paid to the person entitled.  
CHAPTER IX  
EJECTMENT OF TENANTS  
General  
92. Arrears deemed satisfied when tenant is e jected .—Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 94, when a tenant is ejected from his holding for non -payment of arrears of rent, all arrears, 
whether decreed or not, and irrigation dues due in respect of such holding on the date of ejectment shall 
be deemed to have been satisfied.  
93. Decree for arrears, how executed .—No decree for arrears of rent shall be executed against a 
tenant otherwise than in the manner provided by section 98.  
94. Adjustm ent of arrears and compensation on ejectment .—(1) A court, deciding any proceeding 
under this Act by which a tenant is ejected from his holding or part thereof shall, before passing an order 
of ejectment, award the amount of compensation due to him on acco unt of an improvement, a tree or a 
crop belonging to him and existing on such holding:  
Provided that if, on the date of such order, no arrears of rent, decreed o r undecreed, or irrigation dues 
are outstanding against him on account of such holding and ther e is a tree or crop upon the land, he may 
cut and remove such tree and, subject to such payment and such other terms as the court passing the order 
may specify, use such land for tending, gathering and removing such crop.  
(2) If, on such date, any such arr ears are outstanding against the tenant and the amount of 
compensation awarded to him under sub -section ( 1) exceeds the amount recoverable from him as such 
arrears, the order for ejectment shall be conditional on the payment into court by the landholder of  the 
balance due to the tenant within such time as the court may direct; and if the amount of such 
compensation does not exceed such arrears, any claim for compensation made by the tenant shall be 
deemed to have been satisfied on his ejectment.  
95. Entry o f landholder on land from which tenant is ordered to be ejected .—(1) A landholder 
may enter upon possession of a holding or part thereof from which a tenant is ordered to be ejected:  
Provided that he shall not enter upon such holding or part unless — 
(a) in a case to which the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 94 applies, the tenant has gathered 
and removed the crop in due course of husbandry; and  
(b) the amount of compensation, if any, awarded by the court has been paid into court or adjusted 
in accorda nce with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 94.  
(2) If the amount of compensation awarded under sub -section ( 1) of section 94 has not been paid into 
court or adjusted in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of that section, the order of ejectment shal l be 
cancelled, and the landholder shall be liable to pay to the tenant the cost of the proceedings which shall be 
collected as arrears of revenue and paid to the tenant.  
(3) If the tenant offers any resistance or obstruction to entry on land on which a la ndholder has 
become entitled to enter under sub -section ( 1), the court passing the order of ejectment shall, on the 
application of the landholder, direct that such landholder be put into possession of such land and where he 
is still resisted or obstructed in obtaining possession, the court may, at his instance, order the tenant to be 
detained in the civil prison under rule 98 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908).  
(4) The court hearing any proceeding by which a tenant is ejected from  his holding or part thereof 
shall decide all disputes arising under section 94 or this section and such decision shall be subject to 
confirmation by the court to which the record of such proceeding is submitted for confirmation.  33 
 Grounds of ejectment  
96. Grounds of ejectment .—A tenant shall be liable to ejectment from his holding on one or more of 
the following grounds: — 
(a) that a final decree against him for arrears of rent in respect of that holding had remained 
unsatisfied; or  
(b) that he is guilty of  any act detrimental to the land in that holding, or inconsistent with the 
purpose for which it was let; or  
(c) where rent is payable by batai, that for three successive years he has, without sufficient cause, 
failed to cultivate his holding; or  
(d) that he or any person holding from him has broken a condition on breach of which he is, by 
special contract which is not contrary to the provisions of section 8, liable to be ejected; or  
(e) that he has sub -let or otherwise transferred his holding or part there of in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the use of one -twentieth part of a plot included in a holding for growing grass or for the 
construction of enclosures on such part for stock raising, or for any purpose subservient to agricul ture, 
shall not constitute a ground for ejectment under clause ( b). 
97. Special grounds of ejectment of non -occupancy tenants .—A non -occupancy tenant, other than 
a sub -tenant to whom the provisions of section 32 apply, shall be liable to ejectment on the g round that he 
holds only as a tenant from year to year, or under a lease which has expired or will expire by the end of 
the current agricultural year.  
98. Procedure in ejectment for decreed arrears .—(1) Immediately after a decree for arrears of rent 
passed  under section 77, 79, 81 or 85 has become final , the tahsildar  shall cause a notice to be served on 
the tenant stating the amount due under the decree, and requiring him, within two months from the service 
of the notice, to pay such amount into court.  
(2) If the amount is so paid, the tahsildar  shall record satisfaction on the decree and grant a receipt 
therefore which shall operate as an acquittance for the amount deposited as if such amount had been 
received by the decree holder and pay such amount to t he person entitled to receive it.  
(3) If the amount is not so paid by the tenant the tahsildar  shall order his ejectment from his holding 
or part thereof as prescribed and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him 
to the sub -divisional officer.  
(4) The sub -divisional officer may — 
(a) on the application of the tenant, extend the tithe for the payment of the decretal amount for a 
period, not exceeding two months from the date of such order; or  
(b) allow payment into court of su ch amount by installments and specify the time for payment 
thereof; or  
(c) confirm the order of ejectment.  
(5) If the sub -divisional officer by order extends the time for the payment of the decretal amount or 
allows payment by installments and such order i s duly complied with, the order of ejectment shall be set 
aside.  
(6) If the decretal amount or any installment is not paid into court within the period allowed under 
clause ( a) or ( b) of sub -section ( 4), the sub -divisional officer shall confirm the order o f ejectment.  
99. Procedure for ejectment on other grounds .—(1) When a landholder desires to eject a tenant on 
one or more of the grounds specified in clauses ( b) to ( c) of section 96, he shall file an application in the 
court of the sub -divisional officer containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  34 
 (2) If the sub -divisional officer finds that the tenants is liable to ejectment, he shall pass a conditional 
order for his ejectment either from the entire holding or from such portion thereof, as, having r egard to all 
the circumstances of the case, he considers desirable and shall also direct that — 
(i) in the case of an order under clause ( b), (c) or ( d) of section 96, the tenant shall repair the 
damage, or pay such compensation as the court may direct with in two months from the date of the 
order, or such further time as the court may, for reasons to be recorded allow; and  
(ii) in the case of an order under clause ( e) of that section, the tenant shall obtain surrender of, or 
eject the sub -lessee or other tra nsferee from, the holding or part thereof which is sub -let or otherwise 
transferred in contravention of the provisions of this Act and resume possession of such holding or 
part, as the case may be, within such time as the court may specify.  
(3) If the sub -divisional officer is satisfied that the tenant has complied with the order passed under 
sub-section ( 2), he shall cancel the order of ejectment, but if he is not so satisfied, he shall make the order 
of ejectment absolute and shall, in either case, submit  the record for confirmation of the order passed by 
him to the collector:  
Provided that no application for ejectment shall be entertained on the ground mentioned in clause ( c) 
of section 96, i f the landholder has recovered u nder section 85 the arrears of rent for the period the tenant 
has failed to cultivate his holding.  
100. Application for ejectment of non -occupancy tenant .—A landholder who desires to eject a 
non-occupancy tenant to whom section 97 applies may, in the month of May, make an application in 
duplicate to the tahsildar  stating the following particulars: — 
(a) the name, description and place of residence of the land holder;  
(b) the name, description and place of residence of the tenant;  
(c) a description of the holding, specifying the name of the village, the rent payable, and, unless 
the holding can be otherwise adequately described, the khasra  number and area of eac h field; and  
(d) the ground on which ejectment is applied for.  
101. Procedure on application .—(1) The tahsildar  shall send one copy of the application to the 
tenant and inform him that he may file objections, if any, within thirty days of the receipt of su ch 
application.  
(2) It the tenant admits his liability to ejectment, or has not appeared within such period, the tahsildar 
shall pass an order for his ejectment.  
(3) If the tenant contests his liability to ejectment on the ground that he is not a tenant, o r claims 
occupancy, exproprietary or hereditary rights, or denies the right of the landholder to eject, the tahsildar 
shall forward the record to the sub -divisional officer for trial of the case.  
(4) On receipt of the record, the sub -divisional officer sha ll hear and decide the case and submit the 
record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
(5) If the liability to ejectment is contested on any other ground, the tahsildar  shall decide the case 
and submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
Remedies for wrongful ejectment  
102. Remedies for wrongful ejectment .—A tenant ejected by his landholder, otherwise than in 
accordance w ith the provisions of this Act may, within one year of such ejectment, apply to the            
sub-divisional officer — 
(a) for possession of the holding;  
(b) for compensation for wrongful dispossession; and  
(c) for compensation for any improvement he may have made, or for a tree belonging to him.  35 
 103. Procedure on application .—(1) If the court finds that the tenant has been wrongfully ejecte d, it 
shall proceed as follows: — 
(a) if the tenant is not entitled to remain  in possession after the expiry of the agricultural year in 
which the order is passed, the order shall not be for recovery of possession, but for costs only, or, if 
compensation has been claimed and found due, for compensation and costs only;  
(b) when the order is for recovery of possession, compensation, if claimed and found due, may be 
awarded for wrongful dispossession but not for an improvement or a tree;  
(c) where an order is given for compensation for wrongful dispossession, but not for possession, 
the compensation shall be for the whole period during which the tenant was entitled to remain in 
possession.  
(2) If the order is for recovery of possession, the sub -divisional officer shall put the tenant wrongfully 
ejected in possession.  
(3) After the decis ion of the case, the sub -divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation 
of the order passed by him to the collector.  
(4) Any amount awarded as compensation shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the 
person entitled.  
Ejectment of person occupying land without title  
104. Ejectment of person occupying land without title .—(1) A person, other than a landholder 
mentioned in section 102, taking or retaining possession of a plot of land otherwise than in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act shall, on the application made to the sub -divisional officer, be liable to 
ejectment and also to pay damages.  
(2) Such application shall be made — 
(a) if the unauthorised occupation has existed from a date prior to the commencement of this Act, 
within two years of the commencement of this Act;  
(b) in any other case, within three years from the date when the unauthorised occupation first 
began.  
105. Procedure on application .—(1) If, on application under section 104, the sub -divisional officer 
is satisfied that any person taking or retaining possession of a plot of land is liable to ejectment, he shall 
order the ejectment of such person and award damages which may extend to four times the annual rental 
value of such plot, calculated in accordance w ith the sanctioned rates applicable to hereditary tenants.  
(2) If, on the date of the order of ejectment, there is any ungathered crop or other produce belonging 
to the person ordered to be ejected, the applicant shall become owner thereof.  
(3) The sub -divisional officer shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed 
by him to the collector.  
(4) Any damages awarded under this section shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to the 
person entitled.  
106. Consequences of failure to file application under section 102 or 104 .—If no application 
under section 102 or 104 is made within the period of limitation prescribed therefore, and the person 
ejecting the tenant from, or taking or retaining possession of, l and, otherwise than in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, cultivates such land, such person shall become — 
(i) if he possesses proprietary interest in such land, khudkasht -holder; or  
(ii) if he does not possess proprietary or tenancy interest in su ch land, a hereditary tenant.  
107. No separate relief claimable, if not claimed in revenue court .—A person who has made an 
application under section 102 or 104, shall not be entitled to institute a separate suit or proceeding in a 
civil court for any relief which he might and ought to have claimed and has not claimed.  36 
 CHAPTER X  
COMPENSATION AND PENALTIES  
108. Tenant’s right to claim inquiry for illegal exaction and other matters .—If any landholder or 
his agent— 
(i) dishonestly collects a premium prohib ited by this Act, or any sum, or produce in excess of the 
amount which is due as arrears of rent, or as sayar, or 
(ii) charges interest on an arrear of rent, not expressly allowed by this Act or at a rate exceeding 
that allowed by this Act, or  
(iii) realis es, by proceedings in court or otherwise, any rent of which payment has been remitted, 
or, before the expiry of the period of suspension, any rent of which payment has been suspended 
under the provisions of this Act, or  
(iv) habitually refuses or neglects to deliver to the tenant a receipt, or does not prepare and retain 
a counterfoil of the receipt in the manner prescribed by this Act, or  
(v) without reasonable cause, credits or applies a payment made towards rent otherwise than in 
accordance, with the pro visions of this Act,  
the sub -divisional officer shall, on the application of the tenant, if made within six months of the 
contravention of the provision of this Act to which the complaint relates, institute an inquiry and, if he is 
satisfied that the charg e is established, shall award to the tenant monetary compensation not exceeding 
two hundred rupees and submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the 
collector.  
109. Power to award compensation in proceedings for arrears o f rent .—(1) If, in the course of 
proceedings for the realisation of arrears of rent, the trial or the confirming court finds that the landholder 
has committed any of the acts enumerated in clauses ( i) to ( v) of section 108, it may award to the tenant 
compe nsation, not exceeding one hundred rupees.  
(2) If such compensation is awarded by the trial court, the record of the case shall be submitted for 
confirmation of the order passed by it to the sub -divisional officer, and if by the confirming court, to the 
collector.  
110. Prosecution of landholder for illegal exaction .—If a landholder or his agent collects from a 
tenant any lag or neg, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence of extortion within the meaning 
of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).  
111. Compensation for exaction by landholder and for false complaint by tenant .—(1) If a 
landholder compels his tenant to render any service, or makes use of any cattle or any agricultural 
implement of his tenant against the will of such tenant, whether for remuneration or not, the                   
sub-divisional officer shall, on the application of the tenant made within one month of such service or use 
and on the charge being established, award to the tenant a sum, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as 
compensation.  
(2) If, as a result of inquiry, the sub -divisional officer finds that the complaint is false, and either 
vexatious or frivolous, he shall award to the landholder a sum, not exceeding one hundred rupees, as 
compensation.  
(3) After deciding the  case, the sub -divisional officer shall submit the record for confirmation of the 
order passed by him to the collector.  
112. Penalty for habitual infringement of rights of tenant .—If a landlord habitually infringes the 
rights of a tenant under this Act, he  shall, notwithstanding anything in section 7 of the Ajmere 
Government Wards Regulation, 1888 (I of 1888), be deemed to be a “landlord who is disqualified to 
manage his own property ” within the meaning of section 6 of the said Regulation and his property s hall 
be liable to be taken under the superintendence of the Court of Wards.  37 
 113. Penalty for illegal entry on a holding .—(1) A tenant against whom an order of ejectment from 
a holding or any portion thereof has become final and who re -enters into or remain s in occupation of such 
holding or such portion, as the case may be, without the written, consent of the person entitled to admit 
him as tenant, shall be deemed to have committed an offence of criminal trespass within the meaning of 
the Indian Penal Code ( Act XLV of 1860).  
(2) If a landholder enters upon a holding in the possession of a tenant with the object of dispossessing 
him of such holding, otherwise than under the provisions of this Act, such landholder shall be deemed to 
have committed an offence of  criminal trespass within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.  
(3) Where a person is convicted of such offence and it appears to the court convicting him that the 
tenant or the landholder has, by reason of anything done in the course of the commission of the offence, 
been dispossessed of any land, the court shall order such tenant or landholder to be reinstated in such 
land.  
114. Compensation, how reali sable.—Any compensation awarded under this Chapter shall be 
recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to t he person entitled.  
CHAPTER XI  
GRANTS  
115. Exemption of muafidar .—The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a muafidar.  
116. Interpretation .—(1) A rent-free grant means a grant by a landlord of a right to hold land rent -
free with or without consideration.  
(2) A grant of land at a favourable rate of rent means a grant held at a rent which, at the time when 
such grant was made, was below the rent gene rally payable by a tenant -at-will for land of the same class 
in the neighbourhood.  
(3) A village service grant means a grant made rent -free or at a favourable rate of rent on condition of 
rendering any service to the village community.  
117. Grant which can not be resumed .—(1) No claim shall be entertained for the resumption of        
a grant— 
(a) in khalsa  area, if such grant has been held from a date prior to 1818; or  
(b) in any other part of the State, if such grant has been held from a date prior to 1874; or  
(c) which is hereditary and was made out of personal regard for the grantee or in lieu of his past 
services and loyalty to the grantor and big family; or  
(d) which is h eld unconditionally; or  
(e) which is not resumable under the terms of the grant; or  
(f) to a charitable institution or for the maintenance of a sacred building so long as such institution 
or building exists.  
(2) A holder of a grant to which clause ( a), (b), (c), (d) or ( e) of sub -section ( 1) applies and who has 
continuously been in  possession thereof for twenty -five years immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, may, on an application made within one year of such commencement and on payment of 
compensation adjudged under sub -section ( 3), be declared a biswadar  of such grant and shall, on such 
declaration, be liable to pay such revenue as may be fixed thereon.  
(3) The compensation to be paid under sub -section ( 2) shall be four times the annual re ntal value of 
such grant, calculated at sanctioned rates applicable to hereditary tenants.  
(4) On a declaration being made under sub -section ( 2), the sub -tenant, if any, of such grant shall 
become a hereditary tenant thereof.  38 
 (5) When land revenue is fixed  on a grant in respect of which a declaration is made, the proprietor of 
such grant shall as prescribed be entitled to claim reduction in the revenue payable by him by an amount 
equal to the amount of revenue fixed under sub -section ( 2). 
118. Grounds on which certain grants may be resumed .—Subject to the provisions of section 117, 
a landlord may apply for the resumption of a grant — 
(i) in case of a grant held for the performance of religious service, on the ground — 
(a) that  the object for which the grant was made has ceased to exist; or  
(b) that the grantee has died, leaving no heir entitled to succeed him under the law applicable 
to the deceased; or  
(c) that the grantee has ceased to render the service which he is bound to render;  
(ii) in case of a grant for the performance of secular service, on the ground that the landlord no 
longer requires such service or the grantee has ceased to render such service;  
(iii) in case of a village service grant, on the ground that the grant ee has ceased to render the 
service;  
(iv) in case of a grant held for the life -time of the grantee or for a term, on the ground that the 
grantee has died or the term has expired, as the case may be;  
(v) in case the grant is held at the pleasure of the gran tor, on the ground that it is so held;  
(vi) in case of a grant to which the provisions of clause ( f) of section 117 apply, on the ground 
that the institution or the building has ceased to exist.  
119. How to deal with resumable grant .—If the trial court fin ds on Inquiry that the grant is 
resumable under section 118, it shall — 
(i) in a case  to which the provisions of sub -clause ( a) or ( b) of clause ( i), or clause ( ii), (iv), (v)      
or (vi) of section 118 apply, declare the person in possession — 
(a) a hereditary tenant if, on the date of the application for resumption, such person has been 
in continuous occupation of such grant for twelve years or more; or  
(b) as holding without title, if the period of his occupation on such date is less than twelve 
years, and order his ejectment from such grant; and  
(ii) in a case to which the provisions of sub -clause ( c) of clause ( i) or clause ( iii) of section 118 
apply, order the ejectment of the grantee and appoint a suitable successor in office with or without the  
consent of the landlord, as the court deems fit.  
120. Application of certain Chapters and sections to grantees .—(1) A grantee may — 
(i) obtain a declaration of his status;  
(ii) make improvements and claim compensation therefore;  
(iii) plant trees;  
(iv) claim reinstatement in his holding, if wrongfully dispossessed; and  
(v) eject a person taking or retaining possession of his land in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act and claim damages , 
and the respective provisions of the Act relating to such ma tters shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to him as 
they apply to a hereditary tenant.  
(2) The provisions of Parts II and III of Chapter VIII and of section 62 and sections 108 to 110 and 
sections 164 to 168 shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to a grantee at a favo urable rate of rent as they apply to 
a hereditary tenant.  39 
 (3) The provisions of sections 88, 89 and 111 and of Chapters XIV and XV, so far as they are 
applicable, shall apply to a grantee as they apply to a hereditary tenant.  
(4) The amount of a decree for  arrears of rent passed against a grantee at a favourable rate of rent, if 
not satisfied within four months of the date on which such decree becomes final, shall, on an application 
to the tahsildar,  be recovered under sections 88 and 89 as if it were a sum  due on account of sayar  and 
paid to the person entitled.  
121. Grants, how far transferable .—(1) Except as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), no grantee 
shall transfer by sale, mortgage, gift or otherwise his interest in a grant which is liable to resumption 
under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No grantee shall let the whole or any portion of his holding for a term exceeding three years, or 
within three years of any portion of such holding being held by a sub -tenant.  
122. Void transactions .—A trans action by which a grantee transfers or lets his holding or a portion 
thereof in contravention of the provisions of section 121 shall be void.  
123. Power to hear cases of grantees .—An application under section 117, 118 or 120, shall be 
entertained, heard an d decided by the sub -divisional officer who shall submit the record of the case for 
confirmation of the order or the decree passed by him to the collector.  
CHAPTER XII  
PREPARATION OF RECORD -OF-RIGHTS AND DETERMINATION AND MODIFICATION OF RENT AND  
RENT -RATES  
124. Applicability of Part III .—No notification under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 shall be made in 
respect of Part III of this Chapter, unless, in the area to which such part is applied, rent -rates have been 
determined and the record -of-rights has be en framed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that if the Chief Commissioner is satisfied that in such area the rent -rates determined in the 
year of settlement and the record -of-rights framed in such year and maintained since are re liable, he may 
accept such rent -rates, with or without modification, and such record -of-rights, as framed and determined 
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
PART I.—Preparation and maintenance of maps and records  
125. Power to form and alter Patwaris  circles .—The collector may, with the previous sanction of 
the Chief Commissioner, divide the area of the State into mahals, thoks  or other convenient units, and 
arrange them into girdawars ‟ and patwaris ‟ circles and may al ter the number and limits of such circles, 
but no such division, arrangement or alteration shall be final unless it has been sanctioned by the Chief 
Commissioner.  
126. Appointment of patwaris .—The collector shall appoint a patwari  to each circle for preparing 
and maintaining the record -of-rights and registers specified in this Act and for performing such other 
duties as the Chief Commissioner may prescribe.  
127. Appointment of  girdawars .—The collector shall appoint one or more girdawars  in each tahsil  
for the proper supervision, maintenance and correction of the annual registers and records, and for such 
other duties as the Chief Commissioner may prescribe.  
128. Cadre and pay of girdawars  and patwaris .—The Chief Commissioner may fix  the cadre, 
grades and pay of girdawars  and patwaris  and other staff required for the preparation and maintenance of 
the record -of-rights.  
129. Girdawars  and patwaris  to be public servants .—Every  girdawar  and patwari  shall be deemed 
to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).  
130. Maintenance of maps and fieldbooks .—The collector shall maintain a map and a field book of 
each village in the State and shall cause annually, or at  such longer intervals as may be prescribed, to be 
recorded therein all changes in the boundaries of each village, mahal  or field, and shall correct any error 
in such map or field book.  40 
 131. Obligation of owners as to boundary marks .—(1) Every landlord of a village, mahal or field 
is bound to maintain and keep in repair the permanent boundary marks and the collector may at any time 
order such landlord — 
(a) to erect proper boundary marks on such village, mahal  or field; or  
(b) to repair or renew, in such for m and with such material as he may order all such boundary 
marks.  
(2) If such order is not complied with within thirty days from the communication thereof, or such 
longer period as the collector may allow, he shall cause such boundary marks to be erected, repaired or 
renewed, and shall recover the charges incurred from the landlord concerned as arrears of revenue.  
(3) Survey marks shall, as prescribed, be maintained and kept in repair by the collector.  
132. Record -of-rights .—(1) There shall be a record -of-rights for each village, or if a mahal or other 
unit formed under section 125 consists of two or more villages or portions of villages, the record may be 
prepared for each such village or portion separately.  
(2) The record -of-rights shall include the follow ing documents: — 
(i) a khewat  which shall comprise — 
(a) a register of all the proprietors in the village, including the proprietors of specific areas, 
and, in estates mentioned in the Second Schedule, maintenance -holders; and  
(b) a register of jagirdars  and muafidars.  
(ii) a khatauni  which shall be a register of persons cultivating or occupying land as tenants or 
otherwise; and  
(iii) a wajib -ul-arz which shall be a record of customs obtaining in the State or any part thereof.  
Explanation. —In this section the word “proprietor ” shall include a person in possession of 
proprietary rights under a mortgage or lease.  
133. Contents of certain registers .—The registers specified in clauses ( i) and ( ii) or sub -section ( 2) 
of section 132 shall specify the nature and extent of the interest of each person recorded therein and shall 
be prepared in the prescribed form.  
134. Registers of revenue -paying, revenue -assigned and revenue -free villages .—The collector 
shall prepare and maintain — 
(a) a register of al l revenue -paying villages, mahals, thoks  or other units, specifying the revenue 
assessed on each and the person by, or through whom it is payable; and  
(b) a register of all revenue -free and revenue -assigned villages and areas, specifying the authority 
and conditions for exemption or assignment as the case may be.  
135. The annual registers .—(1) The collector shall be responsible for maintaining the               
record -of-rights specified in clauses ( i) and ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 132, and, for th at purpose, 
shall annually, or at such longer intervals as may be prescribed, cause to be prepared an amen ded set of 
such registers, and the registers so prepared shall be called annual registers.  
(2) The collector shall cause to be recorded in the annual registers all changes that may take place as a 
result of succession or transfer or otherwise, and shall correct any error in such registers.  
(3) No entry in the wajib -ul-arz shall be altered except as a result of inquiry in any settlement or 
record operati ons in the State.  
136. Obligation to furnish information necessary for compilation of certain                           
record -of-rights .—(1) Every person, obtaining possession by succession or transfer of any proprietary or 
other right which is re quired b y this Act or any rule made thereunder to be recorded in any register 
prescribed by clause ( i) or clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 132, shall report such succession or 
transfer to the prescribed authority. If such person is a minor or otherwise  disqualified, the guardian in 
charge of his property shall make such report.  41 
 (2) Every such person, or, if he is a minor or otherwise disqualified, his guardian, shall furnish, on the 
requisition of the patwari,  girdawar  or any other  officer or employee of the revenue department, engaged 
in compiling such register, all information necessary for the correct compilation thereof.  
(3) No revenue court shall entertain any application under this Act by the person so succeeding or 
otherwise obtaining possession, un til such person, or, if he is a minor or otherwise disqualified, his 
guardian, has made a report required by this section.  
Explanation. —In this section, the word “transfer ” shall include a family settlement.  
137. Decision of disputes .—All disputes affectin g the entries in the annual registers shall be decided 
in the following manner: — 
(i) those relating to entries to be made in the khewat,  on the basis of possession or, if possession is 
doubtful, on the basis of summary inquiry into the question of title;  
(ii) those relating to class or tenure of any tenant, the rent payable by him or any other matter to 
be recorded in the khatauni , in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the terms of the lease, if 
any, so far as they are consistent with such provi sions; and  
(iii) those relating to boundaries, on the basis of the survey map, and in case one was not prepared 
or is not available, on the basis of actual possession.  
138. Inquiry into cases .—(1) Contested cases relating to entries in the annual registers  and to 
boundary disputes shall be heard and decided by the sub -divisional officer who shall submit the record of 
the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
(2) Uncontested cases shall be disposed of by the tahsildar.  
139. Certa in decisions, no bar to civil suit .—No entry made or order passed under section 138, 
relating to entries in the khewat , or to boundary disputes, shall debar any person from establishing his 
right to any property in a court of competent jurisdiction.  
140. Value of entries and decisions in contested cases .—Subject to the provisions of section 139, 
the decision given under sub -section ( 1) of section 138 shall be binding on the parties to the dispute and 
an entry made in the khewat  or khatauni  under the order o f the sub -divisional officer or the collector in a 
contested case shall be presumed to be correct until the contrary is proved.  
141. Appointment and punishment of lambardars  and patels .—The collector may appoint one or 
more lambardars  or patels  in a village, mahal  or thok and may suspend, remove or dismiss them.  
PART II. —Record and rent -rate operations and the appointment of officers  
142. Record and rent -rate operations .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, order that in any estate mentioned in the Second Schedule or group of such estates or in 
any other area of the State, a preparation or revision of the record -of-rights or survey or re -survey, or the 
determination of rent -rates for any class or classes of s oils, or some or all of these operations be taken in 
hand, whether by revision of the most recent records and rent -rates or otherwise, and may appoint an 
officer as a record officer or rent -rate officer to be in charge of record or rent -rate operations, as  the case 
may be, and as many assistant record officers as it deems fit.  
(2) From the date of the notification every such estate or group of estates or other area shall be held to 
be under record, or rent -rate operations or both, as the case may be, until the issue of another notification, 
declaring such operations to be closed therein.  
143. Powers of the record officer, assistant record officer and rent -rate officer .—(1) For such 
period and to such extent as he deems fit, the Chief Commissioner may empower  the record officer or the 
rent-rate officer — 
(i) to perform the duties and exercise the powers of a collector under Part I of this Chapter; and  
(ii) to commute, abate, enhance and determine rents in accordance with the provisions of Part III 
of this Chapt er in any area to which such Part has been applied.  42 
 (2) An assistant record officer shall exercise such powers of the record officer or any other revenue 
court as the Chief Commissioner may, by order in writing, specify, and shall submit the record of case s 
decided by him to the record officer for confirmation.  
144. Sanctioned rates .—The sanctioned rates shall be the rates determined under this Part:  
Provided that if in any part of the State such rates have not been determined, a revenue court requiring 
the use of such rates, otherwise than for deciding abatement, enhancement or commutation of rent cases, 
shall in the manner prescribed work out appropriate rates after making local inspection and considering 
the rent generally payable by tenants of the same c lass for land of the same class in the vicinity, and the 
rates so worked out shall be deemed to be the sanctioned rates.  
145. Duration of rent -rates .—When rent -rates are determined for any area, they shall not, unless the 
Central Government otherwise directs, be determined again until a period of not less than twenty years 
has elapsed.  
Procedure in determining cash rent -rates  
146. Circle and soil classification .—(1) If, any estate or group of estates or any other area for which 
rent-rates in money are to be determined, has not been divided into assessment circles, or, if classification 
of the soil thereof has not been made, or if the Central Government orders a revision of the existing 
circles or soil classification or both, the rent -rate officer shall make circles and classify she soils, and shall 
propose rent -rates for each class of soil in each circle.  
(2) If such estate, group of estates or area has previously been divided into assessment circles, the 
rent-rate officer shall propose separate rates fo r each circle, and for each separate class of soil previously 
demarcated therein, unless, by order of the Central Government, the circles or the classification of soils, 
or both are revised by him.  
147. Basis of rates for hereditary tenants .—(1) The rates proposed by the rent -rate officer for 
hereditary tenants shall be based on genuine and stable rents paid by such tenants.  
(2) In proposing rates in accordance with sub -section ( 1), the rent -rate officer shall have regard to the 
provisions of sections 63 an d 64 and shall, before framing his proposals, take into consideration — 
(a) the value of the produce with a view to seeing that the valuation of the holdings of hereditary 
tenants at the proposed rates does not exceed one -fifth of such value;  
(b) the prices of agricultural produce prevailing in the main markets of the neighbourhood;  
(c) the changes in the crops grown and in the amount of the produce;  
(d) the rotation of crops and periods of rest which tenants usually allow to land;  
(e) the average siz e of holdings in the circle and methods of cultivation;  
(f) the results of crop -cutting experiments in the local area for which rates are proposed and in the 
different parts of the State generally;  
(g) the level of bighori  rates, if payable in any particul ar area in respect of certain crops; and  
(h) such other matters as generally affect rents payable by tenants.  
(3) In proposing rates for occupancy and exproprietary tenants, the rent -rate officer shall have regard 
to the scale of rents prescribed for such tenants in relation to the scale of rent payable by hereditary 
tenants under sections 63 and 64.  
(4) The rent -rate officer shall also record for each village whether the rates proposed by him are 
applicable without modification to the village as a whole or  to a specified area or class of soil therein, and 
in case they require modification, the extent of such modification; and, in th eir application to such village, 
area or class, the rates shall be deemed to be modified accordingly.  
  43 
  
148. Provision for rates in special cases .—The rent -rate officer shall propose rates for the 
commutation of — 
(a) rent paid by batai,  or partly by batai  and partly by bighori,  into fixed money rent; and  
(b) rent paid by batai  into bighori  at current rates.  
149. Procedure in publishing and sanctioning rates .—(1) The rent -rate officer shall publish, in 
such manner as may be prescribed, the proposals and records made by him under sections 147 and 148 
and shall receive and consider any objection which may be made to  him. 
(2) When such objections, if any, have been considered and disposed of, the rent -rate officer shall 
submit the proposals and records made by him after such modification, if any, as he may deem fit, to the 
Chief Commissioner.  
(3) On receipt of the pro posals, the Chief Commissioner may direct further inquiry into any of the 
matters contained therein and shall, if satisfied that such proposals have been rightly framed, submit them 
to the Central Government for acceptance.  
(4) The Central Government shall  either sanction the proposed circles, soil classification, rates and 
other matters recorded under sections 147 and 148, or may, for reasons to be recorded, sanction them with 
such modification as it deems fit, and the rates so sanctioned shall be sanction ed rates.  
150. Civil suit relating to record -of-rights and certain other matters barred .—Subject to the 
provisions of section 139, no suit shall be brought in any civil court in respect of any matter concerning 
the entries in, or preparation of, a record -of-rights, the framing, publication, signing or attestation of such 
record or of any part of it, or the determination of rent -rates under the provisions of this Chapter.  
PART III.—Commutation, abatement, enhancement, and determination of rent  
151. Commutation of rent from kind to cash .—(1) Where an occupancy, an exproprietary or a 
hereditary tenant has heretofore paid his rent by bighori  or batai,  or partly by bighori  and partly by  batai,  
he may apply for the commutation of such rent to a fixed money  rent: 
Provided that in an area where rents are paid by bighori  for some crops and by batai  for others, the 
tenant may elect to have that portion of the rent which is payable by batai  alone commuted into bighori  
on the basis of sanctioned rates appropriate to him, and in such case the court shall commute that portion 
which is payable by batai  by fixing a rate of rent per bigha  for batai  crops grown on the holding.  
152. Commutation of rent from cash to kind .—Where  the rent of an occupancy, an exproprietary 
or a hereditary tenant has been commuted under section 151, he may, subject to the provisions of       
clause ( ii) of section 161, apply that the rent of such holding be declared as payable by batai  in 
accordance  with the provisions of sections 63 and 64, or, if before commutation it was payable partly by 
bighori  and partly by batai,  in the manner it was payable before such commutation, and the court shall 
make such declaration.  
153. Grounds of abatement of fixed money rent .—The fixed money rent or the bighori,  determined 
under section 151, of an occupancy, an exproprietary of a hereditary tenant shall be liable to abatement on 
one or more of the following grounds: — 
(a) that  the rent payable by the tenant is substantially greater than the rent calculated at the 
sanctioned rates appropriate to him; or  
(b) that the productive power of the land held by the tenant has decreased by any cause beyond 
the control of the tenant during  the currency of the present rent; or  
(c) in case of fixed money rent, that the area of his holding has been decreased by diluvion, or by 
the taking up of land for a public purpose, or for a work of public utility.  
  44 
 154. Ground of enhancement of fixed mon ey rent .—The fixed money rent of the bighori,  
determined under section 151, of an occupancy, an exproprietary or a hereditary tenant, shall be liable to 
enhancement on one or more of the following grounds: — 
(a) that  the rent payable by the tenant is substantially less than the rent calculated at the 
sanctioned rates appropriate to him; or  
(b) that the productive power of the land held by the tenant has increased by an improvement 
effected by, or at the expense of, th e land  holder, other than a work in respect of which irrigation dues 
are payable under section 87 or which is carried out under the scheme sanctioned by the             
Central Government under section 5 of the Delhi and Ajmer -Merwars  Land Development               
Act, 1948 (LXVI of 1948); or  
(c) in case of fixed money rent, that the area of the holding has been increased by alluvion.  
155. Order for determination, commutation or variation of rent, when to take effect .—Except as 
otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3) of section 163, every order for abatement, enhancement, 
commutation or determination of rent shall take effect from the commencement of the agricultural year, 
next following the date of such order.  
156. Joinder of parties in cases relating to variation of rent .—(1) An application for commutation, 
abatement or enhancement of rent may be made against, or by, any number of tenants collectively:  
Provided that all such tenants are tenants of the same landholder, and all the holdings in respect of 
which the application is made are situated in the same village.  
(2) No order shall be passed in any such proceeding affecting the interest of any person, unless the 
court is satisfied that he has had an opportunity of being heard.  
(3) The order shall specify  the extent to which each of the holdings is affected thereby.  
157. Determination of rent on partial ejectment .—When a tenant is ejected under an order of a 
court from a part only of his holding which is assessed to fixed money rent, or being entitled to s urrender 
a part of such holding legally surrenders such part, either he or his landholder may apply for the 
determinations of the rent of the remainder.  
158. Rent, how calculated for commutation, variation or determination .—Subject to the 
provisions of sec tions 160 and 163, when rent is to be determined or commuted into fixed money rent, or 
the fixed money rent or the bighori  determined under section 151 is to be abated or enhanced, the court 
shall calculate the rent — 
(a) in the case of hereditary tenants, in accordance with the rates sanctioned for hereditary 
tenants; and  
(b) in case of occupancy and exproprietary tenants, in accordance with rates which shall conform 
to the scale prescribed for such tenants in relation to hereditary tenants under the provis ions of 
sections 63 and 64:  
Provided that, for special reasons to be recorded, the court may modify the sanctioned rates applicable 
to any particular case, and it shall modify such rates if it finds that, as a result of their application, the rent 
arrived at on commutation, abatement, enhancement or determination, as the case may be, is substantially 
different from the money value of the rent payable by the same class of tenants under the provisions of 
sections 63 and 64.  
159. Meaning of “substantial ” in certain sections .—For the purposes of sections 153, 154 and 158 
a difference of ten per cent . or more shall be deemed to be substantial.  
160. Basis of variation of rent in certain cases .—(1) In any proceedings for abatement of fixed 
money rent on the g round that the area of the holding has decreased by diluvion or by the taking up of 
land for a public purpose or for a work of public utility, or under the provisions of section 37, or for 
enhancement on the ground that the area of the holding has increase d by alluvion, the court shall abate or 
enhance the rent with reference to the existing rent and the decrease or increase in the area of the holding.  45 
 (2) In any proceedings for enhancement of fixed money rent or the bighori  determined under       
section 1 51 on the ground that the productive power of the holding has increased by an improvement 
effected by, or at the expense of, the landholder or for abatement of rent on the ground that such power 
has decreased by any cause beyond the control of the tenant, the court shall enhance or abate the rent with 
reference to the existing rent and the increase or decrease of the productive power.  
(3) In an application for the determination of the fixed money rent of a portion of a holding under 
section 157, the court s hall determine the rent with reference to the rent payable before ejectment or 
surrender and the loss of area  due to such ejectment or surrender.  
161. Period for which rent is not liable to modification .—Save as provided in section 163, when 
the rent of an occupancy, an exproprietary or a hereditary tenant has been commuted, abated or enhanced 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall not be liable to be commuted, abated or enhanced 
unless— 
(i) in case of abatement or enhancement of rent — 
(a) the revenue payable by the landlord has been revised; or  
(b) there has occurred a decrease or increase in the productive power or the area of the land 
held by the tenant, as provided in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sections 153 and 154; or  
(c) the sanctioned rates have been altered; and  
(ii) in case of commutation of rent, a period of three years, or such longer period as may have 
been extended under section 83, has elapsed since the date of the last commutation  order.  
162. Applications for variation of rent, by whom to be entertained .—(1) Save as provided in     
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), all applications for commutation, abatement, enhancement or determination of 
rent shall be made to, and heard and decided by, the sub -divisional officer who shall submit the record of 
the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the collector.  
(2) When any area is under rent -rate operations, or when rent -rates have been determined under this 
Act for any area, or accept ed under the proviso to section 124 and such area is placed under record 
operations, all such applications relating to such area shall be filed in the court of the rent -rate officer or 
the record officer, as the case may be.  
(3) If such application is heard and decided by the rent -rate officer or the record officer, the record of 
the case shall be submitted for the confirmation of the order passed by him to the Chief Commissioner.  
CHAPTER XII I 
EXTRAORDINARY AND EMERGENCY PROVISIONS  
163. Provision of ren t and revenue in an emergency .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or 
in any other law for the time being in force, when the Central Government is satisfied that an emergency 
has arisen in any area, it may appoint to such area an officer of the grade of an assistant commissioner and 
invest him with all or any of the following powers: — 
(a) the powers of a rent -rate officer and a record officer;  
(b) if sanctioned rates have not been determined or have not been accepted under the proviso to 
section 124 fo r such area, powers to commute, abate, enhance or determine rents summarily 
otherwise than in accordance with such rates; and  
(c) powers to revise revenue assessed on any estate, mahal, village or thok in which rents have 
been commuted, abated, enhanced or  determined under this Chapter.  
(2) If, as a result of any order passed by the officer appointed under sub -section ( 1), the assets of any 
estate or area are increased or decreased, such officer shall increase or decrease, as the case may be, the 
revenue of  such estate, village, mahal or thok in the proportion which such increased or decreased assets 
bear to the assets before such increase or decrease.  46 
 (3) Every order passed by such officer in exercise of the powers conferred on him under                  
sub-section ( 1) shall be submitted for confirmation to the collector or such other officer as the Chief 
Commissioner may, by order, specify and shall take effect from such date as the officer passing it or the 
confirming court may direct.  
164. Remission or s uspension of rent in agricultural calamities .—(1) On the occurrence of an 
agricultural calamity, affecting the crops of any village or area, the Central Government or any authority 
empowered by it in this behalf, may remit or suspend for any period the who le or any portion of the rent 
payable by a tenant in respect of any holding affected by such calamity.  
(2) When the Central Government or such authority remits or suspends rent, it shall remit or suspend 
for a like period the whole or portion of tie revenu e assessed on such village or area.  
165. Bar to collection of rent remitted or suspended .—No landholder shall collect, under the 
provisions of this Act or otherwise, any rent the payment of which has been remitted or, during the period 
of suspension, any r ent the payment of which has been suspended under section 164.  
166. Period of suspension to be excluded in computing period of limitation .—When  the payment 
of rent has been suspended in accordance with the provisions of section 164, the period during which the 
suspension continues shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation under this Act for the 
recovery of such rent.  
167. Remission for calamity by court decreeing claim for arrears .—(1) If it Appears to a court 
passing a decree for arrears of rent that the area of the holding was so decreased by diluvion or otherwise, 
or that the produce thereof was so diminished by drought, hail, pes ts, deposit of sand or other like 
calamity during the period for which the arrears are claimed, or that the full amount of rent payable by the 
tenant for that period cannot be equitably decreed, it may, with the sanction of the collector, allow such 
remiss ion from the rent payable by the tenant for that period as it deems fit.  
(2) The court allowing such remission shall submit the record of the case for confirmation of the order 
passed by it to the collector.  
(3) No remission made under this section shall b e deemed to vary the rent payable by the tenant 
otherwise than for the period in respect of which such remission was made.  
(4) When remission of rent is granted in accordance with the provisions of this section, the collector 
shall, on the application of t he landlord, grant a remission of revenue in proportion to the rent remitted for 
the corresponding area belonging to the same landlord.  
168. Jurisdiction of certain courts excluded in cases of remission and suspension of rent or 
revenue .—Except as provided  in this Act, an order for revision, remission or suspension of rent or 
revenue passed under this Chapter shall not be called in question in any court.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PROCEDURE AND JURISDICTION OF COURTS  
General provisions  
169. Cases cognizable by revenue courts .—A case which is cognizable by a revenue court under 
this Act shall be heard and decided by such court, and no court other than a revenue court shall, except as 
provided in this Act, hear or decide any such case, or any suit or application based on a cause of action in 
respect of which relief could be obtained in a revenue court.  
Explanation. —If the cause of action is one in respect of which relief might be granted by the revenue 
court, it is immaterial that the relief as ked for from the civil court is different from, greater than, or 
additional to, that which the revenue court could have granted.  
170. Procedure of revenue courts .—The Chief Commissioner may frame rules for regulating the 
procedure of revenue courts and may , in doing so, extend or apply any provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), with or without modification:  47 
 Provided that until such rules are framed and, subject to them when framed, the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (A ct 5 of 1908), shall, except when they are inconsistent with anything in 
this Act, or relate to special suits or proceedings outside the scope of this Act, apply, in so far as they are 
applicable, to proceedings under this Act.  
171. Application of Indian L imitation Act, 1908 .—Sections 4, 5 and 12, sub -section ( 2) of       
section 14 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 17 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply, 
mutatis mutandis,  to applications and other proceedings under this Act.  
172. Limitation in cases under this Act .—Except as provided in section 171, no application under 
this Act shall, if the period for filing it is specified therein, be filed after the expiry of such period.  
173. Payment of court -fees under this Act .—(1) No court -fee shall be payable when the first 
application is filed by a party to any proceeding under this Act.  
(2) Any second or subsequent application made in the course of the same proceeding shall bear a 
court -fee stamp of four annas  only:  
Provided that when, under this Act, any sum is collected by a revenue court as arrears of revenue or 
as sayar  on behalf of an applicant or a party to a proceeding, or when the amount of a decree is paid into 
court under section 98, such court shall, notwit hstanding anything in this Act, before making payment to 
the person entitled, deduct seven and a half per cent . of the amount so collected or paid into court as     
court -fee and pay the balance to such person:  
Provided further that if in any case, after i ssues have been framed and any evidence has been 
recorded, the first application is dismissed or withdrawn, the trial court or the confirming court, as the 
case may be, shall assess the amount of the court -fee which, but for the provisions of sub -sections (1)     
and ( 2), the applicant would have been liable to pay under the Court -Fees Act, 1870 ( 7 of 1870), as 
applied to the State, deduct the amount, if any, paid as court -fee under sub -section (2) and recover the 
balance as arrears of revenue.   
Subordinati on of courts  
174. Subordination of courts .—(1) All revenue courts in the State shall be subordinate to the Chief 
Commissioner.  
(2) All revenue courts specified in sub -clauses ( iv) to ( viii) of clause ( 35) of section 4 shall be 
subordinate to the collector,  and the revenue courts specified in sub -clauses ( vi) to ( viii) of the said clause 
shall be subordinate to the sub -divisional officer of the area within which they exercise jurisdiction.  
(3) An assistant record officer shall be subordinate to the record of ficer.  
Powers of courts and places for holding courts  
175. Place of sitting of revenue courts .—(1) A revenue court mentioned in sub -clause ( i), (ii) or ( iii) 
of clause ( 35) of section 4 and, subject to the orders of the collector, a revenue court mentioned  in        
sub-clause ( v) of the said clause may hear and dispose of cases at any place within the State.  
(2) A sub -divisional officer may hold his court at any place within his sub-division or, with the 
sanction of the collector, in any other part of the State.   
(3) A tahsildar or a naib-tahsildar may hold his court at any place within his tahsil.  
(4) A revenue court, mentioned in clause ( a) or ( b) of section 180, may sit in any part of the State 
specified by the collector.  
176. Chief Commissioner ’s power to confer powers .—The Chief Commissioner may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, confer on an assistant commissioner or a sub -divisional officer all or 
any of the powers of a collector under this Act to be exercised in respect of such cases or class of cases or 
such other matters as may be specified in such notification.  
177. Collector ’s power to place assistant commissioner in charge of sub -division .—(1) The  
collector may place any assistant commissioner in charge of a sub -division and may remove him 
therefrom.  48 
 (2) The assistant commissioner so placed in charge shall be sailed a sub -divisional officer and shall, 
subject to the control of the collector, exerci se all the powers conferred, and discharge all the duties 
imposed, upon the sub -divisional officer by this Act, or any rules made thereunder.  
178. Collector ’s powers to authorise certain courts to entertain and dispose of        
applications .—The collector  may, by order in writing, empower — 
(a) an assistant commissioner to entertain and decide applications, and to receive and dispose of 
cases submitted for confirmation of a decree or an order passed by a tahsildar, which a sub -divisional 
officer is empowere d under this Act to entertain, decide, receive or dispose of; and  
(b) a naib-tahsildar of not less than three years standing, to entertain and dispose of such 
applications as a tahsildar  is empowered under this Act to entertain and dispose of.  
179. Powers of revenue courts to refer cases for investigation and report .—Any revenue court 
may refer any case which it is empowered to dispose of to any revenue court subordinate to it for 
investigation and report.  
180. Powers of Chief Commissioner to create  shamlat  committee and courts .—The Chief 
Commissioner may — 
(a) create an honorary court and invest it with powers to hear and dispose of cases which a 
tahsildar  may hear and dispose of under the provisions of this Act;  
(b) establish a punchayat  in any village or group of villages of the State, and invest such 
punchayat with powers to hear and dispose of cases which a tahsildar  may hear and dispose of under 
the provisions of this Act, and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed;  
(c) san ction the creation of a shamlat  committee in any village or town which has at least three 
hundred acres of stable land as shamlat deh; and 
(d) define the jurisdiction of the courts created or established under clause ( a) or ( b) of this 
section and provide for submission of the cases decided by them for confirmation to courts specified 
by him:  
Provided that no court so created or established under clause ( a) or ( b) shall hear or decide a case if 
such court or a member thereof is interested in the result of s uch case:  
Provided further that if, at the commencement of this Act, there exists a shamlat committee in any 
village or town to which the provisions of clause ( c) apply, the Chief Commissioner may recogni se such 
committee as one created under this section.  
Confirmation of orders  
181. Decree or order to be final in certain circumstances .—Subject to the provisions of       
sections 185, 186 and 187, a decree or an order which is not required by this Act to be submitted to a 
confirming court shall be final.  
182. Submission to confirming court .—When, under the provisions of this Act, a revenue court is 
required to submit the record of a case to a confirming court, it shall not comply with such provisions — 
(i) unless any of the parties to such case has, within seven days of the decree or the order passed 
therein, made an application bearing a court -fee stamp of the value of two rupees and eight annas  to 
such revenue court, requesting that the record be submitt ed for confirmation; or  
(ii) if such decree or order is passed on the admission of a party to the case, or in terms of a 
compromise; or is based on the award of an arbitrator appointed by the parties; or  
(iii) if the parties to the case apply in writing th at they accept the decree or order as final:  
Provided that if any party challenges a decree or an order mentioned in clause ( ii) on the ground that 
it does not conform to the compromise or the award, or that it goes beyond it, such court shall, on the 
application of such party, submit the record to the confirming court.  49 
 183. Form of decree or order to be submitted for confirmation .—(1) An order submitted for 
confirmation shall contain a concise statement of the case, the points for determination, the decisi on 
thereon, and the reasons for such decision.  
(2) A decree submitted for confirmation shall conform to the order passed and shall be prepared only 
in cases and in the form prescribed.  
184. Procedure for confirmation .—When  the record of a case is received by a confirming court and 
the provisions of the section under which such, record is submitted do not specify the manner of 
confirmation, such court shall — 
(i) call upon each of the parties to file, if he wishes to do so, a  written statement setting forth, 
concisely and under distinct heads, the grounds of objection to the decree or order, numbered 
consecutively wi thout any argument or narrative ; 
(ii) treat the written statement of the party against whom the decision was giv en by the trial court 
as memorandum of appeal, and that presented by the other party as memorandum of cross -objection; 
and 
(iii) after hearing the parties or such of them as appear before him, pass an order which a court of 
appeal may pass under the provis ions of Order 41 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908):  
Provided that no such written statement shall be entertained on behalf of a party who has not applied 
for submission of the record under clause ( i) of section 182, unless it bears a court -fee stamp of the value 
of rupees two and annas eight.  
Review  
185. Review by the Chief Commissioner .—The Chief Commissioner may, on his own motion, or on 
the application of a party, review any decree or order passed by him and may rescind, vary or confirm it. 
186. Review by other courts .—Every other revenue court may review its judgment, order or decree 
to correct clerical or arithmetical errors, or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission:  
Provided that no application for review shall be  entertained — 
(a) after the record has been submitted to a confirming court; or  
(b) if such application cannot be disposed of without recording further evidence.  
Revision  
187. Revision .—(1) The Chief Commissioner or, in respect of a decree or an order passed by a civil 
court, the Judicial Commissioner may, on the application of a party, call for the record of any case which 
is decided by a court subordinate to him and if such subordinate court appears — 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or  
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or  
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, he may 
make such order as he thinks fit.  
(2) An application for revision shall be made within three months of the passing of an order or a 
decree sought to be revised.  
Transfer of cases  
188. Power to transfer cases .—The collector may, on the application of a party, transfer an 
application pending before a subordinate revenue court or a case submitted to such court for confirmation 
of a decree or an order from such court to any other court of competent jurisdiction:  
Provi ded that if the collector refuses to transfer such application or case, he shall submit the record 
for confirmation of the order passed by him to the chief Commissioner.  
  50 
 189. Power of collector to transfer and withdraw cases .—The collector may — 
(a) trans fer any case submitted to him or to any subordinate court for confirmation of a decree or 
an order  to any subordinate court of competent jurisdiction; or  
(b) by order recall to his own court any case pending for confirmation in a subordinate court; or  
(c) withdraw from any court subordinate to him any case other than a case which is submitted to 
such court for confirmation, and try such case himself or transfer it to any other subordinate court of 
competent jurisdiction:  
Provided that if the collector himse lf hears and decides any case withdrawn under clause ( c) he shall 
submit the record for confirmation of the order passed by him in such case to the Chief Commissioner.  
190. Sub-divisional officer ’s power to transfer cases .—A sub -divisional officer may, wit h the 
previous sanction of the collector, transfer any case or class of cases pending before him to any assistant 
commissioner competent to try such case or class of cases.  
191. Power of record officer to transfer and withdraw cases .—A record officer may t ransfer any 
case or class of cases pending before him to any assistant record officer, and may withdraw any case or 
class of cases from an assistant record officer and try such case or class of cases himself or transfer the 
same to any other assistant reco rd officer:  
Provided that if the record officer himself tries any case so withdrawn, he shall submit the record for 
confirmation of the order passed by him in such case to the Chief Commissioner.  
192. Transfer of cases by the district judge .—A district jud ge may, with the previous sanction of 
the Judicial Commissioner, transfer any case submitted to him for confirmation of an order or a decree to 
an additional district judge or to a subordinate judge, and such additional district judge or subordinate 
judge shall dispose of such case as if he had the powers of a district judge under this Act.  
Question of proprietary right in revenue court  
193. Dispute as regards ownership of land .—(1) If, in connection with any action taken by a 
landlord under clause ( iii) of section 9, a dispute arises between him and any other person who claims to 
have a proprietary interest in the land in respect of which such action is taken, either party may apply to 
the collector for the decision of such dispute.  
(2) On the receipt of su ch application, the collector shall follow the procedure specified in section 38 
and the provisions of that section shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the case.  
(3) If, in consequence of the order passed by the collector, any loss results to a tenant or to any other 
person having an interest in the land to which such order relates, the collector shall, before submitting the 
record of the case to the confirming court, award monetary compensation to such tenant or other person.  
(4) Any compensation awarded und er this section shall be recovered as arrears of revenue and paid to 
the person entitled.  
194. Procedure when plea of proprietary right raised in revenue court .—(1) Except as otherwise 
provided in sections 38 and 193, if in any proceeding, other than a pro ceeding under section 137, a 
question of proprietary right is raised and such question has net previously been determined by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, the revenue court shall frame an issue on the question of proprietary right, and 
submit the reco rd to, the competent civil court for the decision of that issue only.  
Explanation I.—A plea of proprietary right which is clearly untenable and intended to oust the 
jurisdiction of the revenue court shall not be deemed to raise a question of proprietary right within the 
meaning of this section.  
Explanation  II.—A question of proprietary righ t does not include the question whether land is 
khudkasht  or niji jot.  
(2) The civil court, after refraining the issue, if necessary, shall decide such issue and return the 
record together with its finding thereon to the revenue court which submitted it.  51 
 (3) The revenue court shall then proceed to decide the case, accepting such finding and shall, 
notwithstanding anything in this Act, submit the record to the district judge for confirmation of the order 
or the decree passed by it.  
Question of tenancy right in civil courts  
195. Procedure when plea of tenancy raised in civil court .—(1) If in any suit relating to 
agricultural land instituted in a civil court, any question regarding tenancy right arises and such question 
has not been previously determined by a c ourt of competent jurisdiction, the civil court shall frame an 
issue on the plea of tenancy and submit the record to the sub -divisional officer for decision of that issue 
only.  
Explanation. —A plea of tenancy which is clearly untenable and intended only to oust the jurisdiction 
of the civil court shall not be deemed to raise a plea of tenancy.  
(2) The sub -divisional officer, after refraining the issue, if necessary, shall decide such issue and 
return the record together with his finding thereon to the civil court which submitted it.  
(3) The civil court shall then proceed to decide the suit, accepting the finding of the revenue court on 
the issue referred to it.  
(4) The finding of the revenue court on such issue shall, for the purposes of appeal, be deemed to be 
part of the finding of the civil court.  
Conflict of jurisdiction  
196. Reference to Judicial Commissioner .—(1) Where either a civil or a revenue court is in doubt 
whether it is competent  to try any case, the court may refer such case with a st atement of the reasons 
therefor  to the Judicial Commissioner:  
Provided that if the court is a revenue court subordinate to the collector, no reference shall be made 
except with the previous sanction of the collector.  
(2) On any such reference being made, the Judicial Commissioner may order the court either to 
proceed with the case or transfer such case to such other court as may be declared by him to be competent 
to try it.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
197. Provision for injunction and appointment of receiver .—(1) If, in the course of any 
proceeding under this Act, it is proved by affidavit or otherwise — 
(a) that any property, tree or crop standing on the land to which such proceeding relates i s in 
danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to such proceeding, or  
(b) that any party to such proceeding threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of the said 
property, tree or crop to defeat the ends of justice,  
the revenue court befo re which any such proceeding is pending may grant a temporary injunction and, if 
necessary, appoint a receiver.  
(2) Any person against whom an injunction has been granted under sub -section ( 1) may offer to give 
cash security of an amount determined by the court to compensate the other party in case the matter in 
dispute is decided against such person, and the court may withdraw the injunction on his depositing such 
security.  
198. Cases i n which legal practitioners may appear .—A legal practitioner shall be e ntitled to 
appear in any proceeding on behalf of a party before a revenue court under the provisions of this Act in 
the following cases only and in no others — 
(i) to file a written statement, and to argue a case, before a confirming court,  
(ii) to prosecut e and defend cases under Chapters IX and X and Part III of Chapter XII, and  52 
 (iii) to file an application for revision under section 187 and to argue the case before the court 
hearing such application.  
199. Persons who may appear before a revenue court .—A party to a proceeding or his authorised 
agent may appear, plead or act before a revenue court.  
200. Costs in revenue courts .—A revenue court may allow and apportion the costs of any 
proceeding under this Act in any manner it thinks fit, but if it orders t hat costs shall not follow the event, 
it shall record its reasons for the order.  
201. Power of revenue court to summon persons .—(1) A revenue court may summon any person 
whose attendance it considers necessary for the purpose of disposing of any proceeding before it.  
(2) Unless exempted from personal appearance in court under sub -section ( 1) of section 133 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), a person so summoned shall appear at the time and place 
mentioned in the summons in person or, if the summons so allows, by his authorised agent.  
(3) The person attending in obedience to the summons shall be bound to state the truth  upon any 
matter respecting which he is examined or makes a statement, and to produce such document and other 
thing relating to any matter which may be within his power or possession as the court may require.  
202. Mode of service of summons or notice .—(1) A summons issued by a court acting under this 
Act shall, if practicable, be served ( a) personally on the person to whom it is addressed, or failing him      
on (b) his authorised agent or ( c) an adult male member of his family who is residing with him.  
(2) If service cannot be so made, or if any person mentioned in sub -section ( 1) refuses to accept 
service, the summons may be served by posting a copy thereof at the usual or last known place of 
residence of the person to whom it is addressed, or, if that per son does not reside in the tahsil in which 
such court is held, and the case to which the summons relates has reference to land in that tahsil, then by 
posting a copy of the summons on some conspicuous place in or near the estate wherein the land is 
situate d. 
(3) If the summons relates to a case in which persons having the same interest are so numerous that 
personal service on all of them is not reasonably practicable, it may, if the court so directs, be served by 
delivery of a copy thereof to such of those persons as the court nominates in this behalf and by 
proclamation or publication in a local paper of the contents thereof for the information of the other 
persons interested in such case.  
(4) A summons may, if the court so directs, be served on the person named therein, either in addition 
to, or in substitution for, any other mode of service, by forwarding the summons by post in a letter 
addressed to such person under a certificate of posting.  
(5) When a summons is served in accordance with the provisions o f this section, it shall be deemed to 
have been duly served.  
(6) For the purposes of this section “summons ” shall include a “notice ” which a court may issue 
under this Act.  
CHAPTER XVI  
POWER TO MAKE RULES  
203. Power to make rules .—(1) The Chief Commissione r may make rules for the purpose of giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) for demarcation of pasture land and niji jot;  
(b) for the attestation of leases and agreements;  
(c) for the collection and disbursement of cesses, or assessment and recovery of irrigation dues, 
and for decision of disputes in respect of them;  53 
 (d) for the trai ning of patwaris and girdawars;  
(e) regulating the appointment and transfer of girdawars  and patwaris , and other staff required 
for the maintenance of the record -of-rights, their salaries, qualifications, duties, leave, removal, 
dismissal or any other puni shment;  
(f) prescribing the form, contents, method of preparation, attestation and maintenance of the 
record -of-rights, annual registers, maps, field -books, and other records to be kept under this Act;  
(g) for the erection of boundary and survey marks, and  for their repairs and renewals, and for the 
recovery of costs in respect of such erection, repairs or renewals;  
(h) for providing the principles on which the part of the holding from which a tenant is to be 
ejected be determined and for the demarcation of  such part;  
(i) for recording transfers and changes affecting interest in land, whether proprietary or otherwise;  
(j) regulating the imposition of fines for failure to notify succession or transfer;  
(k) for the appointment of lambardars and patels, the duties to be performed by them, the 
remuneration, if any, to be paid to them and for their removal and dismissal;  
(l) for appeals or other modes of obtaining redress in cases of punishments inflicted on girdawars, 
patwaris , and other employees of land reco rds establishment, and on lambardars  and patels;  
(m) for the guidance of officers in cases for the determination, enhancement, abatement and 
commutation of rent;  
(n) for the guidance of record officers and rent -rate officers;  
(o) for the remission and suspension of rent and revenue in agricultural calamities;  
(p) defining the powers of various classes of officers and revenue courts to hear and dispose of 
cases;  
(q) for the establishment of honorary courts and village punchayats  and fo r regulating their     
work; and  
(r) for collection of fines, compensation, damages or other sums imposed, awarded or ordered to 
be paid under the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
1[(s) for the levy of a fee in respect of any applicati on or the grant of any relief under this Act in 
cases not specifically provided for.]  
(3) In making any rule the Chief Commissioner may provide that any contravention of such rule shall 
be punishable with a fine not exceeding fifty rupees.  
(4) All rules ma de under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall also be laid 
before Parliament, as soon as may be, after such publication.  
CHAPTER XVII  
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
204. Reinstatement of tenant ejected before commencement of this Act .—(1) If, between the first 
day of June, 1942 and the commencement of this Act, the landlord of an estate mentioned in the Second 
Schedule had ejected a tenant from his holding, otherwise than in accordance with the Ajmere Land and 
Revenue Regulation, 1877 ( 2 of 1877), such tenant may, within 2[nine months]  of such commencement, 
apply to the tahsildar  to be reinstated in such holding.  
(2) An application under this section shall state — 
(i) the Khasra  number and area or other description of such holding and the name and address of 
the person who is in possession thereof;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1950, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1950).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1950).  54 
 (ii) if such holding is held by a tenant, the khasra , number and area of other land in the possession 
of the landlord which may be gi ven to the applicant in lieu of the holding from which he was so 
ejected; and  
(iii) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) The tahsildar  shall, after hearing the parties and making such other inquiry as he deems fit, 
order— 
(i) if such holding is in the possession of the landlord, that the applicant be reinstated in such        
holding; and  
(ii) if such holding is held by a tenant, that an area of the land mentioned in clause ( ii) of                  
sub-section ( 2) or any other la nd in the possession of the landlord which is approximately equal in 
value to the holding from which the applicant was so ejected be allotted to him and demarcated on the 
spot.  
(4) If the applicant cannot be reinstated in his holding under clause ( i), or a llotted other land under 
clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 3), the tahsildar  shall award to the applicant monetary compensation which 
shall be six times the annual rental value of the holding from which he was so ejected calculated at 
sanctioned rates applicable  to hereditary tenants, recover the amount of such compensation as arrears of 
revenue and pay it to him.  
(5) No person shall be reinstated in his holding under this section unless, within such time as may be 
allowed by the tahsildar , he pays to the landlor d compensation, calculated in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, for any improvement on such holding made by such landlord.  
(6) The applicant shall be a hereditary tenant of the land in which he is reinstated or which is allotted 
to him under this  section.  
(7) The tahsildar  shall, after deciding the case, submit the record for confirmation of the order passed 
by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
205. Provision for pending and other cases .—(1) After the commencement of this Act, no court 
shall entertain any proceeding for the establishment or enforcement of a claim, prohibited by, or 
inconsistent with, the provisions of this Act, whether such claim arose before or after such 
commencement.  
(2) A proceeding, in respect of any matter covered by thi s Act, pending in any civil or revenue court 
at the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 169, be heard and 
decided by such court in accordance with the corresponding provisions of this Act, and if there is no such 
corresponding provision, it shall be quashed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the record of every case in which the proceeding 
is so quashed shall be submitted for confirmation in accordance with the provisions of section 183 by the 
court quashing the proceeding to the court to which it is immediately subordinate and the court to which 
the record is so submitted shall follow the procedure specified in section 184.  
__________  
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
General  
1. The provisions of this Schedule a nd the rates of fees specified therein for occupying a house site in 
the village or for grazing and pasturing animals in the waste land of such village shall apply to tenants 
other than sub -tenants:  
Provided that if, at the commencement of the Act, no such  fee is charged in any village or estate from 
the tenants or any class of them or such fee was charged at a rate lower than that entered in this Schedule, 
such exemption or lower rate, as the case may be, shall continue in force as heretofore.  55 
 2. The fees for grazing and occupying a house -site shall be assessed annually by the tahsildar in the 
manner prescribed.  
3. If any person has not paid grazing fee within six weeks of its becoming due, the tahsildar  shall, on 
the application of the landlord, exclude the animals of such person from the waste -land until he has paid 
up his arrears.  
Fee for occupation of house -site 
4. A landlord shall provide a tenant with a house -site of reasonable dimensions, preferabl y in the 
village abadi.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this paragraph “reasonable dimensions ” shall ordinarily mean — 
(a) in the case of a tenant who has a residential house in the village, the present site of his     
house; and  
(b) in the case of a tenan t who has no such house, 800 square yards.  
5. No premium shall be charged for providing any house -site, and  the fee to be charged therefor  shall 
not exceed one anna  per 100 square yards per year.  
Grazing fee  
6. (1) No grazing fee shall be charged for the following classes of animals: — 
(i) cows;  
(ii) calves;  
(iii) bullocks;  
(iv) he-buffaloes;  
(v) padis  (up to two years of age);  
(vi) padas; and 
(vii) kids and lambs:  
Provided that in bir, cows, calves, bullocks and he -buffaloes shall be allowed to graze on pa yment of 
one anna  per head per annum and padis  and padas  on payment of one -half of such rate.  
(2) A grazing fee at the following rates shall be payable for the other classes of animals: — 
 
 Bir Other waste land    
 Rs.   A.    P. Rs.    A.    P.  
(i) She-buffaloes          0     12     0  0      3     0 per head per year.  
(ii) Jhotis  (over two years old)           0      6       0  0      1     6 per head per year.  
(iii) Goats or sheep  0      1      6 Nil per head per year.  
(iv) Donkeys  0      4      0  Nil per head per year.  
(v) Ponies  0      4      0  Nil per head per year.  
(vi) Camels  0      8      0  0     4     0 per head per year.  
7. Any dispute arising under this Schedule shall be decided by the tahsildar  who shall submit the 
record of the case for confirmation of the order passed by him to the sub -divisional officer.  
 
  
  56 
  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
 
Names of estates  
1. Binai . 25. Khawas.  
 
2. Sholyan.  26. Sadara.  
 
3. Saholao . 27. Gulgaon.  
 
4. Sarans.  28. Junia . 
 
5. Sawar.  29. Bogla Kalahera.  
 
6. Piplaj.  30. Karonj.  
 
7. Deokheri.  
 31. Deolia Khurd.  
 
8. Basundni.  
 32. Manda.  
 
9. Chandthali . 
 33. Lasaria.  
 
10. Chausla.  
 34. Deolia Kalan.  
 
11. Mehrun khurd.  
 35. Gudha Kalan.  
 
12. Masuda . 
 36. Jetpura.  
 
13. Sathana.  
 37. Nandsi.  
 
14. Sakrani.  
 38. Shokli.  
 
15. Lamba.  
 39. Arwar.  
 
16. Nagar.  
 40. Rammalian . 
17. Shergarh.  
 41. Kaibania.  
 
18. Akrol.  
 42. Kharwa.  
 
19. Lalawas.  
 43. Nasun.  
 
20. Jamola . 44. Bandanwara.  
 
21. Sheopuri.  
 45. Padlia.  
 
22. Aaan.  
 46. Jotayan.  
 
23. Pisangan.  
 47. Kalyanpura.  
 
24. Pranhera.  
 
 48. Amargarh.  
 57 
 49. Mehrun.  
 62. Barli.  
 
50. Kadera.  
 63. Gcela.  
 
51. Tiswaria.  
 64. Nagelao.  
 
52. Sankaria.  
 65. Kanai Khurd.  
 
53. Nimode.  
 66. Baghsuri.  
 
54. Para.  
 67. Bubania.  
 
55. Kodah.  
 68. Kerote.  
 
56. Meoda Khurd.  
 69. Kurthal.  
 
57. Deogaon Baghera . 
 70. Kanai Kalan.  
 
58. Salari.  
 71. Manoharpura.  
 
59. Govindgarh.  
 72 Mewaria.  
 
60. Tantoti.  
 73. Richmalian.  
 
61. Baori . 
 74. Sathan . 
 
--------------------------The Army Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMY ACT, 1950  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Persons subject to this Act.  
3. Definition s. 
CHAPTER II  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF ACT IN CERTAIN CASES  
4. Applicatio n of Act to certain forces under Central Government.  
5. [Omitted. ] 
6. Special provision as to rank in certain cases.  
7. Commanding officer of persons subject to military law under clause ( i) of section 2.  
8. Officers exercising powers in certain cases.  
9. Power to declare persons to be on active service.  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSION, APPOINTMENT AND ENROLMENT  
10. Commission and appointment.  
11. Ineligibility of aliens for enrolment.  
12. Ineligibility of females for enrolment or employment.  
13. Procedure before en rolling officer.  
14. Mode of enrolment.  
15. Validity of enrolment.  
16. Persons to be attested.  
17. Mode of attestation.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  
18. Tenure of service under the Act.  
19. Termination of service by Central Government . 
20. Dismissal, r emoval or reduction by the Chief of the Army Staff and by other officers . 
21. Power to modify certain fundamental rights in their application to persons subject to this Act.  
22. Retirement, release or discharge.  
23. Certificate on termination of service.  2 
  
SECTIONS   
24. Discharge or dismissal when out of India . 
CHAPTER V  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
25. Authorised deductions only to be made from pay . 
26. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers . 
27. Remedy of aggrieved officers . 
28. Immunity from attachment . 
29. Immunity from arrest for debt . 
30. Immunity of persons attending courts -martial from arrest . 
31. Privileges of reservists . 
32. Priority in respect of army personnel ‟s litigation . 
33. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES  
34. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death . 
35. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death . 
36. Offences punishable more severely on active service than at other times . 
37. Mutiny . 
38. Desertion and aiding deserti on. 
39. Absence without leave . 
40. Striking or threatening superior officers . 
41. Disobedience to superior officer.  
42. Insubordination and obstruction . 
43. Fraudulent enrolment . 
44. False answers on enrolment . 
45. Unbecoming conduct . 
46. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct . 
47. Ill -treating a subordinate . 
48. Intoxication . 
49. Permitting escape of person in custody . 
50. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.  
51. Escape from custody . 
52. Offences in respect of property . 
53. Extortion and co rruption . 3 
 SECTIONS  
54. Making away with equipment . 
55. Injury to property . 
56. False accusations . 
57. Falsifying official documents and false declaration . 
58. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
59. Offences relating to courts -martial . 
60. False eviden ce. 
61. Unlawful detention of pay . 
62. Offences in relation to aircraft and flying . 
63. Violation of good order and discipline . 
64. Miscellaneous offences . 
65. Attempt . 
66. Abetment of offences that have been committed . 
67. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed . 
68. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed . 
69. Civil offences . 
70. Civil offence not triable by court -martial . 
CHAPTER VII  
PUNISHMENTS  
71. Punishments awardable by courts -martial.  
72. Alternative punishments awardable by court -martial.  
73. Combination of punishments . 
74. Cashiering of officers . 
75. [Omitted. ] 
76. [Omitted. ] 
77. Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer or non -commissioned officer . 
78. Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service . 
79. Punishments otherwise than by court -martial . 
80. Punishment of persons other than officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers . 
81. Limit of punishments under section 80 . 
82. Punishments in addition to those specified in section 80 . 
83. Punishment of officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers by brigade 
commanders and others.  
84. Punishment of officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers by area commanders 
and others . 
85. Punishment of junior commissioned officers . 4 
 SECTIONS  
86. Transmission of proceedings . 
87. Review of proceedings . 
88. Superior military authority . 
89. Collective fines . 
CHAPTER VIII  
PENAL DEDUCTIONS  
90. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers . 
91. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons other than officers . 
92. Computation of time of absence or custody . 
93. Pay and allowances during trial . 
94. Limit of certain deductions . 
95. Deduction from public money due to a person . 
96. Pay and allowance s of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct . 
97. Remission of deductions . 
98. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions . 
99. Provision for dependants of prisoner war from his pay and allowances . 
100. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war . 
CHAPTER IX  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
101. Custody of offenders.  
102. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention . 
103. Interval between committal and court -martial . 
104. Arrest by civil authoritie s. 
105. Capture of deserters . 
106. Inquiry into absence without leave . 
107. Provost -marshals.  
CHAPTER X  
COURTS -MARTIAL  
108. Kinds of courts -martial . 
109. Power to convene a general court -martial . 
110. Power to convene a district court -martial . 
111. Content s of warrants issued under sections 109 and 110.  
112. Power to convene a summary general court -martial.  
113. Composition of general court -martial . 
114. Composition of district court -martial . 5 
 SECTIONS  
115. Composition of summary general court -martial . 
116. Summary court -martial . 
117. Dissolution of courts -martial . 
118. Powers of general and summary general courts -martial . 
119. Powers of district courts -martial . 
120. Powers of summary courts -martial.  
121. Prohibition of second trial . 
122. Period of limitation  for trial . 
123. Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act . 
124. Place of trial . 
125. Choice between criminal court and court -martial.  
126. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender . 
127. [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER XI  
PROCEDURE OF COURTS -MARTIAL  
128. Presiding officer . 
129. Judge advocate . 
130. Challenges . 
131. Oaths of member, judge advocate and witness . 
132. Voting by members . 
133. General rule as to evidence.  
134. Judicial notice . 
135. Summoning witnesses . 
136. Documents exempted from p roduction . 
137. Commis sions for examination of witnes ses. 
138. Examination of a wit ness on commission . 
139. Conviction of offence not charged . 
140. Presumption as to signatures . 
141. Enrolment paper . 
142. Presumption as to certain documents . 
143. Reference  by accused to Government officer.  
144. Evidence of previous convictions and general character . 
145. Lunacy of accused . 
146. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial . 
147. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 146 . 6 
 SECTIONS  
148. Release of lunatic accused . 
149. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives . 
150. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial . 
151. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed . 
152. Powers of court -martial in relation to  proceedings under this Act . 
CHAPTER XII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
153. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed . 
154. Power to confirm finding and sentence of general court -martial . 
155. Power to confirm finding and sentence of district court -martial. 
156. Limitation of powers of confirming authority . 
157. Power to confirm finding and sentence of summary general court -martial . 
158. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences . 
159. Confirming of findings and sentences on bo ard a ship . 
160. Revision of finding or sentence . 
161. Finding and sentence of a summary court -martial.  
162. Transmission of proceedings of summary court -martial . 
163. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases . 
164. Remedy against order, finding o r sentence of court -martial . 
165. Annulment of proceedings . 
CHAPTER XIII  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES  
166. Form of sentence of death.  
167. Commencement of sentence of transportation or imprisonment . 
168. Execution of sentence of transportation.  
169. Execution of  sentence of imprisonment . 
169A. Period of custody undergone by the officer or person to be set off against the imprisonment . 
170. Temporary custody of offender . 
171. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases . 
172. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place . 
173. Communication of certain orders to prison officers . 
174. Execution of sentence of fine . 
175. Establishment and regulation of military prisons . 
176. Informality or error in the order or warrant . 
177. Power to make rules in respect of pr isons and prisoners . 7 
 SECTIONS  
178. Restriction of rulemaking power in regard to corporal punishment . 
CHAPTER XIV  
PARDONS, REMISSIONS AND SUSPENSIONS  
179. Pardon and remission.  
180. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission.  
181. Re duction of warrant officer or non -commissioned officer . 
182. Suspension of sentence of transportation or imprisonment . 
183. Orders pending suspension . 
184. Release on suspension . 
185. Computation of period of suspension . 
186. Order after suspension . 
187. R econsideration of case after suspension . 
188. Fresh sentences after suspension . 
189. Scope of power of suspension . 
190. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal . 
CHAPTER XV  
RULES  
191. Power to make rules.  
192. Power to make regulations . 
193. Publica tion of rules and regulations in Gazette . 
193A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
194. [Repealed .] 
195—196. [Chapter XVI. ] [Omitted. ] 
THE SCHEDULE .—[Repealed .] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
 THE ARMY ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 46 OF 19501 
[20th May , 1950.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Government of the regular Army.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Army Act, 1950.  
(2) It shall come into force on su ch date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Persons subject to this Act .—(1) The following persons shall be subject to this Act wherever they 
may be, namely: — 
(a) officers, junior commissioned  officers and warrant officers of the regular Army;  
(b) persons enrolled under this Act;  
(c) persons belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces;  
(d) persons belonging to the Indian Supplementary Reserve Forces when called out for service or 
when carrying out t he annual test;  
(e) officers of the Territorial Army, when doing duty as such officers, and enrolled persons of the 
said Army when called out or embodied or attached to any regular forces, subject to such adaptations 
and modifications as may be made in the  application of this Act to such persons under                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 9 of the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948) .  
 (f) persons holding commissions in the Army in India Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any 
duty or service f or which they are liable as members of such reserve forces;  
(g) officers appointed to the Indian Regular Reserve of Officers, when ordered on any duty or 
service for which they are liable as members of such reserve forces;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(i) persons not  otherwise subject to military law who, on active service, in camp, on the march or 
at any frontier post specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf, are employed 
by, or are in the service of, or are followers of, or accompany any po rtion of, the regular Army . 
(2) Every person subject to  this Act under clauses ( a) to 4[(g)] of sub -section ( 1) shall remain so 
subject until duly retired, dis charged, released, removed, dismissed or cashiered from the service.  
3. Definition s.—In this Act,  unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(i) “active service ”, as applied to a person subject to this Act, means the time during which such 
person — 
(a) is attached to, or forms part of, a force which is engaged in operations against an enemy, 
or 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to -Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch edule;  Assam Rifles 
as modified by S.R.O. 318, dated 6 -12-1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 4, page 223. N.P. Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 
1963, s. 3 and Sch edule  I (w.e.f. 1 -10- 1963).   And brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and 
Schedule  I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
2. 22nd July, 1950, vide notification No . S.R.0 120, dated the 22nd Ju ly, 1950, see Gazette of India, P art II, s. 4.    
3. Omitted by the Adaptation of law s (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
4. Subs. ibid., for clause (h). 9 
 (b) is eng aged in military operations in, or is on the line of march to, a country or place 
wholly or partly occupied by an enemy, or  
(c) is attached to or forms part of a force which is in military occupation of a foreign country;  
(ii) “civil offence ” means an off ence which is triable by a Criminal Court;  
(iii) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under 
the Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894) , or under any other law for the tim e being in force ;  
1[(iv) “Chief of the Army Staff ,” means the officer commanding the regular Army;]  
(v) “commanding officer ”, when used in any provision of this Act, with reference to any separate 
portion of the regular Army or to any department thereof, means the officer whose duty it is under the 
regulations of the regular Army,or in the absence of any such regulations, by the custom of the 
service, to discharge with respect to that portion of the regular Army or that department, as the case 
may be, the functions of a commanding officer in regard t o matters of the description referred to in 
that provision;  
(vi) “corps ” means any separate body of persons subject to this Act, which is prescribed as a 
corps for the purposes of all or any of the provisions of this Act;  
(vii) “court -martial ” means a cour t-martial held under this Act;  
(viii)”Criminal Court ” means a Court of ordinary crimina l justice in any part of India 2*** ;  
(ix) “department ” includes any division or branch of a department;  
(x) “enemy ” includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed r ioters, pirates and any person in 
arms against whom it is the duty of any person  subject to military law to act ; 
(xi) “the Forces ” means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one or more of 
them;  
(xii) “junior commissioned officer ” means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as a junior 
commissioned officer in the regular Army or the Indian Reserve Forces, and includes a person 
holding a junior commission in the Indian Supplementary Reserve Forces , or the Territorial Army,             
3* * * who is for the  time being subject to this Act ; 
(xiii) “military custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a person according to the usages of 
the service and includes naval or air force custody;  
(xiv) “military reward ” includes any gratuity or ann uity for long service or good conduct, good 
service pay or pension, and any other military pecuniary reward;  
(xv) “non-commissioned officer ” means a person holding a non -commissioned rank or an acting 
non-commissioned rank in the regular Army or the Indian  Reserve Forces, and includes a non -
commissioned officer or acting non -commissioned officer of the Indian Supplementary Reserve 
Forces  or the Territorial Army 4* * *, who is for the time being subject to this Act;  
(xvi) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(xvii) “offence ” means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes a civil offence 
as hereinbefore defined;  
(xviii) “officer ” means a person commissioned, gazetted are in pay as an officer in the regular 
Army, and includes — 
(a) an officer of the Indian Reserve Forces;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955 ,. s. 2 and the Schedule , for clause ( iv).  
2. The words “other than the State of Jammu an d Kashmir ” omitted by Act 13 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1975).  
3. The words and letter “or a junior or equivalent commission in the land forces of a Part B State ” omitted by the Adaptation of 
Laws  (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
4.  The words and letter “or the land forces of a Part B State ” omitted, ibid. 10 
 (b) an officer holding a commission in the Territorial Army granted by the President with 
designation of rank corresponding to that of an officer of the regular Army who is for the time 
being s ubject to this Act;  
(c) an officer of the Army in India Reserve of Officers who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
(d) an officer of the Indian Regular Reserve of Officers who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(f) in rela tion to a person subject to this Act when serving under such conditions as may be 
prescribed, an officer of the Navy or Air Force;  
but does not include a junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, petty officer or non -
commissioned officer;   
(xix) “presc ribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(xx) “provost -marshal ” means a person appointed as such under section 107 and includes any of 
his deputies or assistants or any other person legally exercising authority under him or on his behalf;  
(xxi) “regular Army ” means officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers, non -
commissioned officers and other enrolled persons who, by their commission, warrant, terms of 
enrolment or otherwise, are liable to warrant, terms of enrolment or otherwise , are liable to Union in 
any part of the world, including persons belonging to the Reserve Forces and the Territorial Army 
when called out on permanent service;  
(xxii) “regulation ” includes a regulation made under this Act;  
(xxiii) “superior officer ”, when  used in relation to a person subject to this Act, includes a junior 
commissioned officer, warrant officer and a non -commissioned officer, and, as regards persons 
placed under his orders, an officer, warrant officer, petty officer and non -commissioned offi cer of the 
Navy or Air Force;  
(xxiv) “warrant officer ” means a person appointed, gazetted or in pay as a warrant officer of the 
regular Army or of the Indian Reserve Forces, and includes a warrant officer of the Indian 
Supplementary Reserve Forces o r of th e Territorial Army 2* * * who is for the time being subject to 
this Act;  
(xxv) 3[all words (except the word “India ”)] and expressions used but not defined in this Act and 
defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be deemed to have the meanings as signed to them 
in that Code.  
CHAPTER II  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF ACT IN CERTAIN CASES  
4. Application of Act to certain forces under Central Government .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, apply, with or without modifications, all or any of the provisions of this Act to any 
force raised and maintained in India under the auth ority of that Government, 4* * * and suspend the 
operation of any other enactment for the time being applicable to the said force.  
 (2) The provisions of thi s Act so applied shall have effect in respect of persons belonging to the said 
force as they have effect in respect of persons subject to this Act holding in the regular Army the same or 
equivalent rank as the aforesaid persons hold for the time being in t he said force.  
                                                           
1.  Omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  
2.  The words and letter “or the land forces of a Part B State ” omitted, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 1975, s. 3 , for “all words ” (w.e.f. 25 -1- 1975).  
4. The  words “including any force maintained by a Part B State ” omitt ed by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3)  Order , 1956.  11 
 (3) The provisions of this Act so applied shall also have effect in respect of persons who are 
employed by or are in the service of or are followers of or accompany any portion of the said force as 
they have effect in respect of per sons subj ect to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of                  
section ( 2)]. 
(4) While any of the provisions of this Act apply to the said force, the Central Government may, by 
notification, direct by what authority any jurisdiction, powers or d uties incident to the operation of these 
provisions shall be exercised or performed in respect of the said force.  
5. [Application of Act to forces of Part B States .] Omitted  by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  3)         
Order , 1956.  
6. Special provision as to rank in certain cases .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
direct that any persons or class of pers ons subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2] shall be so subject as officers, junior commissioned officers, warra nt officers or                    
non-commissioned officers and may authorise any officer to give a like direction and to cancel such 
direction.  
(2) All persons subject to this Act other than officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers 
and non -commissioned officers shall, if they are not persons in respect of whom a notification or direction 
under sub -section ( 1) is in force, be deemed to be of a rank inferior to that of a non -commissioned officer.  
7. Commanding officer of persons subject to mi litary law under clause ( i) of section 2. —(1) 
Every pe rson subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2] shall, for the purposes 
of this Act, be deemed to be under the commanding officer of the corps, department of detachment, if 
any, to which he is attached, and, if he is not so attached, under the command of any officer who may for 
the time being be named as his commanding officer by the officer commanding the force with which such 
person for the time being is serving, or any oth er prescribed officer, or, if no such officer is named or 
prescribed, under the command of the said officer commanding the force.  
(2) An officer commanding a force shall not place a pe rson subject to this Act under 1[clause ( i) of 
sub-section ( 1) of secti on 2] under the command of an officer of rank inferior to that of such person, if 
there is present at the place where such person is any officer of a higher rank under whose command he 
can be placed.  
8. Officers exercising powers in certain cases. —(1) When ever persons subject to this Act are 
serving under an officer commanding any military organisation, not in this section specifically named and 
being in the opinion of the Central Government not less than a brigade, that Government may prescribe 
the officer  by whom the powers, which under this Act may be exercised by officers commanding armies, 
army corps, divisions and brigades, shall, as regards such persons, be exercised.  
(2) The Central Government may confer such powers, either absolutely or subject to such restrictions, 
reservations, exceptions and conditions, as it may think fit.  
9. Power to declare persons to be on active service .—Notwithstanding anything contained in   
clause ( i) of section 3, the Central Government may, by notification, declare that  any person or class of 
persons subject to this Act shall, with reference to any  area in which they may be serving or with 
reference to any provision of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to be on 
active service within the meaning of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSION, APPOINTMENT AND ENROLMENT  
10. Commission and appointment .—The President may grant, to such person as he thinks fit, a 
commission as an officer, or as a junior commissioned officer or appoint any person, as a war rant officer 
of the regular Army.  
11. Ineligibility of aliens for enrolment .—No person who is not a citizen of India shall, except with 
the consent of the Central Government signified in writing, be enrolled in the regular Army:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s.  3 and the Second Schedule , for “clause ( i) of section  2”. 12 
 Provided that nothing cont ained in this section shall bar the enrolment of the subjects of Nepal in the 
regular Army.  
12. Ineligibility of females for enrolment or employment .—No female shall be eligible for 
enrolment or employment in the regular Army, except in such corps, departm ent, branch or other body 
forming part of, or attached to any portion of, the regular Army as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the prov isions of any law for the time 
being in force providing for the raising and maintenance of any service auxiliary to the regular Army ,or 
any branch thereof in which females are eligible for enrolment or employment.  
13. Procedure before enrolling officer .—Upon the appearance before the prescribed enrolling 
officer of any person desirous of being enrolled, the enrolling officer shall read and explain to him, or 
cause to be read and explained to him in his presence, the conditions of the service for which he i s to be 
enrolled; and shall put to him the questions set forth in the prescribed form of enrolment, and shall, after 
having cautioned him that if he makes a false answer to any such question, he will be liable to punishment 
under this Act, record or cause to be recorded his answer to each such question.  
14. Mode of enrolment .—If, after complying with the provisions of section 13, the enrolling officer 
is satisfied that the person desirous of being enrolled fully understands the questions put to him and 
consents to the conditions of service, and if such officer perceives no impediment, he shall sign and shall 
also cause such person to sign the enrolment paper, and such person shall ther eupon be deemed to be 
enrolled.  
15. Validity of enrolment .—Every person wh o has for the space of three months been in receipt of 
pay as a person enrolled under this Act and been borne on the rolls of any corps or department shall be 
deemed to have been duly enrolled, and shall not be entitled to claim his discharge on the ground  of any 
irregularity or illegality in his enrolment or on any other ground whatsoever ; and if any person, in receipt 
of such pay and borne on the rolls as aforesaid, claims his discharge before the expiry of three months 
from his enrolment, no such irregu larity or illegality or other ground shall, until he is discharged in 
pursuance of his claim, affect his position as an enrolled person under this Act or invalidate any 
proceeding, act or thing taken or done prior to his discharge.  
16. Persons to be attest ed.—The following persons shall be attested, namely: — 
(a) all persons enrolled as combatants ; 
(b) all persons selected to hold a non -commissioned or acting non -commissioned  rank; and  
(c) all other persons subject to this Act as may be prescribed by the Cen tral Government.  
17. Mode of attestation .—(1) When a person who is to be attested is reported fit for duty, or has 
completed the prescribed period of probation, an oath or affirmation shall be administered to him in the 
prescribed form by his commanding of ficer in front of his corps or such portion thereof or such members 
of his department as may be present, or by any other prescribed person.  
(2) The form of oath or affirmation prescribed under this section shall contain a promise that the 
person to be atte sted will bear true allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and that 
he will serve in the regular Army and go wherever he is ordered by land, sea or air, and that he will obey 
all commands of any officer set over him, even to the per il of his life.  
(3) The fact of an enrolled person having taken the oath or affirmation directed by this section to be 
taken shall be entered on his enrolment paper, and authenticated by the signature of the officer 
administering the oath or affirmation.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  
18. Tenure of service under the Act. —Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during  the 
pleasure of the President.  
19. Termination of service by Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules and regulations made thereunder the Central Government may dismiss, or remove from the service, 
any person subject to this Act.  13 
 20. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Chief of the Army Staff and by other officers .—(1) 
1[The Chief of the Army Staff ] may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act 
other than an officer.  
(2) 1[The Chief of the Army Staff] may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks, any warrant 
officer or any non -commissioned officer.  
(3) An officer having p ower not less than a brigade or equivalent commander or any prescribed 
officer may dismiss or remove from the service any person serving under his command other than an 
officer or a junior commissioned officer.  
(4) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 3) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the 
ranks, any warrant officer or any non -commissioned officer under his command.  
(5) A warrant officer reduced to the ranks under this section shall not, however, be required to serve 
in the ranks as a sep oy. 
(6) The commanding officer of an acting non -commissioned officer may order him to revert to his 
permanent grade as a non -commissioned officer, or if he has no permanent grade above the ranks, to the 
ranks.  
(7) The exercise of any power under this secti on shall be subject to the said provisions contained in 
this Act and the rules and regula tions made thereunder.  
21. Power to modify certain fundamental rights in their application to persons subject to this 
Act.—Subject to the provisions of any law for the  time being in force relating to the regular Army or to 
any branch thereof, the Central Government may, by notification, make rules restricting to such extent 
and in such manner as may be necessary the right of any person subject to this Act — 
(a) to be a m ember of, or to be associated in any way with, any trade union or labour union, or 
any class of trade or labour unions or any society, institution or association, or any class of societies, 
institutions or associations ; 
(b) to attend or address any meeting  or to take part in any demonstration organised by any body 
of persons for any political or other purposes ; 
(c) to communicate with the press or to publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document.  
22. Retirement, release or discharge .—Any person subject to this Act may be retired, released or 
discharged from the service by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed . 
23. Certificate on termination of service .—Every junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, or 
enrolled pers on who is dismissed, removed, discharged, retired or released from the service shall be 
furnished by his commanding officer with a certificate, in the language which is the mother tongue of 
such person and also in the English language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service ; 
(b) the cause for such termination ; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the regular Army.  
24. Discharge or dismissal when out of India .—(1) Any person enrolled under this Act who is 
entitled under the conditions of his enrolment to be discharged, or whose discharge is ordered by 
competent authority, and who, when he is so entitled or ordered to be discharged, is serving out of India, 
and requests to be sent to India, shall, before being discharged, be sent to Indi a with all convenient speed.  
(2) Any person enrolled under this Act who is dismissed from the service and who, when he is so 
dismissed, is serving out of India, shall be sent to India with all convenient speed.  
                                                           
1 Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “The Commander -in-Chief ”. 14 
 (3) Where any such person as is mentioned in sub-section ( 2) is sentenced to dismissal combined with 
any other punishment, such other punishment, or, in the case of a sentence of transportation or 
imprisonment, a portion of such sentence may be inflicted before he is sent to India.  
(4) For the purpos es of thi s section, the word “discharge ” shall include re lease, and the word 
“dismissal ” shall include removal.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
25. Authorised deductions only to be made from pay .—The pay of every person subject to this Act 
due to him as such under any regulation for the time being in force shall be paid without any deduction 
other than the deductions authorised by or under this or any other Act.  
26. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers .—(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may, if not attached to a 
troop or company, complain to the officer under whose command or orders he is serving ; and may, if 
attached to a troop or company, complain to the officer comma nding the same.  
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under           
sub-section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer ‟s next superior officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an investigation into it as may 
be poss ible for giving full redress  to the complainant; or, when necessary, refer the complaint to superior 
authority.  
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may f rom time to time be specified by 
the proper authority.  
(5) The Central Governm ent may revise any decision by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] under                 
sub-section ( 2), but, sub ject thereto, the decision of 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] shall b e final.  
27. Remedy of aggrieved officers. —Any officer who deems himself wronged by his commanding 
officer or any superior officer and who on due application made to his commanding officer does not 
receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled , may complain to the Central Government in 
such manner as may from time to time be specified by the proper authority.  
28. Immunity from attachment .—Neither the arms, clothes, equipment, accoutrements or 
necessaries of any person subject to this Act, nor a ny animal used by him for the discharge of his duty, 
shall be seized, nor shall the pay and allowances of any such person or any part thereof be attached, by 
direction of any civil or revenue court or any revenue officer in satisfaction of any decree or or der 
enforceable against him.  
29. Immunity from arrest for debt .—(1) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs 
to the Forces, be liable to be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil 
or revenue court or revenue officer.  
(2) The judge of any such court or the said officer may examine into any complaint made by such 
person or his superior officer of the arrest of such person contrary to the provisions of this section and 
may, by warrant under his hand, d ischarge the person, and award reasonable costs to the complainant, 
who may recover those costs in like manner as he might have recovered costs awarded to him by a decree 
against the person obtaining the process.  
(3) For the recovery of such costs no court -fee shall be payable by the complainant.  
30. Immunity of persons attending courts -martial from arrest .—(1) No presiding officer or 
member of a court -martial, no judge advocate, no party to any proceeding before a court -martial, or his 
legal practitioner o r agent, and no witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend a court -martial 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and  the schedule  for “the Commander -in-Chief ”.  15 
 shall, while proceeding to, attending or returning from, a court -martial, be liable to arrest under civil or 
revenue process.  
(2) If any such person is arrested under any su ch process, he may be discharged by order of the court -
martial.  
31. Privileges of reservists .—Every person belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces shall, when 
called out for or engaged in or returning from, training or service, be entitled to all the privi leges accorded 
by sections 28 and 29 to a person subject to this Act.  
32. Priority in respect of army personnel ’s litigation .—(1) On the presentation to any court by or 
on behalf of any person subject to this Act of a certificate from the proper military a uthority of leave of 
absence having been granted to or applied for by him for the purpose of prosecuting or defending any suit 
or other proceeding in such court, the court shall, on the application of such person, arrange, so far as may 
be possible, for th e hearing and final disposal of such suit or other proceeding within the period of the 
leave so granted or applied for.  
(2) The certificate from the proper military authority shall state the first and last day of the leave or 
intended leave, and set forth a description of the case with respect to which the leave was granted or 
applied for.  
(3) No fee shall be payable to the court in respect of the presentation of any such certificate, or of any 
application by or on behalf of any such person, for priority fo r the hearing of his case.  
(4) Where the court is unable to arrange for the hearing and final disposal of the suit or other 
proceeding within the period of such leave or intended leave as aforesaid, it shall record its reasons for its 
inability to do so, a nd shall cause a copy thereof to be furnished to such person on his application without 
any payment whatever by him in respect either of the application for such copy or of the copy itself.  
(5) If in any case a question arises as to the proper military aut hority qualified to grant such certificate 
as aforesaid, such question shall at once be referred by the court to an officer having power not less than a 
brigade or equivalent commander whose decision shall be final.  
33. Saving of rights and privileges unde r other laws .—The rights and privileges specified in the 
preceding sections of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other rights and 
privileges conferred on persons subject to this Act or on members of the regular Army, Navy and Air 
Force generally by any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES  
34. Offences in relation to the enemy and punishable with death. —Any person subject to this Act 
who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) shamef ully abandons or delivers up any garrison, fortress, post, place or guard, commi tted to 
his charge, or which  it is his duty to defend, or uses any means to compel or induce any commanding 
officer or other person  to commit any of the said acts ; or 
(b) inten tionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to military, naval or air 
force law to abstain from acting against the enemy, or to discourage such person from acting against 
the enemy; or  
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts a way his arms, ammunition, tools or equipment 
or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice ; or 
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy or any 
person in arms against the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectl y ass ists the enemy with money, arms , ammunition, stores or supplies; or  
(f) treacherously or through cowardice sen ds a flag of truce to the enemy ; or 16 
 (g) in time of war or during any military operation, intentionally occasions a false alarm in action, 
camp, garrison or quarters, or spreads reports calculated to creat e alarm or despondency ; or 
(h) in time of action leaves his commanding officer or his post, guard, picquet, patrol or party 
without being regu larly relieved or without leave ; or 
(i) having bee n made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the enemy ; or 
(j) knowingly harbours or protect s an enemy not being a prisoner ; or 
(k) being a sentry in time of war or alarm, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or  
(l) knowingly does any act c alculated to imperil the success of the military, naval or air forces of 
India or any forces co -operating therewith or any part of such forces;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
menti oned.  
35. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death .—Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is taken prisoner, by want of due precaution, or through disobedience of orders, or wi lful 
neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner, fails to rejoin his se rvice when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with or communicates intelligence to the enemy 
or having come by the knowledge of any such correspondence  or communication, wilfully omits to 
discover it immediately to his commanding or other superior officer; or  
(c) without due authority sends a flag of truce to the enemy; shall, on conviction by court -martial, 
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
36. Offences punishable more severely on active service than at other times .—Any person subject 
to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force to  a sentry ; or 
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, picquet, patrol or post ; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp, garrison, or quarters ; or 
spreads reports calculated to create unnece ssary alarm or despondency ; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchword or counter sign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign different from what he received ; 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits any such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer impriso nment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits any such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years or such les s punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. Mutiny .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes, or conspires with any other persons to cause any mutiny in the 
military, naval or air forces of India or any forces co-operating therewith ; or 
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the same; or  17 
 (d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
commanding or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the military, naval. or air forces of India from his duty or 
allegiance to the Union;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
38. Desertion and aiding desertion .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if he commits the offence on active service or when under orders for active service, be liable to 
suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if he commits the offence under a ny other circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who, knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
court-martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subje ct to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to two years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
39. Absence without leave .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from proper authority that any 
corps, or portion of a corps, or any department, to which he belongs, has been ordered on active 
service, fails, without suffici ent cause, to rejoin without delay ; or 
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appoint ed for 
exercise or duty ; or 
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits  the parade or line of march ; or 
(f) when in camp or garrison or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place 
prohibited, by any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior 
officer ; or 
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordered to attend there;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Striking or threatening superior officers .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force to o r assaults his superior officer ; or 
(b) uses threatening lang uage to such officer ; or 
(c) uses insubord inate language to such officer;  18 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial,  
if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or,  if the offence is committed on active 
service, be liable  to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less 
punishment as is in this A ct mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five 
years.  
41. Disobedience to superior officer .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance o f authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or 
otherwise shall on conviction by court - martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a t erm which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful com mand given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by court - martial,  
if he commits such offence when on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment fo r a term 
which may extend to  fourteen years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned ; and  
if he commits such offence when not on active service, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a te rm 
which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Insubordination and obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affra y, or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to or assaults any such officer ; or 
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehe nd him or to have him in charge ; or 
(d) breaks ou t of barracks, camp or quarters ; or 
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the provost -marshal or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, or when called upon, 
refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a provost -marshal or any perso n lawfully acting on his 
behalf ; or 
(g) uses criminal force to  or assaults any person bringing provi sions or supplies to the forces ;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial , be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend, in the 
case of the offences specified in clauses ( d) and ( e) to two years, and in t he case of the offences specified 
in the other clauses to ten years , or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Fraudulent enrolment .— Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) without havi ng obtained a regular discharge from the corps or department to which he 
belongs, or otherwise fulfilled the conditions enabling him to enrol or enter, enrols himself in, or 
enters the same or any other corps or department or any part of the naval or air f orces of India or the 
Territorial Army; or  
(b) is concerned in the enrolment in any part of the Forces of any person when he knows o r has 
reason to believe such  person to be so circumstanced that by enrolling he comm its an offence against 
this Act ; 19 
 shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. False answers on enrolment .— Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enrolled shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
45. Unbecoming conduct .—Any officer, junior commissioned officer or warrant officer who 
behaves in a manner unbec oming his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by 
court -martial, if he is an officer, be liable to be cashiered or to suffer such less punishment as is in this 
Act mentioned; and, if he is a junior commissioned officer or a warra nt officer, be liable to be dismissed 
or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
46. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any d isgraceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or infirmity in himself, or intentionally delays his 
cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes  hurt to 
himself or that person ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Ill-treating a subordinate .—Any officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer or non -
commissioned officer who uses criminal force to or otherwise illtreats any person subject to this Act, 
being his subordinate in rank or position,  shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
48. Intoxication .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication, whether 
on duty or  not, shall, on conviction by court -martial, if he is an officer, be liable to be cashiered or to 
suffer such less punishment as is in this Act menti oned ; and, if he is not an officer, be liable, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2), to suffer imp risonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Where an offence of being intoxicated is committed by a person other than an officer when not on 
active service or not on duty, the period of impris onment awarded shall not exceed six months.  
49. Permitting escape of person in custody .— Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when in command of a guard, picquet, patrol or post, releases without pr oper authority, 
whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or refuses to 
receive any prisoner or person so committed; or  
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wilfully to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he h as not 
acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
50. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the fol lowing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the pro per authority for investigation ; or 20 
 (b) having committed a person to military custody fail s without reasonable cause to d eliver at the 
time of such com mittal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight hours. thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
51. Escape  from custody .— Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
52. Offences in respect of property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any military, naval or air 
force mess, b and or institution, or to any person subject to m ilitary, naval or air force law ; or 
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly r eceives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such offence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Gove rnment entrusted to him ; or 
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person;  
shall, on conviction by court -martia l, be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
53. Extortion and corruption .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority exacts from any p erson money, provisions or service ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
54. Making away with equipment .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments. tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to h im for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or  decoration granted to him;   
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a te rm which may extend in the 
case of the offences specified in clause ( a) to ten years, and in the case of the offences specified in the 
other clauses to five years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
55. Injury to property .—Any person subj ect to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 54 or any property 
belonging to any military, naval or air force mess, band or institution, or to any person  subject to 
military, naval or air force law, or serving with, or attached to, the regular Army; or  21 
 (b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Government 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -treats or  loses any, animal entrusted to him;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wil fully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishm ent as is in this Act mentioned ; and if he has 
acted w ithout reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
56. False accusations .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say ,— 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false ; or 
(b) in making a complaint under section 26 or section 27 makes any statement affecting the 
character of any person s ubject to this Act, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be 
false or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
57. Falsifying official documents and false declaration .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or othe r document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the  accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of any false or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowi ngly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud ; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his dut y to preserve or 
produce ; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter, knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension,  allowance or other advanta ge or 
privilege by  a state ment which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true e ntry or docum ent containing a 
true statement ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
58. Signing in blank and failure to rep ort.—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any, property of the Government fraudulently leaves  in blank any material part for w hich 
his signature is a voucher ; or 
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which  it is his duty to 
make or send ; 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liabl e to suffer imprison ment f or a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  22 
 59. Offences relating to courts -martial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or or dered to attend as a witness before a court martial, wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a court -martial to be taken 
or mad e; or 
(c) refuses to produce  or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a court -
martial to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses when a witness to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer ; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of court -martial  by using insulting or threatening language, or by causing 
any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such court;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial , be liable to suffer imprison ment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less pun ishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
60. False evidence .—Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any court -martial or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation, makes any 
statement which  is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentio ned. 
61. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer or non -
commissioned officer who, having received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or 
refuses to pay the same when due, shall, on convict ion by court - martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
62. Offences in relation to aircraft and flying .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the fol lowing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) wilfully or without reasonable excuse damages, destroys or loses any aircraft or aircraft 
material belonging to the Government: or  
(b) is guilty of any act or neglect likely to cause such damage, destruction or loss ; or 
(c) without lawful authority disposes of any aircraft or aircraft material belonging to the 
Government; or  
(d) is guilty of any act or neglect in flying, or in the use of any aircraft, or in relation to any 
aircraft or aircraft material, which causes or  is likely to cause loss of life or bodily injury to any 
person ; or  
(e) during a state of war, wilfully and without proper occasion, or negligently, causes the 
sequestration, by or under the authority of a neutral State, or the destruction in a neutral St ate of any 
aircraft,  belonging to the Government;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable, if he has acted wil fully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, and, in any other 
case, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
63. Violation of good order and discipline .—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission which, tho ugh not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and military discipline 
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
64. Miscellaneous offences .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
his command has beaten or otherwise maltreated  or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair or 23 
 market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured person or to 
report t he case to the proper authority ; or 
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of warrant officer, when off duty, ap pears without proper authority, in or 
about camp or cantonments, or in or about, or when going to or returning from, any town or bazar, 
carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept  or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment „of any 
person, or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgence for any person in the 
service; or  
(f) commi ts any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving;  
shall, on conviction by court -martial, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
65. Attempt .—Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 34 to 64 inclusive and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, 
shall, on conviction by  court -martial, where no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment 
of such attempt, be liable,  
if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such le ss punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment 
as is in this Act mentioned.  
66. Abetment of offences that have been committed .—Any person subject to this Act who abets the 
commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 64 inclusive shall, on conviction by court -
martial, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is made 
by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment provided for that 
offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
67. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not committed .—Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 34, 37 and 
sub-section ( 1) of section 38 shall, on conviction by court - martial, if that o ffence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such 
abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this A ct mentioned.  
68. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed .—Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 34 to 64 
inclusive and punishable with imprisonment shall, on convic tion by court -martial, if that offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of 
the longes t term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
69. Civil offences .—Subject to the provisions of section 70, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in or beyond India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this 
Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried by a court -martial and, on 
conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable unde r any law in force in India with death or 
with transportation, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned for the 
offence, by the aforesaid law and such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  24 
 (b) in any other case,  he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, other than whipping, assigned 
for the offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
70. Civil offence not  triable by court -martial .—A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder against a person not subject to military, naval or air force law, or of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder against such a person or of rape in relation to such a person, shall not be deemed 
to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tried by a court -martial, unless he commits any 
of the said offences — 
(a) while on active service, or  
(b) at any place outside India, or  
(c) at a frontier post speci fied by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.  
1*   *   *  *   * 
CHAPTER VII  
PUNISHMENTS  
71. Punishments awardable by courts -martial .—Punishments may be inflicted in respect of 
offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicte d by courts -martial, according to the scale 
following, that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) transportation for life or for any period not less than seven years;  
(c) imprisonment, either rigorous or simple, for any period not exceeding fourteen years;  
(d) cashie ring, in the case of officers;  
(e) dismissal from the service;  
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their rank, in the case of 
warrant officers; and reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade, in the case o f non -
commissioned officers:  
Provided that a warrant officer reduced to the ranks shall not be required to serve in the ranks as a 
sepoy;  
(g) forfeiture of seniority of rank, in the case of officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers and non -commissioned officers; and forfeiture of all or any part of their service for the 
purpose of promotion, in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of service;  
(h) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any oth er prescribed purpose;  
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand, in the case of officers,  junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers and non -commissioned officers;  
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an offence 
committed on active service;  
(k) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to cashiering or dismissal from the service of all 
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such cashiering or 
dismissal;  
(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
                                                           
1.  The Explanation  omitted by Act 13  of 1975, s.  3 (w.e.f.  25-1-1975).  25 
 72. Alternative punishments awardable by court -martial .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a 
court -martial may, on convicting a person subje ct to this Act of any of the offences specified in          
sections 34 to 68 inclusive, award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the 
said sections to be punishable, or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in  the scale set out in 
section 71, regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
73. Combination of punishments .—A sentence of a court -martial may award in addition to, or 
without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of section 71 and 
any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( f) to ( l) of that section.  
74. Cashiering of officers .—An officer shall be sentenced to be cashiered before he is awarded any 
of the punishments specified in clauses ( a) to ( c) of section 71.  
75. [Field punishment .] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 1992 (37 of 1992 ), s. 2                         
(w.e.f. 6 -9-192). 
76. [Position of Field punishment in scale of punishments .] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 
1992 (37 of 1992 ), s. 2 (w.e.f. 6 -9-192). 
77. Result of certain punishments in the case of a warrant officer or non -commissioned 
officer .—A warrant officer or a non - commissioned officer sentenced by a court -martial to tr ansportation, 
imprisonment, 1* * * or dis missal from the service, shall be de emed to be reduced to ranks.  
78. Retention in the ranks of a person convicted on active service .—When, on active service, an y 
enrolled person has been sen tenced by a court -martial to dismissal, or to transportation or im prisonment 
whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed officer may direct that such person may be 
retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall be reckoned as part of his term of transportation or 
imprisonment, if any.  
79. Punishments o therwise than by court -martial .—Punishments may also be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a court -martial and in the 
manner stated in sections 80, 83, 84 and 85.  
80. Punishment of persons other than officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant 
officers .—Subject to the provisions of section 81, a commanding officer or such other officer as is, with 
the consent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 2[the Chief of the Army Staff], may,  in the prescribed 
manner, proceed against a p erson subject to this Act other wise than as an officer, junior commissioned 
officer or warrant officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person, to the 
extent prescribed, one or more  of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) imprisonment in military custody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention up to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties ; 
(e) deprivation of a  position of the nature of an appointment or of corps or working pay, and in 
the case of non -commissioned officers, also deprivation of acting rank or reduction to a lower grade 
of pay;  
(f) forfeiture of go od service and good conduct pay;  
(g) severe reprimand o r reprimand ; 
(h) fine up to fourteen days ‟ pay in any one month;  
(i) penal deductions under clause ( g) of section 91 ; 
3*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. The words “field punishment ” omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s. 3.   
2. Subs. by  Act 19 of 1955. s. 2 and Sch., for “ the Commander -in-Chief ”. 
3. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s.  4. 26 
 81. Limit of punishments under section 80 .—1*            *                    *                  *                 *. 
 (2) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) 
of the said section, the punishment specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of 
the punishment specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
(3) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) are awarded to 
a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not exceed in  the aggregate forty -two days.  
(4) The puni shments specified in clauses 2[(a), (b) and ( c)] of section 80 shall not be awarded to any 
person who is of the rank of non -commissioned officer or was, at the time of committing the offence for 
which he is punish ed, of such rank.  
(5) The punishment specified in clause ( g) of the said section shall not be awarded to any person 
below the rank of a non - commissioned officer.  
82. Punishments in addition to those specified in section 80 .—3[The Chief of the Army Staff] may, 
with the consent of the Central Government, specify such other punishments as may be awarded under 
section 80 in addition to or without any of the punishments specified in the said section, and the extent to 
which such other punishments may be awarded . 
83. Punishment of officers, junior commissioned officers and warrant officers by brigade 
commanders and other s.—An officer having power not less than a brigade, or an equivalent commander 
or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Ce ntral Gover nment, specified by  3[the Chief of the 
Army Staff ] may in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a field officer, a 
junior commissioned officer or a warrant officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act, and 
award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) stoppage of pay and  allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
84. Punishment of officers, junior  commissioned officers and warrant officers by area 
commanders and others .—An officer having power not less than an area commander or an equivalent 
commander or an officer empowered to convene a general court -martial or such other officer as is, with 
the c onsent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 3[the Chief of the Army Staff] may, in the prescribed 
manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of lieutenant -colonel, a junior commissioned officer or 
a warrant officer, who is charged with an offence  under this Act, and award one or more of the following 
punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period  not exceeding twelve months, 
but subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tried by a court -martial;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the off ence of 
which he is convicted is made good.  
85. Punishment of junior commissioned officers .—A commanding officer or such other officer as 
is, with the consent of the Ce ntral Government, specified by 3[the Chief of the Army Staff] may, in the 
prescribed man ner, proceed against a junior commissioned officer who is charged with an offence under 
this Act 4[and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “(a), (b), (c) and ( j)”.  
3.  Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Comm ander -in-Chief ” 
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 6, for certain words.  27 
 (ii) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence of 
which he is convicted is made good:  
Provided that the punishment specified in clause ( i) shall not be awarded if the commanding 
officer or such other officer is below the rank of Colonel] . 
86. Transmission of pro ceedings .—In every case in which punishment has been awarded under any 
of the sections 83, 84 and 85, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed 
manner, by the officer awarding the punishment, to a superior military auth ority as defined in section 88.  
87. Review of proceedings .—If any punishment awarded under any of the sections 83, 84 and 85 
appears to a superior military authority as defined in section 88 to be illegal, unjust or excessive, such 
authority may cancel, va ry or remit the punishment and make such other direction as may be appropriate 
in the circumstances of the case.  
88. Superior military authority .—For the purpose of sections 86 and 87, a “superior military 
authority “ means — 
(a) in the case of punishments awarded by a commanding officer, any officer superior in 
command to such commanding officer;  
(b) in the case of punishments awarded by any other authority, the Central Government, 1[the 
Chief of the Army Staff]  or other officer specified by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] .  
89. Collective fines .—(1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon forming part of the equipment 
of a half squadron, battery, company or other similar unit is lost or stolen, the officer commanding the 
army, army corps, division or indepen dent brigade to which such unit belongs may, after obtaining the 
report of a court of inquiry, impose a collective fine upon the junior commissioned officers, warrant 
officers, non -commissioned officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his judgment, 
should be held responsible for such loss or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENAL DEDUCTIONS  
90. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers .—The following  penal deductions may be 
made from the pay and allowances of an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given to his commanding office r and has been approved by the 
Central Government;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody or under suspension from duty on 
a charge for an offence for which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or a court -martial or 
by an  officer exercising authority  under section 83 or section 84 ; 
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation for  any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by the court - martial 
by whom he is convicted of such offence, or by an officer exercising authority  under section 83 or 
section 84 ; 
(e) all pay and allowances  ordered by a court -martial 2* * * to be forfeited or stopped;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for the “Commander -in-Chief ”.  
2. The words and figures “or an officer exercising authority under section 85”  omitted by Act 37 of 1992 , s. 7.  28 
 (f) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court or a court -martial exercisin g 
jurisdiction under section 69 ; 
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage, or dest ruction of public or regimental 
property which, after due investigation, appears to the Central Government to have been occasioned 
by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Go vernment if the officer is found by 
a court of inquiry constituted by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] in this behalf, to have deserted to the 
enemy, or while in enemy hands, to have served with, or under the orders of, the enemy, or in any 
manner to have a ided the enemy, or to have allowed himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy , 
through want of due precaution or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having 
been taken prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to rejoin his servic e when it was possible to do so ; 
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Governme nt 2[or any prescribed officers] to be paid 
for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief 
given by the said Governmen t to the said wife or child.  
91. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons other than officers .—Subject to the 
provisions of section 94 the following penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of a 
person subject to this Act other than an  officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without leave, or as a 
prisoner of war, and for every day of transportation or imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, a 
court -martial or an officer exe rcising  authority under section 80, 3***;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or a court -martial, or on a charge of absence 
without leave for wh ich he is afte rwards awarded imprisonment 4*** by an officer exercising 
authority under section 80;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been ca used by an offence under this Act 
committed by him;  
(d) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer 
attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or imprudence, such sum as may be 
specified by order of the Central Government or such officer as may be specified by that 
Government;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by a court -martial or by an officer exercising authority under 
any of the sections 80, 83, 84 and  85, to be forfeited or stopped ; 
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being taken prisoner by, or while in 
the hands of, the enemy;  
(g) any sum required to make good such c ompensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property as may be 
awarded by his commanding officer;  
(h) any sum required to, pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, a court -martial e xercising 
jurisdiction under section 69, or an officer exercising authority under any of the sections 80 and 89;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Commander - in-Chief ”. 
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 7.  
3. Certain words omitted by s. 8, ibid.  
4. The words “the field punishment” omitted by s. 8, ibid.  29 
 (i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for 
the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate  or illegitimate child or towards the cost of any relief 
given by the said Government to the said wife or child.  
92. Computation of time of absence or custody .—For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b) of            
section 91, — 
(a) no person shall be treate d as absent or in custody for a day unless the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another, for six consecutive hours 
or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as abs ence or custody for a day if 
such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling any military duty which was thereby 
thrown upon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upwards may be reckoned as absence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the person was absent or in custody;  
(d) a period of absence, or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends after, midnight may 
be reckoned as a day.  
93. Pay and allowances during trial .—In the  case of any person subject to this Act who is in 
custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence, the  prescribed officer may direct that 
the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld, pending the result of his 
trial on the charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause ( b) of sections 90 and 91.  
94. Limit of certain deductions .—The total deductions from the pay and allowances of a person 
made under clauses ( e), (g) to ( i) of secti on 91 shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal, exceed 
in any one month one -half of his pay and allowances for that month.  
95. Deduction from public money due to a person .—Any sum authorised by this Act to be 
deducted from the pay and allowance s of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to him other than a pension.  
96. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct .—Where the conduct 
of any person s ubject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of, the enemy, is to 
be inquired into un der this Act or any other law, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] or any officer authorised 
by him may order that the whole or any part of the pay an d allowances of such person shall be withheld 
pending the result of such inquiry.  
97. Remission of deductions .—Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be remitted in such manner and to such extent, and by such authority, as may fro m time to time be 
prescribed.  
98. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from remitted deductions .—In the case of all 
persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and allowances have been forfeited under 
clause ( h) of section 90 or c lause ( a) of section 91, but in respect of whom a remission has been made 
under section 97, it shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities out of 
such pay and allowances for any dependants of such persons, and any such rem ission shall in that case be 
deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances.  
99. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his pay and allowances .—It shall be lawful 
for proper provision to be made by the prescri bed authorities for any dependants of any person subject to 
this Act who is a prisoner of war or is missing, out of his pay and allowances.  
100. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war .—For the purposes of 
sections 98 and 99, a perso n shall be deemed to continue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2  and the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief ”. 30 
 any inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in section 96, and if he is cashiered or dismissed from 
the service in consequence of such conduct, until the date of such cas hiering or dismissal.  
CHAPTER IX  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
101. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into military custody.  
(2) Any such person may be ordered into military custody by any superior officer.  
(3) An officer may order into military custody any officer, though he may be of a higher rank, 
engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder.  
102. Duty of commanding officer in regard to detention .—(1) It shall be the duty of every 
comm anding officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without the charge being investigated, u nless investigation within that period seems to 
him to be impracticable having regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reason thereof, shall be reported by the comma nding officer to the general or other officer to whom 
application would be made to convene a general or district court - martial for the trial of the person 
charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section ( 1), Sundays and other public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in military c ustody, pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence committed by him.  
103. Interval between commit tal and court -martial .—In every case where any such person as is 
mentioned in section 101 and as is not on active service remains in such cus tody for a longer period than 
eight days, without a court -martial for his trial being ordered to assemble, a special report giving reasons 
for the delay shall be made by his commanding officer in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall 
be forward ed at intervals of every eight days until a court - martial is assembled or such person is released 
from custody.  
104. Arrest by civil authorities .—Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of any 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdic tion of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to military custody of such person upon receipt of 
a written application to that effect signe d by his commanding officer.  
105. Capture of  deserters .—(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the commanding 
officer of the corps, department or detachment to which he belongs, shall give written information of the 
desertion to such civil authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to  afford assistance towa rds the capture 
of the deserter ; and such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in 
like manner as if he were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate, and 
shall deliver the deserter , when apprehended, into military custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shall bring him w ithout delay before the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
106. Inquiry into absence without leave .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from his duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of inqu iry shall, as soon as 
practicable, be assembled, and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed 
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property of the 
Government entrusted to hi s care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or 31 
 necessaries ; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due authority or other sufficient cause, the 
court shall declare such absence and the period thereof, and the said de ficiency, if any, and the 
commanding officer of the corps or department to which the person belongs shall enter in the               
court -martial book of the corps or department a record of the declaration.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not after wards surr ender or is not apprehended, he  shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
107. Provost -marshals .—(1) Provos t-marshals may be appointed by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] 
or by any prescribed officer.  
(2) The duties of a prov ost-marshal are to take charge of persons confined for any offence, to preserve 
good order and discipline, and to prevent breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to, the 
regular Army.  
(3) A provost -marshal may act any time arrest and detain  for trial any person subject to this Act who 
commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in 
pursuance of the sentence awarded by a court -martial, or by an officer exercising authority under                
section 80 but shall not inflict any punishment on his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), a provost -marshal sha ll be deemed to include a 
provost -marshal appointed under any law for the time being in force relating to the Government of the 
Navy or Air Force, and any person legally exercising authority under him or on his behalf.  
CHAPTER X  
COURTS -MARTIAL  
108. Kinds o f courts -martial .—For the purposes of this Act there shall be four kinds of courts -
martial, that is to say, — 
(a) general courts -martial;  
(b) district courts -martial;  
(c) summary general courts -martial; and  
(d) summary courts -martial.  
109. Power to convene a general court -martial .—A general court - martial may be convened  by the 
Central Government or 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or by any officer empowered in this beha lf by 
warrant of 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ].  
110. Power to convene a district court -martial .—A district court - martial may be convened by an 
officer having power to convene a general court -martial or by any officer empowered in this behalf by 
warrant of any such officer.  
111. Contents of warrants issued under sections 109 and 110 .—A warra nt issued under section 
109 or section 110 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may 
think fit.  
112. Power to convene a summary general court -martial .—The following authorities shall have 
power to convene a sum mary general court -martial, namely, — 
(a) an officer empowered in this behalf by an order o f the Central Government or of  1[the Chief 
of the Army Staff ]; 
(b) on active service, the officer commanding the forces in the field, or any officer empowered by 
him in this behalf;  
                                                           
1  Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and Sch edule , for “the Commander -in-Chief ”. 32 
 (c) an officer commanding any detached portion of the regular Army on active service when, in 
his opinion, it is not practicable, with due regard to discipline and the exi gencies of the service, that 
an offence should be tried by a general  court -martial.  
113. Composition of general court -martial .—A general court -martial shall consist of not less than 
five officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than three whole years and of whom not 
less than four are of a rank not below t hat of captain.  
114. Composition of district court -martial .—A district court -martial shall consist of not less than 
three officers, each of whom has held a commission for not less than two whole years.  
115. Composition of summary general court -martial .—A summary general court -martial shall 
consist of not less than three officers.  
116. Summary court -martial .—(1) A summary court -martial may be held by the commanding 
officer of any corps, department or detachment of the regular Army, and he sh all alone constit ute the 
court.  
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or junior 
commissioned officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
117. Dissolution of courts -martial .—(1) If a court -martial after the commencement of a trial is 
reduced below the minimum number of officers required by t his Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the judge advocate or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to contin ue the trial, a co urt-martial shall be dissolved.  
(3) The officer who convened a court -martial may dissolve such court -martial if it appears to him that 
military exigencies or the necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to c ontinue th e said 
court -martial.  
(4) Where a court -martial is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
118. Powers of general and summary general courts -martial .—A general or summary general 
court -martial shall have power to try any person subjec t to this Act for any offence punishable therein and 
to pass any sentence authorised thereby.  
119. Powers of district courts -martial .—A district court -martial shall have power to try any person 
subject to this Act other than an officer or a junior commissi oned officer for any offence made punishable 
therein, and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death, transportation, or 
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years:  
Provided that a district court -martial shall not sentence  a warrant officer to imprisonment.  
120. Powers of summary courts -martial .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a 
summary court -martial may try any off ence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and r eference can without detriment to 
discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a district court -martial or on active service a 
summary general court -martial for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer holding a summary court -
martial shall n ot try without such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 34, 37 and 
69, or any offence against  the officer holding the court.  
(3) A summary court -martial may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of the 
officer hold ing the court, except an officer, junior commissio ned officer or warrant officer.  
(4) A summary court -martial may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except a 
sentence of death or transportation, or of imprisonment for a term exceeding th e limit specified in                 
sub-section ( 5). 
(5) The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be one year if the officer holding the summary    
court -martial is of the rank of lieutenant -colonel and upwards, and three months if such officer is b elow 
that rank.  33 
 121. Prohibition of second tria l.—When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a court -martial or by a criminal court, or has been dealt with under any of the 
sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a court - martial 
or dealt with under the said sections.  
122. Period of limitation for trial .—(1) Except as provided by sub -section ( 2), no trial by                  
court -martial of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expirat ion of 
a period of three years 1[and such period shall commence, — 
(a) on the date of the offence; or  
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the o ffence o r 
to the authority com petent to initiate action, the first day on which such offence comes to the 
knowledge of such person or auth ority, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not kno wn by whom the offence was com mitted, the first day on which the identi ty 
of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority competent to 
initiat e action, whichever is earlier.]  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of desertion or fraudulent 
enrolment  or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37.  
(3) In the computation of the p eriod of time mentioned in sub -section ( 1), any time spent by such 
person as a prisoner of war, or in enemy territory, or in evading arrest after the commission of the offe nce, 
shall be excluded.  
(4) No trial for an offence of desertion other than desertion on active service or of fraudulent 
enrolment shall be commenced if the person in question, not being an officer, has subsequently to the 
commission of the offence, served  continuously in an exemplary manner for not less than three years with 
any portion of the regular Army.  
123. Liability of offender who ceases to be subject to Act .—(1) Where an offence under this Act 
had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he may 
be taken into and kept in military custody, and tried and punished for such offence as if he continued to be 
so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offen ce, unless his trial commences 2[within a period of three 
years after he had ceased to be subject to this Act; and in computing such period, the time during which 
such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself or where the institution of the 
proceeding in respect of the offen ce has been stayed by an injunction or order, the period of the 
continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it 
was withdrawn, shall be excluded:]  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section s hall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or fraudulent enrolment or for any of the offences mentioned in section 37 or shall 
affect the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try any offence triable by such court as well as by a court -
martial.  
(3) When a person subject to th is Act is sentenced by a court -martial to transportation or 
imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is cashiered or 
dismissed from the regular Army, or has otherwise  ceased to be subject to this Act, and he may be kept, 
removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.  
(4) When a person subject to th is Act is sentenced by a court -martial to death, this Act shall apply to 
him till the sent ence is carried out.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 9, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for certain words.  34 
 124. Place of trial. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.  
125. Choice between criminal court and court -martial .—When a criminal court and a                      
court -martial have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the officer 
commanding the army, army corps, division or independent brigade in which the accused person is 
serving or such other officer a s may be prescribed to decide before which court the proceedings shall be 
instituted, and, if that officer decides that they shoul d be instituted before a court -martial, to direct that the 
accused person shall be detained in military custody.  
126. Power of  criminal court to require delivery of offender .—(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in  section 125 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings pending a reference to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall eith er deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted for the determination of the Central Government, whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
127. [Successive trials by a criminal court and court -martial. ] Omitted by the Army (Amendment )  
Act, 1992 (37 of 1992), s. 11 (w.e.f.  6-9-1992)  
CHAPTER XI  
PROCEDURE OF COURTS -MARTIAL  
128. Presiding officer .—At every general, district or summary general court -martial the senior 
member shall be the presiding officer.  
129. Judge advocate .—Every general court -martial shall, and every district or summary general 
court -martial may, be attended by a judge advocate, who shall be either an officer belongi ng to the 
department of the Judge Advocate General, or if no such officer is available, an officer approved of by the 
Judge Advocate General or any of his deputies.  
130. Challenges .—(1) At all trials by general, district or summary general court -martial, a s soon as 
the court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read over to the accused, 
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by any officer sitting on the court.  
(2) If the accused objects to any such o fficer, his objection, and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to, shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged officer decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by o ne-half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to ob ject. 
(4) When no challenge is made, or when challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial.  
131. Oaths of member, judge advocate and witness .—(1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of every court -martial and to the judge advocate before  the 
commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving eviden ce before a court -martial shall be examined after being duly sworn or 
affirmed in the prescribed form.  35 
 (3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the court -martial is of opinion that tho ugh the witn ess understands the duty of speaking the 
truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
132. Voting by members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision 
of a court -martial shall be passed b y an absolute majority of votes ; and where there is an equality of votes 
on either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shal l be passed by a general court -martial without the concurrence of a t least 
two-thirds of the members of the court.  
(3) No sentence of death shall be passed by a summary general court -martial without the concurrence 
of all the members.  
(4) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer  shall have a 
casting vote.  
133. General rule as to evidence .—The Indian  Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ) shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a court -martial.  
134. Judicial notice .—A court -martial may take judicial n otice of any matter within the general 
military knowledge of the members.  
135. Summoning wit nesses .—(1) The convening officer, the presidi ng officer of a court -martial, 1[or 
courts of inquiry] the judge advocate or the commanding officer of the accused per son may, by summons 
under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in the summons, of any person 
either to give evidence or to produ ce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness amenable to military authority, th e summons shall be sent to his 
commanding officer, and such officer shall  serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be or reside, and such magistrate sh all give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required i n the court of such magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular document or other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable preci sion.  
136. Documents exempted from production .—(1) Nothing in section 135 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the cu stody of the p ostal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any district magistrate, chief presidency 
magistrate, High Court or Court of Session, wanted for the purpose of any court -martial, such magistrate 
or Co urt may require the postal o r telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to deliver such document to 
such person as such magistrate or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any commissioner of police 
or district superintendent of police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause search to be made for and to detain such document pending the 
orders of any such district magistrate, chief pr esidency magistrate or High Court or Court of Session.  
137. Commissions for examination of witness es.—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by court -
martial, it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, a nd 
that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such Court may address 
the Judge Advocate General in order that a commission to t ake the evidence  of such witness may be 
issued.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s.12 . 36 
 (2) The Judge Advocate General may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any district 
magistrate or magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such witness 
resides, to tak e the evidence of such witness.  
(3) The magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the district magistrate, he 
or such magistrate of the first class as he appoints in this behalf, shall proceed to the place where the 
witness is or shall summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same manner, 
and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in tri als of warrant -cases under the 1[code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ),] or any correspo nding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir .] 
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in any place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in 1[Chapter XXII of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,] 
or of any corresponding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and  Kashmir .] 
(5) In this and the next succeeding section, the exp ression “Judge Advocate General ” includes a 
Deputy Judge Advocate General.  
138. Examination of a withness on commission .—(1) The prosecutors and the accused person in 
any case in which a commission is issued under section 137 may respectively forward any interrogatories 
in writing which the Court may think relevant to the issue, and the magistrate or officer executing the 
commiss ion shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such magistrate or officer by counsel  
or, except in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and            
re-examine, as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 137 has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Judge Advocate General.  
(4) On receipt of a commission and deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Judge Advocate 
General shall forward the same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if such 
Court has been dissolved, to any other Court convened for the tr ial of the accused person; and the 
commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part of the proceedings of the Court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 137, the trial may be adjourned for a 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
139. Conviction of offence not charged .—(1) A person charged before a court -martial with 
desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without leave.  
(2) A person charged before a court -martial with attempting to desert may be found  guilty of being 
absent without leave.  
(3) A person charged before a court -martial with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault.  
(4) A person charged before a court -martial with using threatening language may be found guilty of 
using insubordin ate language.  
(5) A person charged before a court -martial with any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) and ( d) of section 52 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have 
been charged.  
(6) A person charged b efore a court -martial with an offence punishable under section 69 may be 
found guilty of any other offence of which he might have been found guilty if the provisions of the 
1[Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 )] were applicable.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s.1 4, for certain words.   
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “a Part B State ”. 37 
 (7) A person char ged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act, may, on failure of proof 
of an offence having been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found 
guilty of the same offence as having been committed in circumstances invo lving a less severe 
punishment.  
(8) A person charged before a court -martial with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of 
having attempted or abetted the commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not 
separately charged.  
140. Presumption as to signatures .—In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed  by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.  
141. Enrolment paper .—(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be eviden ce of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions which he is there in represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to  be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment paper.  
142. Presumption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the cashiering, dismissal or discharge of any person from , any portion of the 
regular Army, or respecting the circumstance of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any 
portion of the Forces, if purporting to be signed by or on behal f of the Central Government or 1[the Chief 
of the Army Staff], or by a ny prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such letter, return 
or other document.  
(2) An Army, Navy or Air Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be 
evidence of the status and rank of the officers, junior commissioned officers or warrant officers therein 
mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of the corps, battalion or arm or branch of the 
services to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any regimental book in pursuance of this Act o r of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in pursuance of military duty, and purports to be signed by the commanding 
officer or by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts 
therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any regimental book purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence witho ut 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other  person subject to 
this Act, or any portion of the regular Army, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a 
certificate purporting to be signed by such offi cer, or by the commanding officer of that portion of the 
regular Army, or by the commanding officer of the corps, department or detachment to which such person 
belongs, as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehens ion, and 
the manner in which he was dressed, shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody  of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and  the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief “. 38 
 (7) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant 
Chemical Examiner to Government 1[or any of the Government scientific experts namely, t he Chief 
Inspector of the Explosives, the Director of the Finger Print Bureau, the Director, Haffkeine Institute, 
Bombay, the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a State Forensic Science Laboratory 
and t he Serologist to the Government ] upo n any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report may be used as evidence in any proceeding under this Act.  
143. Reference by accused to Government officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, overst aying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the person tried states in his 
defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof to 
any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appears t hat any such officer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedin gs until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him  be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made on oath be fore the court.  
(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply, or if the court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his di scretion, annul the proceedings and order a, 
fresh trial.  
144. Evidence of previous convictions and general character .—(1) When any person subject to 
this Act  has been convicted by a court -martial of any offence, such court -martial may inquire into, and 
receive and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a court -martial or by a 
criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under any of the sections 80, 83, 84 and 85, and may 
further inquire into and record the general cha racter of such person and such other matters as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, court -martial books or other official records ; and it shall not be n ecessary to give notice 
before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions  or character will be received.  
(3) At a summary court -martial the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any previous 
convictions against  the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of 
his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.  
145. Lunacy of accused .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a tria l by a court -martial, it appears to the 
court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the court shal l record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the court, or, in the case of a summary court -martial, the officer holding 
the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the con firming officer, or to the authority empowered to deal 
with its finding under s ection 162, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the acc used person tried by the same or another court -martial for 
the off ence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a summary court -martial is reported under sub -section ( 2), 
and a confirming officer confirming a finding in any case so reported to him shall order the accused 
person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders of the 
Cent ral Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4) the Central Government may order the accus ed person 
to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
                                                           
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 15.  39 
 146. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial .—Where any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under 
detention under section 145, the officer commanding the army, army corps, division or brigade within the 
area of whose command the accused is in custody or is detained, or any other officer prescribed in this 
behalf, may — 
(a) if such  person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 145, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capabl e of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 145, on a certificate of the 
Inspector Gen eral of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub -
section on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum that he is  capable of making 
his defence,  
take steps to have such person trie d by the same or another court -martial for the offence with which he 
was originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
147. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 146 .—A copy of every order 
made by an officer under secti on 146 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
148. Release of lunatic accused .—Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 145 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that sect ion— 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or  
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 146  that, in the judgment of such officer or authority 
such person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred to a  
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
149. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives .—Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 145 or under detention under sub -section (5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may upon application 
by such relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 
delivered shall be pro perly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or any other person, 
and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered to such relative o r friend.  
150. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial .—When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a court -martial during a trial, the court may make such 
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the 
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary,  
order it to be so ld or otherwise disposed of.  
151. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed .—(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any court -martial, the Court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence 
of such court -martial, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of a court -martial whose 
finding or sentence does not require confirmation, the officer commanding the army, army corps, division 
or brigade within which the trial was held, may make such  order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by 
destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof, or 
otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, or regarding which 
any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for  the commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order  signed and certified by the authority 40 
 making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by h im under the provisions of the 1[Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], or any correspo nding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir].  
(3) In this section the term “property” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been conv erted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
152. Powers of court -martial in relation to proceedings under this Act .—Any trial by a court -
martial under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed  to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the court -martial shall be deemed to be  a 
Court within the meaning of 3[sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                     
(2 of 1974) ].  
CHAPTER XII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
153. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed .—No finding or sentence of a general, 
district or summary general, court -martial shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as pr ovided 
by this Act.  
154. Power to confirm finding  and sentence of general court -martial .—The findings and 
sentences of general courts -martial may be confirmed by the Central Government, or by any officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Central Government.  
155. Power to confirm finding and sentence of district court -martial .—The findings and 
sentences of district court -martial may be confirmed by any officer having power to convene a general 
court-martial or by any officer empowered in this behal f by warrant of such officer.  
156. Limitation of powers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under section 154 or section 
155 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
157. Power to confirm fi nding and sentence of summary general court -martial .—The findings 
and sentences of summary general court -martial may be confirmed by the convening officer or if he so 
directs, by an authority superior to him.  
158. Power of confirming authority to mitigate,  remit or commute sentences .—(1) Subject to 
such restrictions, reservations or conditions as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 154 
or section 155 and to the provision of sub -section ( 2), a confirming authority may, when confirming the 
sentence of a court -martial, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that 
punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 71.  
(2) A sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sentence of i mprisonment for a te rm 
exceeding the term of trans portation awarded by the Court.  
159. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship .—When any person subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced  by a court -martial while on board a ship, the finding an d sentence so far as not 
confirmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembarkation.  
                                                           
1. Su bs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 14, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956 for “a Part B State ”. 
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 16 , for certain words . 41 
 160. Revision of finding or sentence .—(1) Any finding or sentence of a court -martial which requires 
confirmation may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Co urt, if 
so directed by the con -firming authority, may take additional evidence.  
(2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the same offi cers as were present when the original 
decision was passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the court shall proceed with the revi sion, provided that, if a general court -martial, it still consists of 
five officers, or, if a sum mary general or district court -martial, of three officers.  
161. Finding and sentence of a summary court -martial .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -
section (2), the finding and sentence of a summary court -martial shall not require to be confirmed, but 
may be carried out forthwith.  
(2) If the officer holding the trial is of less than five years service, he shall not, except on active 
service, carry into effect  any sentence until it has received the approval of an officer commanding not less 
than a brigade.  
162. Transmission of proceedings of summary court -martial .—The proceedings of every 
summary court -martial shall without delay be forwarded to the officer com manding the division or 
brigade within which the trial was held, or to the prescribed  officer; and such officer, or 1[the Chief of the 
Army Staff ], or any officer empowered in this behalf by 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ], may, for reasons 
based on the mer its of the case, but not any merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings or reduce 
the sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed.  
163. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases. —(1) Where a finding of guilty by a cou rt-
martial, which has been confirmed, or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be 
invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under section 
179 to commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid, may substitute a 
new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have been validly made by 
the court -martial on the charge and unless it appears that the court -martial must have been satisfied of the 
facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a court -martial which has been confirmed, or which does not require  
confirmation, not be ing a sen tence passed in pursuance of a new  finding substituted under sub -section ( 1), 
is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid 
sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, u nder this section shall, for the purposes of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a 
court -martial.  
164. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of court -martial .—(1) Any person su bject to this 
Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any court -martial may present a petition to 
the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such court -martial, and the 
confirming authority may take such ste ps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the 
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding to which the 
order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by  a finding or sentence of any 
court -martial which has been confirmed, may present a petit ion to the Central Government, 1[the Chief of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief ”.   42 
 the Army Staff ] or any pres cribed officer superior in com mand to the one who confirmed such finding or 
sentenc e, and the Central Government, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or other officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
165. Annulment of proceedings .—The Central Government, 1[the Chief of the Army Staff] or any 
prescribed officer may  annul the proceedings of any court -martial on the ground that they are illegal or 
unjust.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES  
166. Form of sentence of death. —In awarding a sentence of death a court -martial shall, in its 
discretion, direct that the offende r shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
167. Commencement of sentence of transportation or imprisonment .—Whenever any person is 
sentenced by a court -martial under this Act to transpor tation or imprisonment, the term of his sentence 
shall, whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original 
proceedings were signed by the presiding officer or, in the case of a summary court -martial, by the court.  
168. Execution of sentence of transportation .—Whenever any sentence of transportation is passed 
under this Act or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to transportation, the commanding officer 
of the person under sentence or such other officer as may  be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the 
prescribed form to the officer in charge of the civil prison in which such person is to be confined and shall 
arrange for his despatch to such prison with the warrant.  
169. Execution of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a court -martial or whenever any sentence of death or transportation is commuted 
to imprisonment, the confirming officer or in case of a summary court -martial the officer holding the 
Court or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) and 
(4), direct either that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a military prison or that it shall 
be carried out by  confinement in a civi l prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section ( 1) the commanding officer of the person 
under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer in charge of the prison in which  such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his 
despatch to such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a court -martial, the appropriate officer u nder sub -section ( 1) may direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in military custody instead of in a civil or military prison.  
(4) On active service, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the off icer commanding the forces in the field may from time to time appoint.  
2[169A. Period of custody undergone by the officer or person to be set off against the 
imprisonment .—When a person or officer subject to this Act is sentenced by a court -martial to a te rm of 
imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period spent by him in civil 
or military custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case, and before the date of order of 
such sentence, shall be set off again st the term of imprisonment imposed upon him, and the liability of 
such person or officer to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentence shall be restricted to the 
remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed upon him.]  
170. Temporary custody of offender .—Where a sentence of transportation or imprisonment is 
directed to be undergone in a civil prison the offender may be kept in a military prison or in military 
custody or in any other fit place, till such time as it is possible send him to a civ il prison.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief ”. 
2.  Ins. by Act 37 of 1992, s.17.  43 
 171. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .—Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer commanding an army, army corps, division or independent brigade, any sentence or portion of a 
sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons , conveniently be carried out in a military prison or in 
military custody in accordance with the provision of section 169 such officer may direct that such 
sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil, prison or other fi t place.  
172. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place .—A person under sentence of transportation or 
imprisonment may during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board ship, aircraft, or 
otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is necessary  for his safe conduct and removal.  
173. Communication of certain orders to prison officers .—Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil or military pris on, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making 
the order or his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed to the officer in charge of the 
prison in which such person is confined.  
174. Execution of sentenc e of fine .—When a sentence of fine is imposed by a court -martial under 
section 69 whether the trial was held within India or not, a copy of such sentence, signed and certified by 
the confirming officer, or where no confirmation is required, by the officer holding the trial may be sent 
to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in 
accord ance with the provision of the 1[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ], or any 
corresponding law in force in 2[the State of Jammu and Kashmir] for the levy of fines as if it were a 
sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.  
175. Establishment and regulation of military prisons .—The Central Government may set apart 
any building or part of a building, or any place unde r its control, as a military prison for the confinement 
of persons sentenced to imprisonment under this Act.  
176. Informality or error in the order or warrant .—Whenever any person is sentenced to 
transportation or imprisonment under this Act, and is underg oing the sentence in any place or manner in 
which he might be confined under a lawful order or w arrant in pursuance of this Act , the confinement of 
such person shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of any informality or error in or as respects 
the order, warrant or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was 
brought into or is confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended 
accordingly.  
177. Power to make rules in respect o f prisons and prisoners .—The Central Government may 
make rules providing — 
(a) for the government, management and regulation of military prisons;   
(b) for the appointment, removal and powers of inspe ctors, visitors, governors and -officers 
thereof;  
(c) for the labour of prisoners undergoing confinement therein, and for enabling persons to earn, 
by special industry and good conduct, a remission of a portion of their sentence;  
(d) for the safe custody of prisoners and the maintenance of discipline among them a nd the 
punishment, by personal correction, restraint or otherwise, of offences committed by prisoners ; 
(e) for the application to military prisons of any of the provisions of the Prisons Act, 1894               
(9 of 1894), relating to the duties of 267 of ficers of prisons and the punishment  of persons not being 
prisoners ; 
(f) for the admission into any prison, at proper times and subject to proper restrict ions, of persons 
with whom pri soners may desire to communicate, and for the consultation by prisoners under trial 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1992, s. 14, for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ”.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) order,  1956,   for “a Part B State ”. 44 
 with their legal advisers without the presence as far as possible of any third party within hearing 
distance.  
178. Restriction of rulemaking power in regard to corporal punishment .—Rules made under 
section 177 shall not authorise corporal punis hment to be inflicted for any of fence, nor render the 
imprison ment more severe than it is under the law for the time being in force relating to civil prisons.  
CHAPTER XIV  
PARDONS, REMISSIONS AND SUSPENSIONS  
179. Pardon and remission .—When any person subjec t to this Act has been convicted by a                
court -martial of any offe nce, the Central Government or 1[the Chief of the Army Staff ] or, in the case of a 
sentence, which he could have confirmed or which did not, require confirmation, the officer com manding 
the army, army corps, division or independent brigade in which such person at the time of conviction was 
serving, or the prescribed officer may — 
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit th e whole or any part of the punishmen t awarded ; or 
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded ; or 
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or pun ishments mentioned in this Act:  
Provided that a sentence of transportation shall not be commuted for a sente nce of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding the term of tran sportation awarded by the court ; or 
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
180. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole  or remission. —(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release o r re-mission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel th e pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the court shall be carried into effect 
as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of transportation or imprisonment is carried into effect under th e 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
181. Reduction of warrant officer or non -commissioned office r.—When under the provisions of 
section  77 a warrant officer or a non -commissioned officer is deemed to be  reduced to the ranks, such 
reduction shall, for the purpose of section 179, be treated as a punishment awarded by a sentence of a 
court -martial.  
182. Suspension of sentence of transportation or imprisonment .—(1) Where a person subject to 
this Act is sente nced by a court -martial to transportation or imprisonment, the Centr al Government, 1[the 
Chief of the Army Staff] or any officer empowered to convene a general or a summary general           
court -martial may suspend the sentence whether or not the offende r has already been committed to prison 
or to military custody.  
(2) The authori ty or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that, until the orders of such authority or officer have been obtained the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to military custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
183. Orders pending suspension .—(1) Where the sen tence referred to in section 182 is imposed by 
a court -martial other than a summary court -martial, the confirming officer may, when confirming the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1955, s. 2 and the Schedule , for “the Commander -in-Chief ”. 45 
 sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to military custody until the orders of the 
authority or officer specified in section 182 have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a summary court -martial, the officer holding the 
trial or the officer authorised to approve of the sentence under sub -section ( 2) of sectio n 161 may make 
the direction referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
184. Release on suspension .—Where a sentence is suspended under section 182, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody . 
185. Computation of period of suspension .—Any period during whi ch the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
186. Order after suspension. —The authority or officer specified in section 182 may, at any time 
while a sentence is suspended, order — 
(a) that the offender be comm itted to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence, or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
187. Reconsideration of case after suspension .—(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four mon ths, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 182, or by any general or other officer not below the rank of field officer duly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 182.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the  officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 182.  
188. Fresh sentences aft er suspension .—Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, then — 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the further sent ence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or military custody for the unexpired portion of 
the previous sentence, but both sentences shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if t he further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 186 or sect ion 187, continue to be suspended.  
189. Scope of power of suspension .—The powers conferred by sections 182 and 186 shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
190. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal .—(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a court -martial, and such other sentence is suspended 
under section 182, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or officer 
specified in section 182.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 186, the punishment of dismi ssal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER XV  
RULES  
191. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of 
carry ing into effect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub -section ( 1), the rules made 
thereunder may provide for — 
(a) the removal, retirement, release or discharge from the service of persons subject to this Act;  46 
 (b) the amount and incidence of fines to be imposed under section 89;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) the assembly and procedure of courts of inquiry, the recording of summaries of evidence and 
the administration of oaths or affirmations by such courts ; 
(e) the convening and constituting of court -martial and the appointment of prosecutors at trials by 
courts -martial;  
(f) the adjournment, dis solution and sitting of court -martial ; 
(g) the procedure to be  observed in trials by courts -martial and the appear ance of legal 
practitioners thereat;  
(h) the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against, the fi ndings and sentences 
of courts -martial;  
(i) the carrying into effect of sentences of court -martial;  
(j) the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to court -martial, 
transportation and im prisonment;  
(k) the constitution of authorities to decide for what persons, to what amounts and in what 
manner, provision should be made for dependants under section 99, and the due  carrying out of such 
decisions;  
(l) the relative rank of the officers, junior commissioned officers, warrant officers,  petty officers 
and non -commis sioned officers of the regular Army, Navy and Air Force when acting together;  
(m) any other matter directed  by this Act to be prescribed.  
192. Power to make regulations .—The Central Government may make regulations for all or any of 
the purposes of this Act other than those specified in section 191.  
193. Publication of rules and regulations in Gazette .—All rules  and regulations made under this 
Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act.  
2[193A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation 
made by the C entral Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation should not be made the rule or regulation or shall thereafter have effect on ly in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation.]  
194. [Repeals .] Rep. by the Repeali ng and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule .   
195-196. [Chapter  XVI.] Omitted by the Army (Amendment ) Act, 1992 (37 of 1982), s. 19                
(w.e.f.  6-9-1992).  
THE SCHEDULE .—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule .   
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 37 of 1992, s.  18. 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s.  2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984) . 
--------------------------The Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMY AND AIR FORCE (DISPOSAL OF PRIVATE  PROPERTY) ACT, 1950.  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Property of deceased persons and deserters other than officers . 
4. Property of officers who die or desert . 
5. Decision of questions as to regimental and other debts in camp or quarters . 
6. Representative powers of commanding officer or Committee.  
7. Power of Central Government to hand over estate or deceased person to the Administrator 
Genera l. 
8. Disposal of surplus by prescribed persons . 
9. Disposal of effects, not money . 
10. Disposal of certain property without production of probate, etc.  
11. Discharge of commanding officer, Committee, prescribed person and the Central Government.  
12. Property in the hands of commanding officer, Committee or prescribed person not to be assets 
where commanding officer, Committee or prescribed person is stationed.  
13. Saving of rights of representative . 
14. Application of sections 3 to 13 to persons of unsound mind or to persons repor ted missing on 
active service . 
15. Appointment of standing Committee of Adjustment in certain cases . 
16. Power to make rules . 
17. [Repeal ed.] 
  2 
 THE ARMY AND AIR FORCE (DISPOSAL OF PRIVATE  PROPERTY) ACT, 1950.  
ACT NO. 40 OF 19501 
[28th April, 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the disposal of the private property of persons subject to the Army Act, 
1950  or the Air Force Act, 1950  , who die or desert or are ascertained to be of unsound mind 
or while on active service are officially reported to be missing.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Army and Air Force 
(Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and applies to citizens of India and persons subject to the A rmy 
Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) , or the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , wherever they may be.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “Committee ” means the Committee of Adjustment constituted under section 4;  
(2) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(3) “regimental and other debts in camp or quarters ” includes — 
(i) in relation to any person subject to the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , moneys due as 
military debts, namely, sums due in respec t of or of any advance  in respect of — 
(a) quarters;  
(b) mess, band and other regimental accounts ; 
(c) military clothing, appointments and equipments, not exceeding a sum equal to three 
months ’ pay of the deceased and having become due within eighteen months before the date 
of his death; and  
(ii) in relation to any person subject to the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , moneys due as 
air force debts, namely, sums due in respect of or of any advance in respect of — 
(a) quarters;  
(b) mess, band and other service accounts;  
(c) air force clothing, appointments and equipments, not exceeding a sum equal to thr ee 
months ’ pay of the deceased and having become due within eighteen months before the date 
of his death;  
(4) “representation ” includes probate, letters of administration, with or without the will annexed 
and a succession certificate, constituting a person  executor or administrator of the estate of a deceased 
person or authorising him to receive or realise the assets of a deceased person;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to— 
Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule and comes into force in Pondicherry vide 
Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg.  6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I                  
(w.e.f. 1-10-1963);  
2. 22nd July, 1950, vide notification No. S.R.O. 123, dated 22 nd July, 1950, see Gazette of India, 1950, part II, s. 3.  3 
 (5) “representative ” means any person who has taken out representation, but does not include an 
Administrator General;  
(6) all words and expressions used herein and defined in the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , or the 
Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , and not in this Act defined shall be deemed to have the meaning 
respectively attributed to them by those Acts.  
3. Property of deceased persons and deserters other than officers .—(1) On the death or desertion 
of any person, not being an officer, subject to the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , or the Air Force                  
Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , as the case may be, th e commanding officer of the corps, department, detachment 
or unit to which the deceased or deserter belonged, shall, as soon as may be and subject to any rules that 
may be made in this behalf — 
(a) secure all the movable property belonging to the deceased o r deserter that is in camp or 
quarters, and cause an inventory thereof to be made,  
(b) draw the pay and allowances due to such person,  
(c) make due provision for the payment of regimental and other debts in camp or quarters, if any, 
of such persons.  
(2) In the case of a deceased person, the commanding officer, — 
(a) if in any case not otherwise provided for by rules made under this Act it appears to him to be 
necessary to make provision for the payment of regimental and other debts in camp or quarters, the 
funeral expenses of the deceas ed and the expenses, if any, in curred by the commanding officer in 
respect of the estate of the deceased, shall, and — 
(b) in any other case, may, — 
collect all moneys left by the deceased in any banking company (including any po st office savings bank, 
co-operative bank or society or any other institution receiving deposits in money however named) and for 
that purpose may require the agent, manager or other proper officer of such banking company, society or 
other institution to pa y the moneys to the commanding officer forthwith, notwithstanding anything in the 
rules of the banking company, society or other institution, and such agent, manager or other officer shall 
be bound to comply with the requisition.  
 (3) Where any money has b een paid by a banking company, society or other institution in 
compliance with a requisition made under sub -section ( 2), no person shall have any claim against the 
banking company, society or other institution in respect of such money.  
(4) Where the representative of a deceased has given security to the satisfaction of the commanding 
officer for the payment of the regimental and other debts in camp or quarters, if any, and of the funeral 
expenses of the deceased in cases where no provision for the pay ment of such expenses has been made 
otherwise and of the expenses, if any, incurred by the commanding officer in respect of the estate of the 
deceased, the commanding officer shall deliver over the property received by him under sub -section s (1) 
and ( 2) to that representative, whereupon his responsibility for the administration of the estate of the 
deceased shall cease.  
(5) In the case of a deceased whose estate has not been dealt with under sub -section ( 4), or under 
section 10, and in the case of a deserte r, the commanding officer, — 
(i) if in any case it is necessary in his opinion so to do for the purpose of securing the payment of 
the regimental and other debts in camp or quarters of the deceased or deserter, the funeral expenses of 
the deceased, if any, and the expenses, if any, incurred by the commanding officer in respect of the 
estate of the deceased or deserter, shall, and  4 
 (ii) in any other case, may  
cause the movable property of the deceased or deserter, as the case may be, to be sold or converted i nto 
money.  
(6) The commanding officer shall, out of the moneys received, collected or realised under sub -
sections ( 1), (2) and ( 5), pay the regimental and other debts in camp or quarters, if any, of the deceased or 
deserter, as the case may be, the expense s, if any, incurred by the commanding officer in respect of the 
estate of the deceased or deserter, and in the case of a deceased his funeral expenses in cases where no 
provision for the payment of such expenses has been made otherwise.  
(7) The surplus, if  any, after payment of the debts and expenses specified in sub -section ( 6), shall, — 
(a) in the case of  a deceased, be paid to his representative, if any, or in the event of no claim to 
such surplus being established within twelve months after the death, to  the prescribed person; and  
(b) in the case of a deserter, be forthwith paid to the prescribed person, and shall, on the expiry of 
three years from the date of desertion, be forfeited to the Central Government, unless the deserter 
shall have surrendered or  been apprehended in the meantime : 
Provided that the prescribed person may, if the deserter has not surrendered or been apprehended in 
the meantime, pay the whole or any part of the surplus received by him under clause ( b) to the wife or 
children or any ot her dependant of the deserter at any time during the said period of three years.  
Explanation .—In this section and in section 4, the word “officer ” with reference to persons subject to 
the Air Force Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , includes a warrant officer who has  died or deserted.  
4. Property of officers who die or desert .—The provisions of section 3 shall also apply to the 
disposal of the property of any officer subject to the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950),  or the Air Force            
Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , who dies or deserts, but with the following modifications, namely: — 
(i) the functions of the commanding officer under section 3 shall be performed by a Committee of 
Adjustment constituted in this behalf in the prescribed manner ; 
(ii) the surplus, if any, after  payment of the debts and expenses specified in sub -section ( 6) of 
section 3, shall in the case of a deceased officer, be paid to the prescribed person.  
5. Decision of questions as to regimental and other debts in camp or quarters .—If in any case a 
doubt or differe nce arises as to what are the regimental and other debts in camp or quarters of a deceased 
or deserter or as to the amount payable in respect thereof, the decision of the prescribed person shall be 
final and shall be binding on all persons for al l purposes.  
6. Representative powers of commanding officer or Committee .—For the purpose of the exercise 
of his or its duties under section 3 or section 4, the commanding officer or the Committee, as the case may 
be, shall, to the exclusion of all other pe rsons and authorities whomsoever or whatsoever , have the same 
rights and powers as if he or it had taken out representation to the estate of the deceased, and any receipt 
given by the commanding officer or the Committee, as the case may be, shall have effe ct accordingly.  
7. Power of Central Government to hand over estate or deceased person to the Administrator 
General .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  1[the Administrators -General Act, 1963                   
(45 of 1963)], an Administrator General s hall not interpose in any manner in relation to any property of a 
deceased which has been dealt with under the provisions of section 3 or section 4, except in so far as he is 
expressly required or permitted to do so by or under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time and in such circumstances as it thinks fit, direct that the 
estate of a deceased shall be handed over by the commanding officer or the Committee, as the case may 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  31 of 2000, s. 2, for “the Administrator General’s Act ,1913 (3 of 1913)” (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  5 
 be, to the Administrator General of a State for ad ministration, and thereupon the commanding officer or 
the Committee, as the case may be, shall make over the estate to such Administrator General.  
(3) Where under this section any estate is handed over to the Administrator General, the 
Administrator General shall administer such estate in accordance with the provisions of  1[the 
Administrators  General Act, 1963 (45 of 1963)], or, if that Act is not in force in any State, of the 
corresponding law in force in that State:  
Provided that the regimental and other debts in camp or quarters of the deceased, if any, shall be paid 
by the Administrator General in priority to any other debts due by the deceased.  
(4) The Administrator General shall pay the surplus, if any, remaining in his hands after discharging 
all debts and charges, to the heirs of the deceased, and, if no heir is traceable, shall make over the surplus 
in the prescribed manner to the prescribed person.  
(5) The Administrator General shall not charge in respect of his duties under this section any f ee 
exceeding three per cent. of the gross amount coming to or remaining in his hands after payment of the 
regimental and other debts in camp or quarters.  
8. Disposal of surplus by prescribed persons .—On receipt of the surplus referred to in sub -section 
(7) of section 3 or clause ( ii) of section 4 or sub-section ( 4) of section 7, the prescribed person shall, — 
(a) if he knows of a representative of the deceased, pay the surplus to that representative;  
(b) if he does not know of any such representative and the  surplus has not been disposed of under 
section 10, publish every year a notice in the prescribed form and manner for six consecutive years 
and if no claim to the surplus is made by a representative of the deceased within six months even after 
the publicat ion of the last of such notices, the prescribed person shall deposit the surplus together with 
any income or accumulation of income accrued therefrom to the credit of the Central Government:  
Provided that such deposit shall not bar the claim of any person to such surplus or any part thereof, if 
he is otherwise entitled to it.  
9. Disposal of effects, not money .—Where any part of the estate of a deceased person consists of 
effects, securities or other property not converted into money, the provisions of sub -section ( 7) of section 
3, clause ( ii) of section 4 and section 8, with respect to the payment of the surplus, shall, save as may be 
prescribed, extend to the delivery, transmission or transfer of such effects , securities or property, and the 
prescribed pers on shall have the same power of converting the same into money as a representative of the 
deceased  
10. Disposal of certain property without production of probate, etc .—Property deliverable and 
money payable to the representative of a deceased under section  3 or section 4 or section 8 may, if the 
total amount or value thereof does not exceed  2[two lakhs] rupees and if the prescribed person thinks fit, 
be delivered or paid to any person appearing to him to be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate  
of the deceased without requiring such person to produce any probate, letters of administration, 
succession certificate or other such conclusive evidence of title.  
11. Discharge of commanding officer, Committee, prescribed person and the Central 
Governmen t.—Any payment or application of money or application, delivery, sale or other disposition 
of any property made, or purported to be made, by the commanding officer, the Committee or the 
prescribed person in good faith in pursuance of section 3, section 4, section 8, section 9 or section 10 shall 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2000, s. 2, for “the Administrator General’s Act , 1913 (3 of 1913)” (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “ten thousand ” (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  
 6 
 be valid and shall be a full discharge to the commanding officer, the Committee or the prescribed person, 
as the case may be, and to the Central Government from all further liability in respect of that money of 
property; but nothing herein contained shall affect the right of any executor or administrator or other 
representative, or of any creditor of the deceased against any person to whom such payment or delivery 
has been made.  
12. Property in the hands of commandin g officer, Committee or prescribed person not to be 
assets where commanding officer, Committee or prescribed person is stationed .—Any property 
coming into the hands of the commanding officer o r the Committee or the prescribed person under section 
3, sectio n 4 or sub -section ( 4) of section 7 shall not, by reason thereof, be deemed to be assets of effects at 
the place in which that commanding officer or the Committee or the prescribed persons is stationed, and it 
shall not be necessary by reason thereof that representation be taken out in respect of that property for that 
place.  
13. Saving of rights of representative .—After the commanding officer, or the Committee has paid 
to the prescribed person the surplus of the property of any deceased under sub -section ( 7) of section 3 or 
clause ( ii) of section 4, any representative of the deceased or any Administrator General, shall, as regards 
any property of the deceased not collected by the commanding officer or the Committee, as the case may 
be, and not forming part of the aforesaid surplus, hav e the same rights and duties as if sections 3 and 4 
had not been enacted.  
14. Application of sections 3 to 13 to persons of unsound mind or to persons reported missing on 
active service .—The provisions of section s 3 to 13 shall, so far as they can be made applicable, also 
apply in the case of a person subject to the Army Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , or the Air Force Act, 1950            
(45 of 1950) , as the case may be, who, notwithstanding anything contained  1[the Menta l Health Act, 1987 
(14 of 1987) ], is ascertained in the prescribed manner to be of unsound mind, or who, while on active 
service, is officially reported missing, as if he had died on the day on which his unsoundness of mind is so 
ascertained or, as the case may be, on the day on which he is o fficially reported missing:  
Provided that in the case of a person so reported missing, no action shall be taken under                 
sub-section ( 2) to ( 6) or section 3 o r section 4 or section 7 until such time as he is officially presumed to 
be dead.  
15. Appointment of standing Committee of Adjustment in certain cases .—When an officer dies 
or deserts or is ascertained in the prescribed manner to be of unsound mind or while on active service is 
officially reported missing, the references in the foregoing p rovisions of this Act to the Committee shall 
be construed as references to the Standing Commi ttee of Adjustment, if any, constituted in this behalf in 
the prescribed manner and such Standing Committee shall alone be entitled to perform all the functions of  
the Committee under this Act.  
16. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules2 for the purpose of carrying into effect the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) prescribe  the manner in which any property belonging to a deceased or deserter may be 
secured or collected and his regimental and other debts in camp or quarters paid;  
(b) provide for the payment of the funeral expenses of any deceased;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of  2000, s. 4, for “ the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912) ” (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983 , s. 2,  and the Schedule ( w.e.f. 15-3-1984 ). 
 7 
 (c) provide for the constitu tion of the Committee of Adjustment or any Standing Committee of 
Adjustment under this Act;  
(d) specify the person who shall be regarded as the prescribed pers on for the purposes of this Act ; 
(e) prescribe the circumstances in which the estate of any decea sed shall be handed over to the 
Administrator General;  
(f) prescribe the form and manner in which a notice under section 8 shall be published;  
(g) prescribe the procedure by which any person may be ascertained to be of unsound mind.  
1[(3) Every rule made b y the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter hav e effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
17. [Repeals .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 (36 of 1957), s.  2 and the                       
First Schedule.  
  
_______  
                                                           
1. For the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Rules, 1953, see Gazette of India, 1953, Part II, s. 4.  
 
--------------------------The Contingency Fund of India Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE CONTINGENCY FUND OF INDIA ACT, 1950  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Establishment of the Contingency Fund of India.  
3. Custody of the Contingency Fund and withdrawals therefrom . 
4.  Power to make rules . 
  2 
 THE CONTINGENCY  FUND OF INDIA ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 49 OF 19501 
[14th August , 1950.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment and maintenance of Contingency Fund.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Contingency Fund of India Act, 1950.  
2. Establishment of the Contingency Fund of India .—There shall be established a Contingency 
Fund in the nature of an impres t entitled the Contingency Fund of India, into which shall be paid from 
and out of the Consolidated Fund of India a sum of  2 [fifty crores of rupees.]  
3[Provided  that during the period beginning on the 28th day of July, 1999 and ending on the             
31st day of March, 2000, this section shall have effect subject to the modification that for the words 
“fifty crores  of rupees ”, the words “five hundred and fifty crores of rupees ” shall be substituted:  
Provided further that during the period beginning on the 24th day of January, 1998 and ending on 
the 31st day of March, 1998, this section shall have effect subject to t he modification that for the 
words “fifty crores of rupees ”, the words “thirty -two thousand four hundred and ninety crores of 
rupees ” shall be substituted .] 
4*                             *                                       *                                       *                                      *  
3. Custody of the Contingency Fund and withdrawals therefrom .—The Contingency Fund of 
India shall be held on behalf of the President by a Secretary to the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Finance, and no advances shall be made out of such fund except for the purposes of 
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending au thori sation of such expenditure by Parliament under 
appropriations made by law.  
4. Power to make rules .—5[(1)] For the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act, the 
Central Government may,  6[by notification in the Official Gazette,] make rules regul ating all matters 
connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into and the withdrawal of 
moneys from, the Contingency Fund of India.  
 6[(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the succes sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, t hat any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under th at rule.]  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule.; Dadra and Nagar Haveli by 
Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I; and Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule I.  
2. Subs. by Act 81 of 1976  “thirty crores  of rupees” (w.e.f 26 -8-1976.)  
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 1998, s.  2 “for Proviso ” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1997).  
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -2-1972).  
5. Section 4 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 51 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f 20 -10-1982).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f  20-10-1982).  
 
--------------------------The Cooch-Behar (Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE COOCH -BEHAR (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1950  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Interpretation . 
3. Assimilation of laws . 
4. Provision for removal of difficulties . 
 
  2 
 THE COOCH -BEHAR (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 67 OF 1950  
[7th December,  1950.]  
An Act to assimilate certain laws in force in Cooch -Behar to the laws in force in the rest of West 
Bengal.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cooch -Behar (Assimilation of 
Laws) Act, 1950.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Interpretation .—In this Act, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “Cooch -Behar” means the merged territory of Cooch -Behar in the State of West Bengal;  
(c) “law” means so much of any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, rule, order or bye-law as relates to 
any of the matters enumerated in Lists I and III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
3. Assimilation of laws .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), all laws which immediately before 
the appointed day extend to, or a re in force in, the State of West Bengal, but do not extend to, or are not in 
force in, Cooch -Behar shall, as from that day, extend to, or as the case may be, come into force in, Cooch -
Behar; and all laws which, immediately before the appointed day, are in  force in Cooch -Behar, but not in 
the rest of West Bengal, shall on that day cease to be in force in Cooch -Behar, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before that day.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) 
Application Act, 1937 ( 26 of 1937) shall come into force in Cooch -Behar only on such date as the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and Cooch -Behar Act 2 of 1897, known 
as the Muhammadan Inheritan ce Act, 1897, shall continue in force in Cooch -Behar until that date, and 
shall on that date cease to be in force except as respects things done or omitted to be done before that 
date.  
4. Provision for removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in r elation to the transition under 
section 3 from one law or group of laws to another law or group of laws, the Central Government may, by 
order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provision as it considers necessary for the removal of 
such difficulty . 
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1951, see Gazette of India, 1950, Part II, s. 3.  
--------------------------The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 1950  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prohibition of improper use of certain emblems and names . 
4. Prohibition of registration of certain companies, etc.  
5. Penalty.  
6. Previous sanction for prosecution . 
7. Savings.  
8. Power of the Central Government to amend the Schedule . 
9. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
  THE EMBLEMS AND NAMES (PREVENTION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 12 OF 19501 
[1st March, 1950.]  
An Act to prevent the improper use of certain emblems and names for professional and 
commercial purposes.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Emblems 
and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2* * * and also applies to citizens of India outside India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “emblem ” means any emblem, seal, flag, insignia, coat -of-arms or pictorial representation 
specified in the Schedule;  
(b) “competent authority ” means any authority competent under any law for the time being in 
force to register any company, firm, or other body of persons or any trade mark or design or to grant a 
patent;  
(c) “name ” includes any abbreviation of a name.  
3. Prohibition of improper us e of certain emblems and names .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force, no person shall, except in such cases and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, use or continue to use , for the purpo se of any 
trade, business, calling or profession, or in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or design, any 
name or emblem specified in the Schedule or any colourable imitation thereof without the previous 
permission of the Central Government or s uch officer of Government as may be authorised in this behalf 
by the Central Government.  
4. Prohibition of registration of certain companies, etc. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any law for the time being in force, no competent authority shall, — 
(a) register any company, firm or other body of persons which bears any name, or  
(b) register a trade mark or design which bears any emblem or name, or  
(c) grant a patent in respect of any invention which bears a title  containing any emblem or name,  
if the use of such name or emblem is in contravention of section 3.  
(2) If any question arises before a competent authority whether any emblem is an emblem specified in 
the Schedule or a colourable imitation thereof, the competent authority may refer the questi on to the 
Central Government , and the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
5. Penalty .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3  shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
6. Previous sanction for prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
shall be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any officer 
authorised in this behalf by general or special order of the Cen tral Government.  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule and brought 
into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963, vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule I, in Dadra  and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-
1965) by R eg.  6 of 1963, s. 2 and the Schedule I and in Sikkim (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975), vide S.O. 4292 dated 16 -9-1975.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by the Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956            
(62 of 1956), s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
3. 1st September, 1950, see Gazette of India, 1950, Part II, s. 3.  3 
 7. Savings .—Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which 
might, apart from this Act be brought against him.  
8. Power of the Central Government to amend the Schedule .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, add to or alter the Schedule , and any such addition or alteration shall 
have effect as if it has been made by this Act.  
9. Power to make rules .—1[(1)] The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, m ake rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
2[(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule sh ould not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under tha t rule.]  
  
                                                           
1. Section 9 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and  the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( a) and 3]  
1. The name, emblem or official seal of the United Nations Organization.  
2. The name, emblem or official seal of the World Health Organization.  
3. The Indian National Flag.  
1[4. The name, emblem or official  seal or emblem of the Government of India or of any State, or any 
other insignia or coat -of-arms used by any such Government or by a Department of any such 
Government. ] 
2[5. The emblems of the St. John ‟s Ambulance Association (India), and the St. John ‟s Ambulance 
Brigade (India), consisting of the device of a white eight pointed cross embellished in the four principal 
angles alternatively with a lion passant Quadrant and a Unicorn  passant, whether or not the device is 
surrounded or accompanied by concentri c circles or other decoration or by lettering. ] 
3[6. The name, emblem or official seal of the President, Governor, 4* * * 5[Sadar -i-Riyasat ] or 
Republic or Union of India. ] 
7. Any name which may suggest or be calculated to suggest — 
(i) the patronage of the Government of India or the Government of a State; or  
(ii) connection with any local authority or any corporation or body constituted by the Government 
under any law for the time being in force.  
8. The name, emblem or official seal of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organisation.  
6[9. The name or pictorial representation of  Rashtrapati, 7* * * Rashtrapati Bhavan, Raj Bhavan. ] 
8[9A. The name or pictorial representation of Mahatma Gandhi  or the Prime  Minister of India 
9[except the pictorial use thereof on calendars where only the names of the manufacturers and printers of 
the calendars are given and the calendars are not used for advertising goods ].] 
10[10. The medals, badges or decorations instituted by the Government from time to time or the 
miniatures or replicas of such medals, badges or decorations 11[or the names of such medals, badges or 
decorations or of the miniatures or replicas thereof ].] 
12[11. The name, emblem or official seal of the International Civil Aviation  Organisation. ] 
13[12. The word “Interpol ” which is an integral part of the International Criminal Police 
Organisation. ] 
14[13. The name, emblem or official seal of the World   Meteorological O rganisation. ] 
15[14. The name and emblem of the Tuberculosis   Association of India. ] 
16[15. The name, emblem and official seal of the International Atomic Energy Agency. ] 
                                                           
  1. Subs. by notification No. S.R.O. 1230, dated the 4 th June, 1955, Gazette of India, 1955, Part II, s. 3.  
  2. Ins. by notification No S.R.O. 561, dated the 20 th March, 1952,  ibid., 1952, Part II, s. 3.  
  3. Ins. by notification No S.R.O. 1230, dated the 4th June, 1955, ibid., 1955, Part II, s. 3.  
  4. The word “Rajpramukh” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  
  5. Ins. by notification No S.R.O. 2011, dated the 7th September , 195 5, ibid., 195 5, Part II, s. 3.  
  6. Ins. by notification No.  S.R.O. 2011, dated the 7 th September, 1955,  ibid., 1955, Part II, s. 3.  
  7. The words “rashtra Bhavan” omitted by notification No. S.O. 1916, dated the 30 th July, 1960, ibid., 1960, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
  8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 416, dated the 14 th February, 1959, ibid., 1959, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
  9. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2668, dated the 10 th September, 1963, ibid., 1964, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
10. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 525, dated the 23 th February, 1956, ibid., 1956, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
11. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1862, dated the 17 th August, 1956, ibid., 1956, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
12. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2906, dated the 4 th September, 1957, ibid., 1957, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
13. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1429, dated the 19th June, 1959, ibid., 1959, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
14. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1544, dated the 6 th July, 1959, ibid., 1959 , Part II, s. 3 (ii). 
15. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1605, dated the 13 th July, 1959, Gazette of India, 1959, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
16. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2438, dated the 7th October, 1961, ibid., Part II, s. 3( ii). 5 
 1[16. The names “Ashoka Chakra ” or “Dharma Chakra ” or the pictorial representation of Ashoka 
Chakra as used in the Indian National Flag or in the official seal or emblem of the Government of India or 
of any State Government or of a Department of any such Government. ] 
2[17. The name of the Parliament or the Legislature of any State, or the S upreme Court, or the High 
Court of any State, or the Central Secretariat, or the Secretariat of any State Government or any other 
Government Office or the pictorial representation of any building occupied by any of the aforesaid 
institutions. ] 
3[18.The nam e and emblem of the Rama Krishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission consisting of a 
swan floating on waters, with a Lotus in the foreground and the rising sun in the background, the whole 
being encircled by a hooded serpent, with the words  „तन्नो ह्रंस : प्रचोदयात’ superimposed on the bottom 
portion. ] 
4[19. The name and emblems of the Sri Sarda Math and Ramakrishna Sarda  Mission consisting of a 
swan (facing right) floating on waters, with a Lotus in therefore ground and the rising sun in the 
background, the whole being encircled by a wild serpent (facing right) with the words  „तन्नो ह्रंस : 
प्रचोदयात ’ superimposed on the b ottom portion.  
5[20. The name of The Bharat Scouts and Guides ‟ with its „Emblem ‟.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 671, dated the 18th February, 1964, ibid., Part II, s. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3760, dated the 24th October, 19 64, ibid., 1964, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2356, dated the 4th August, 1973, ibid., 1973, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2697, dated the 11th September, 1973,  ibid., 1973, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1841, dated the 10th July, 1974, ibid., 1974, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
 
--------------------------The High Courts (Seals) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE HIGH COURT S (SEALS) ACT, 1950  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Seals of High Courts.  
3. [Repealed .] 
  2 
 THE HIGH COURT S (SEALS) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 7 OF 1950  
[27th February, 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the use of seals of common form and design by the High Courts in                   
the States.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the High Courts  (Seals) Act, 1950.  
2. Seals of High Courts .—(1) Every High Court in a 1[State ] shall have and use , as occasion may 
arise, a seal bearing a device and impression of the Asoka capital within an exergue or label surrounding 
the same, with the following inscriptions at convenient places, namely, “THE SEAL O F THE HIGH 
COURT AT (or OF) .............. ”, followed by the name of the seal of the High Court or the name of the 
State, as the case may be, and “Satyameva Jayate ” in Devanagari script.  
(2) Every Court of the Judicial Commissioner for a 2[Union territory ] shall have and use, as occasion 
may arise, a seal similar to the seal of a High Court in a 3* * * State, but with the first inscription reading 
“THE SEAL OF THE JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER'S COURT FOR ....................... ” followed by the 
4[name of the Union  territory ]. 
(3) The provisions of this shall supersede any provision contrary thereto or inconsistent therewith 
contained in any Letters Patent, Order, direction or other law relating to the use of seals by High Courts.  
3. [Repeal of Ordinance 13 of 1950 .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 (3 6 of 1957)   
s. 2 and  the First Schedule .  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “Part A State or Part B State”.  
2. Subs. , ibid.,  for “Part C State”.  
3. The word and letter “Part A” omitted, ibid. 
4. Subs. , ibid., for “name of the State”.  
--------------------------The Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE IMMIGRANTS (EXPULSION FROM ASSAM) ACT, 1950  
__________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Power to order expulsion of certain immigrants.  
3. Delegation of power.  
4. Power to give effect to orders, etc.  
5. Penalties.  
6. Protection to persons acting under this Act.  
7. [Repea led.] 
  2 
 THE IMMIGRANTS (EXPULSION FROM ASSAM) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1950  
[1st March, 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the expulsion of certain immigrants from Assam.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: —  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Immigrants (Expulsion from Assam)              
Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Power to order expulsion of certain immigrants .—If the Central Government is of opinion that 
any pers on or class of persons, having been ordinarily resident in any place outside India, has or have, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, come into Assam and that the stay of such person 
or class of persons in Assam is detrimental to the inter ests of the general public of India or of any section 
thereof or of any Scheduled Tribe in Assam, the Central Government may by order — 
(a) direct such person or class of persons to remove himself or themselves from India or Assam 
within such time and by su ch route as may be specified in the order; and  
(b) give such further directions in regard to his or their removal from India or Assam as it may 
consider necessary or expedient:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any person who on account of civil disturbances or 
the fear of such disturbances in any area now forming part of Pakistan has been displaced from or has left 
his place of residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in Assam.  
3. Delegation of power .—The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the powers and duties conferred or imposed on it by section 2 shall, subject to such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised or discharged also by — 
(a) any officer subordinate to the Central Government;  
(b) the 1[2[Government of Assam, Meghalaya] or Nagaland] any officer subordinate to that 
Government.  
4. Power to give effect to orders, etc .—Any authority empowered by or in pursuance of the 
provisions of t his Act to exercise any power may, in addition to any other action expressly provided for in 
this Act, take or cause to be taken such steps, and use or cause to be used such force, as may in its opinion 
be reasonably necessary for the effective exercise of  such power.  
5. Penalties .—Any person who — 
(a) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of any order made under 
section 2, or  
(b) fails to comply with any direction given by any such order, or  
(c) harbo urs any person who has contravened any order made under section 2 or has failed to 
comply with any direction given by any such order,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.  
6. Protection to per sons acting under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
7. [Repeal and saving .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1957 (36 of 1957) , s. 2 and 
Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the State of Nagaland (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1965, for “Government of Assam”                    
(w.e.f. 1 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974, for “Government of 
Assam” (w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).  
--------------------------The Khaddar (Protection of Name) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE KHADDAR (PROTECTION OF NAME) ACT, 1950  
_________  
ARRANAGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. The words “Khaddar” and “Khadi” to be trade description.  
3. [Repealed .] 
 
  2 
 THE KHADDAR (PROTECTION OF NAME) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 78 OF 1950  
[28th December, 1950 .] 
An Act to regulate the use of the words “Khaddar ” and “Khadi ” when applied as a trade 
description of woven materials.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Khaddar (Protection of Name) Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kash mir. 
2. The words “Khaddar” and “Khadi” to be trade description. —The words “Khaddar ” and 
Khadi”, whether in Hindi or in any other Indian language or in English, when applied to any woven 
material, shall be deemed to be a trade description within the meaning of the Indian Merchandise Marks 
Act, 1889  (40 of 1889) , indicating that such material is  cloth woven on handlooms in India from cotton, 
silk or woolen yarn hand -spun in India or from a mixture of any two or all of such yarns.  
3. [Repealed ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957)  s. 2 and First  Schedule .  
 
 
_________  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE OPIUM AND REVENUE LAWS (EXTENSION OF  APPLICATION) ACT, 1950  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Extension of certain opium and revenue laws to certain parts of India . 
3. Modifications in State laws relating to income -tax investigation . 
4. Repeals and savings . 
5. Removal of difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE OPIUM AND REVENUE LAWS (EXTENSION OF  APPLICATION) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1950  
[18th April,  1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain opium and revenue laws to certain parts of India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Opium and Revenue Laws (Extension of Application)  
Act, 1950.  
2. Extension of certain opium and revenue laws to certain parts of India. —(1) The following 
Acts, namely, — 
(i) the Opium Act, 1857 ( 13 of 1857),  
(ii) the Opium Act, 1878 ( 1 of 1878),  
(iii) the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 ( 1 of 1890),  
(iv) the Government Trading Taxation Act, 1926 ( 3 of 1926),  
(v) the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 ( 3 of 1930),  
(vi) the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 ( 30 of 1947), and  
(vii) the Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949 ( 22 of 1949),  
and all rules and orders made thereunder, which are in force immediately before the comm encement of 
this Act in certain parts of India, are hereby extended to and shall be in force in, the rest of India except 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) The amendments specified in the Schedule shall be made in the aforesaid Acts.  
3. Modifications in State laws relating to income -tax investigation. —If immediately before the 
commencement of this Act there is in force in any Part B  State other than Jammu and Kashmir any law 
(hereinafter in this section referred  to as “the State law ”) corresponding to the  Taxation on Income  
(Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 ( 30 of 1947), that law shall continue to remain in force with the 
following modifications, namely: — 
(a) all cases referred to or pending before the State  Commission (by whatever name called) in 
respect of matters relating to taxation  on income other than agricultural income shall stand transferred 
to the Central  Commission for disposal:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not, by  reason merely of the transfer of any case 
under the provisio ns of this section,  be bound to recall or rehear any witness who has given evidence 
in the case, and  may act on the evidence already recorded by or produced before the Commission  
which was origina lly investigating into the case ; 
1[(b) in the disposal of ca ses transferred to the Central Commission under clause ( a), it shall have 
and exercise the same powers as it has and exercises in the  investigation of cases referred to it under 
the Taxation on Income  (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 ( 30 of 1947), and shall be entitled to 
act for the same term as under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 of that Act:  
(bb) any decision given, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, by the  Chief 
Revenue Authority of Travancore or of Travancore -Cochin in the exercis e or purported exercise of 
any powers conferred on it by any law for the time being  in force in the State shall be deemed to be a 
decision given by the Income -tax authority for the purposes of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 of the 
Travancore  Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1124 Travancore Act 14 of 1124);]  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 44 of 1951, s. 2 , for the clause ( b). 3 
 (c) any reference in the State law, by whatever form of words , to the State Government or the 
State Commission shall, in relation to income  other than agricultural income,  be construed as a 
reference to the Central  Government or the Central Commission, as the case may be;  
(d) the report of the Central Commission shall be submitted  to the Central Government, and the 
Central Government may, by order in writing , direct that su ch proceedings as it thinks fit under the 
law in force in  the State relating to income -tax, super -tax or excess profits tax or any other  law, shall 
be taken against the person to whose case the report relates in  respect of his income other than 
agricultura l income, and upon such a direction  being given, all such proceedings may be taken and 
completed under the  appropriate law applicable in the State, as if the direction had been given and  the 
proceedings had been instituted thereunder;  
(e) where under any law in force in the State the  agricultural income of an assessee is to be 
included in his total income for the  purpose of determining the tax payable by him, the tax payable in 
respect of his  income other than agricultural income shall be an amount bearing to the total amount  of 
tax which would have been payable under the appropriate law in force in  the State if a combined 
assessment had been made, the same proportion as such  income bears to th e total income including 
the agricultural income:  
Provided that for this purpose any reduction of tax allowed  on the agricultural income by the 
appropriate law in force in the State  shall not be taken into account.  
Explanation. —In this section, “Central Co mmission ” means the Income -tax Investigation  
Commission constituted under the Taxation on Income (Investigation  Commission) Act, 1947                   
(30 of 1947.)  
4. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the commencement of this Act there is in for ce in 
any Part B State, other than Jammu and Kashmir, or in the merged territory of Cooch -Behar any law 
corresponding to any of the Acts specified in section 2, other that the Taxation on Income (Investigation 
Commission) Act, 1947 ( 30 of 1947), that law s hall, upon the commencement of this Act, stand repealed:  
Provided th at such repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of that law, or  
(b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
that law, or  
(c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be i mposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that anything done or any action taken under any provision of that law shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the Central Act as now extended 
to the State and shall continue in force accordingly.  
5. Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of any of the 
Acts, rules or orders now extended to any part of India in which they were not in force before the 
commencement o f this, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions or give such direction as appears to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.  4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 ( 2)] 
Enactments amended  
 
Year  No. Short title Amendments  
1 2 3 4 
1857  XIII The Opium Act, 1857  (1) In the preamble, omit the words “in the Presidency 
of Fort William in Bengal ”. 
   (2) Insert th e following as section 1 namely :— 
   “1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called 
the Opium Act, 1857.  
   (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
1878  I The Opium Act, 1878  (1) In section 1, for the words beginning with “It shall 
extend to ” and ending with the words “directs in this 
behalf ”, substitute  the following namely: — 
   “It extends to the whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
   (2) In section 3, for the definition s of “import ”, 
“export ”, “transport ”, “sale” and “sell”, substitute the 
following, namely: — 
   “Customs frontiers ” means any of the customs 
frontiers of India as defined by the Central Government 
under section 3A of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 ( 8 of 
1878) ; 
   “Import ” and “export ” means respectively to bring 
into, or take out of, a State otherwise th an across any 
customs frontiers ; 
   “transport ” means to remove from one place to 
another within the same State;  
   “sale” does not include sale for export across customs 
frontiers, and “sell” shall be construed accordingly.  
1890  II The Revenue Recovery  
Act, 1890.  (1) In sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the words and 
letter “Part B States ” substitute the words “the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
   (2) In sub -section ( 4) of section 4, for the words and 
letters “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute the 
words “any State to which this Act extends ”. 
1926  III The Government 
Trading Taxation       
Act, 1926.  (1) In the preamble, omit the words “or the 
Government of any Acceding State or other Indian 
State ”. 
   (2) In section 2, — 
   (a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words, “in Part A States 
and Part C States ” substitute the word “India ”; 
   (b) omit sub -section ( 1A); 5 
 1 2 3 4 
   (c) in sub -section ( 3), add the following words at the 
end, namely: — 
   “and „India ‟ means the territory of India excluding the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
   (3) In section 3, for the words “upon an Acceding 
State or other Indian State ” substitute the words and letter 
“upon a Part B State ”. 
1930  II The Dangerous Drugs  
Act, 1930.  (1) In sub -section ( 2) of section 1, for the words and  
letter “Part B States ” substitute the words “the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
    (2) In sub -section ( 1) of section 39, for the words and 
letters “or an Act of the Legislature of a Part A State or 
Part C State ” substitute the words “or an Act of any State 
Legislature ”. 
1947  XXX  The Taxation on 
Income (Investigation 
Commission) Act, 
1947.  In sub -section ( 2) of section1, for the words and letter 
“Part B  State ” substitute the words “the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir” . 
1949  XXII  The Payment  of Taxes 
(Transfer of Property ) 
Act, 1949.  (1) In sub -section ( 2) of section  1, for the words and 
letter “Part B States ” substitute the words “the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
   (2) In the Explanation to section 2, for the words and 
letter “Part B States ” substitute the words “the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
 
_________  
--------------------------The Representation of the People Act, 1950--------------------------
 
1 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1.    Short title.  
2.     Definitions.  
PART II  
ALLOCATION OF SEATS AND DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES  
The House  of the People  
3.    Allocation o f seats in the House of the People.  
4.    Filling  of seats in the House of the People  and  Parliamentary Constituencies.  
5.    [Omitted .] 
6.    [Omitted .] 
The State Legislative Assemblies  
7.   Total  number  of seats in Legislative Assemblies  and  Assem bly Constituencies.  
7A.Total number of seats in the  Legislative Assembly of Sikkim  and Assembly Constituencies.  
The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order  
8.   Consolidation of delimitation orders.  
8A. Delimitation of Parliamentary  and Assembly Constituencies in the States of Arunchal 
Pardesh, Assam, Manipur or Nagaland.  
9.    Power of Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Order up -to-date.  
9A. [ Omitted .] 
9B. [ Omitted .] 
The State Legislative Councils  
10.  Allocation of seats in the Legislative Councils.  
11.  Delimitation of Council constituencies.  
Provisions as to orders delimiting constituencies  
12.  Power to alter or amend orders.  
13.  Procedure as to orders delimiting constituencies.  
PART IIA  
OFFICERS  
13A. Chief electoral o fficers.  
13AA. District election officers.   
2 
 SECTIONS  
13B. Electoral registration officers.  
13C. Assistant electoral registration officers.  
13CC. Chief electoral officers, district election  officers,  etc., deemed to be on deputation to 
Election Commission.  
PART IIB  
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES  
13D. Electoral rolls for parliamentary constituencies.  
PART III  
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES  
14.        Definitions.  
15.        Electoral roll for every constituency.  
16.        Disq ualifications for registration in an electoral roll.  
17.        No person to be registered in more than one constituency.  
18.        No person to be registered more than once in any constituency.  
19.        Conditions of registration.  
20.        Meaning of  “ordinarily resident ”. 
20A.     Special provisions for citizens of India residing outside India.  
21.        Preparation and revision of electoral rolls.  
22.        Correction of entries in electoral rolls.  
23.        Inclusion of names in electoral rolls.  
24.        Appeals.  
25.        Fee for applications and appeals.  
25A.     Conditions of registration as elector in Sangha constituency in Sikkim.  
PART IV  
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES  
26.       [Omitted .] 
27.       Preparation of electoral ro lls for Council Constituencies.  
PART IVA  
MANNER  OF  FILLING  SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES TO  BE  FILLED   BY 
REPRESENTATIVES OF UNION TERRITORIES  
27A.   Constitution of electoral colleges for the filling of seats  in the Council of States allotted to 
Union territories.  
27B.     [Omitted .] 
27C.    [Omitted .] 
27D.     [Omitted .]  
3 
 SECTIONS  
27E.    [Omitted .] 
27F.    [Omitted .] 
27G.   Termination of membership of electoral college for certain disqualifications.  
27H.   Manner of filling of seats in the Council o f States allotted to Union territories.  
27-I.   [Omitted .] 
27J.     Power of electoral col leges to elect notwithstanding vacancies therein.  
27K.    [Omitted. ] 
PART V  
GENERAL  
28.     Power to make rules.  
29.     Staff of local authorities to be made availab le. 
30.     Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
31.     Making false declarations.  
32.    Breach of official duty in connection with the preparation, etc., of electoral rolls.  
THE  FIRST SCHEDULE. —ALLOCATION OF SEATS I N THE HOUSE OF THE  PEOPLE . 
THE  SECO ND  SCHEDULE. —TOTAL  NUMBER  OF   S EATS  IN  THE  LEGIS LATIVE ASSEMBLIES.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —ALLOCATION OF SEATS I N THE LEGISLATIVE CO UNCILS.  
THE  FOURTH  SCHEDUL E.—LOCAL AUTHORITIES FOR  PURPOSES OF ELECTION S  TO 
LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL S. 
THE  FIFTH  SCHEDUL E.—[Omitted .] 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE. —[Omitted .] 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE .—[Omitted .] 
  
4 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1950  
                                              [12th May , 1950.]  
An Act to provide the allocation of seats in, and the delimitation of constituencies for the 
purpose of election t o, the House of the People and the Legislatures of States, the 
qualifi cations of voters at such elections, the preparation of electoral rolls, 1[the manner 
of filling seats in the Council of S tates to be filled by representatives of 2[Union 
territories]], and matters connected therewith.   
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1.  Short  title .—This Act may be called the Representation  of  the People Act, 1950.  
2.  Definit ions. —3* * * In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(b)  “Assembly  constituency ” means a constituency provided 4[by  law] for the purpose of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State ; 
(c) “Council constituency ” means a constituency provided 5[by law] for the purpose of 
elections to the Legislative Council of a State;  
6*                *                 *                 *                
 (d) “Election Commission ” means the  Election Co mmission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(f)  “Parliamentary  constituency ” means a constituency provided  7[by law] for the purpose of 
elections to the House of the People;  
8*                *                 *                 *                
 (g) “person ” does not include a body of persons;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
9[(i) “State ” includes a Union territory;]  
(j)  “State Government ”, in relati on to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof.  
10*                *                 *                 *             * 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 73 of 1950, s.  2 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1950).  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956, for “Part C States ”.   
3. The brackets and figure “(1)” omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s.  65 . 
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1956, s . 2, for “by order made under section 9 ”.  
5. Subs.  by the Adaptation  of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956, for “by order made under section 11 ”.  
6. Omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s.  65.   
7. Subs. by Act 2 of 195 6, s.  2, for “by section 6 or by order made thereunder ”.  
8. Omitted by the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) (Adaptation of Laws on U nion Subjects) Order, 1974, s. 3 and the 
Schedule (w.e.f.  21 -1-1972).   
9. Subs. by s. 3 and the Schedule , ibid., for clause (i) (w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).   
10. O mitted by the Adaptatio n of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.   
5 
 PART II  
ALLOCATION OF SEATS AND DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES  
The House of the People  
1[3. Allocation of seats in the House of the People .—The allocation of  seats  to the States in the 
House of the People and the number  of seats,  if  any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and  for  
the Scheduled  Tribes  of  each  State  shall be as  shown  in  the  First Schedule.  
4.   F illing of seats in the House of the People and parliame ntary constituencies . —2*** 
3[(2) All the seats in the House of the Peopl e allotted to the States under section 3 shall be seats to 
to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from parliamentary con stituencies in the States.]  
(3) Every parliamentary constitue ncy referred to in sub -section (2) shall be a single -member 
constituency.  
(4) Every State to which o nly one seat is allotted under section 3 shall form one parliamentary 
constituency.  
4[(5) Save as provided in sub -section ( 4), the extent of all parliamentary constituencies except the 
parliamentary constituencies in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur and 
Nagaland shall be as determined by the orders of the Delimitation Commi ssion made under the 
provisions of the Delimitation Act, 2002  (33 of 2002)  and the extent of the parliamentary 
constituencies in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland shall be 
as provided for in the Delimitation of Parliam entary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 having 
regard to the provisions of sections 10A and 10B of the Delimitation Act, 2002.]]  
5.  [Parliamentary constituencies .] Omitted by the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act , 
1956 (2 of 1956), s.  4. 
6.   [Delimitation  of  parliamentary constituencies .]  Omitted by  the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) 
Order , 1956.  
The State Legislative Assemblies  
5[7. Total  number of seats in Legislative Assemblies  and  Assembly Constituencies .—(1)  
6[Subject  to the provisions  of  7[sub-sections ( 1A),  (1B)  and ( 1C)], the total number of seats] in the  
Legislative Assembly  of each State specified in the Second Schedule, to be filled by persons chosen 
by direct election from Assembly Constituencies, and the  number of seats, if any, to be reserved for 
the Scheduled  Castes and  for the Scheduled Tribes of the State, shall be as shown in  that Schedule:  
Provided  that  for  the period referred to in clause ( 2)  of  article 371A,  the total number of seats 
allotted to the Legislative  Assembly of the State of Nagaland shall be 8[fifty -two], of which — 
(a)  9[twelve  seats] shall be allocated to the Tuensang district  and shall  be  filled  by persons 
persons chosen by the members  of  the  regional council,  referred to in that article, from amongst 
themselves in such manner  as  the  Governor,  after consulting  that  Council  may,  by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 2, for sections 3 and 4 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Omitted by Act 29 of 1975,  s. 11 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f.  15 -8-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2008, s. 2, for sub-section  (5) (w.e.f. 16 -4-2008).    
5. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 14-12-1966).    
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1980, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-1979).    
7. Subs. by Act 38 of 1992, s. 2, for “sub-sections ( 1A) and ( 1B)” (w.e.f. 5 -12-1992).   
8. Subs. by Act 61 of 1968, s. 4, for “forty -six”.    
9. Subs. by s.  4,  ibid., for “six seats ” . 
  
6 
 (b)  the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons  chosen  by direct election from 
assembly constituencies in the rest of the State.   
1[(1A)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained in sub -section  ( 1),  the total  number  of  seats in the 
the Legislative Assembly of the  State  of  Sikkim,  to  be constituted at any time after the 
commencement of   the Representation  of the People (Amendment) Act, 1980 (8 of 1980), to be filled   
by   persons  chosen  by   direct  election   from   assembly constituencies shall be thirty -two, of 
which — 
(a)  twelve seats  shall be reserved for Sikkimese  of  Bhutia -Lepcha origin;  
(b) two seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes of that State; and  
(c)  one seat shall be reserved for the Sanghas referred to in section 25A.  
Explanation. —In   this   sub -section   “Bhutia ” includes Chumbipa, Dopthapa, Dukpa, Kaga tey, 
Sherpa, Tibetan, Tromopa and Yolmo.]  
2[(1B)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), in  the Legislative  Assemblies of 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram  and  Nagaland,  to  be  constituted at  any  
time  after  the c ommencement  of  the Representation of the People  (Third  Amendment) Act, 1987 
(40 of 1987), —  
(a) 3[fifty-nine seats] shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes  in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Arunachal Pradesh;   
(b) fifty -five seats shall b e reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Meghalaya;   
(c)  thirty -nine  seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes  in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Mizoram;  and   
(d) fifty -nine seats shall be reserve d for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Nagaland.]  
4[(1C) Notwithstanding  anything  contained in sub -section ( 1),  twenty seats  shall  be reserved 
for the Scheduled Tribes in the  Legislative Assembly  of the State of Tripu ra to be constituted at any 
time  after the  commencement of the  Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1992  
(38 of 1992).]  
(2)  Every assembly constituency referred to 5[in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A)] shall be a 
single -member constituenc y. 
6[(3) The extent of each assembly constituency in all the States and Union Territories except the 
assembly constituencies in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur and 
Nagaland shall be as determined by the orders of the Delimitation  Commission made under the 
provisions of the Delimitation Act, 2002  (33 of 2002)  and the extent of each assembly constituency in 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland shall be as provided for in 
the Delimitation of Parliam entary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 having regard to the 
provisions of sections 10A and 10B of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002).]  
7[7A. Total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim and Assembly 
Constituencies .—(1) Notwiths tanding anything contained in section 7, in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Sikkim [deemed under the Constitution (Thirty -sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 to be the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-9-1979).   
2. Ins. by Ac t 40 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-9-1987).    
3. Subs.  by Act 10 of 2008, s. 3, for “thirty -nine seats ” (w.e.f. 16-4-2008).   
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1992, s. 2 (w.e .f. 5-12-1992).    
5. Subs. by Act 8 of 1980, s. 2, for “in sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1-9-1979).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2008, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3).   
7. Ins. by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 9-9-1975).   
7 
 Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted], the total number of seats to be fi lled by persons 
chosen by direct election from Assembly constituencies shall be 32.  
(2)  Every Assembly constituency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be a single -member 
constituency.  
(3) In the Legislative Assembly so deemed to b e duly constituted, the  extent of each constituency 
and the  reservation of seats shall be as provided for immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Thirty -sixth Amendment) Act, 1975.]  
The Delimiation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order  
8. Consolidat ion of delimitation orders .—1[(1) Having regard to all the orders referred to in 
sub-section ( 5) of section 4 and sub -section ( 3) of section 7 relating to the delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies in all States and Union Territories, ex cept the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Manipur and Nagaland, made by the Delimitation 
Commission and published in the Official Gazette, the Election Commission shall —  
(a) after making such amendments as appear to it to be necessary for br inging up -to-date the 
description of the extent of the parliamentary and assembly constituencies as given in such orders, 
without, however, altering the extent of any such constituency;  
(b) after taking into account the provisions of the Delimitation of P arliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, as made applicable pursuant to the orders made by the 
President under section 10A of the Delimitation Act, 2002  (33 of 2002)  relating to delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur 
and Nagaland, and the provisions of section 10B of the said Act relating to delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies in the State of Jharkhand,  
consolidate all such orders into one single order to be known as the Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 and shall send authentic copies of that Order to the Central 
Government and to the Government of each State having a Legislative Assembly; and thereupon that 
Order sha ll supersed e all the orders referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 4 and sub -section ( 3) of 
section 7 and shall have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. ] 
(2) As soon as may be, after the said Order is received by the Centr al Government  or  by  the 
Government of a State, that  Government  shall cause it to be laid before the House of the People or, 
as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State.  
2[(3)  The consolidation under sub -section ( 1) of the orders  referr ed to in sub -section ( 5) of 
section 4, or as the case may be, sub -section ( 3)  of section 7 shall not, 3[as provided in sub -section ( 5) 
(5) of section 10   of  the  Delimitation  Act,  2 002 (33 of  2 002)],  affect   the representation in, and 
the territorial c onstituencies of, the House of the  People  or the Legislative Assembly of the State 
existing on  the date  of  publication  in the Gazette of India of any  such  order  or orders as may be 
relevant.]  
4[8A. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Consti tuencies in the States of Arunachal 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur or Nagaland .—(1) If the President is satisfied that the 
situation and the conditions prevailing in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur or 
Nagaland are conducive for the conduct of deli mitation exercise, he may, by order, rescind the 
deferment order issued under the provisions of section 10A of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002) 
in relation to that State, and provide for the conduct of delimitation exercise in the State by the 
Elect ion Commission.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2008, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -4-2008).   
2. Ins. by Act 88 of 1976, s.  4.   
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2008,  s. 4, for certain words.   
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. 
  
8 
  (2) As soon as may be after the deferment order in respect of a State is rescinded under sub -
section ( 1), the Election Commission may, by order, determine —  
(a) the parliamentary constituencies into which such State to which more than one seat is 
allotted in the First Schedule shall be divided;  
(b) the extent of each constituency; and  
(c) the number of seats, if any, reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.  
(3) As soon as may be after the deferment order in respect of a State is rescinded under sub -
section ( 1), the Election Commission may, by order, determine —  
(a) the assembly constituencies into which such State shall be divided for the purpose of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of that State;  
(b) the extent of e ach constituency; and  
(c) the number of seats, if any, reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.  
 (4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Election Commission shall, having regard to 
the provisions of the Constitution and the  principles specified in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002) determine the parliamentary and assembly 
constituencies in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland in which seats s hall 
be reserved, if any, for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
(5) The Election Commission shall, — 
 (a) publish its proposals under sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) with respect to any State in the 
Official Gazette and also in such other manner as it thinks fit;  
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it;  
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified;  
(d) hold, for the purpose of such considerat ion, if it thinks fit so to do, one or more public 
sittings at such place or places in such State as it thinks fit;  
(e) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before 
the date so specified, determine, by order, t he delimitation of parliamentary and assembly 
constituencies in the State and also the constituency or constituencies in which seats shall be 
reserved, if any, for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and cause such order to be 
published in the Of ficial Gazette; and, upon such publication, the order shall have the force of law 
and shall not be called in question in any court and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008 shall be deemed to have been amended accordingl y. 
(6) Every order made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) and clause ( e) of sub -section ( 5) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
(7) Every order made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) and clause ( e) of sub -section ( 5) shall, as 
soon as may be after it is published under that sub -section, be laid before the Legislative Assembly of 
the State concerned.]  
9.   Power  of  Election  Commission to  maintain  Delimitation  Order up -to-date.— (1)  The  
Election Commission may, from time to time,  by notification   published  in the Gazette of India and 
in  the  Official Gazette o f the State  concerned, —  
9 
 1[(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 2008 or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(aa) make such amendments in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 2008 as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for consolidating with that 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2008, s. 6, for clause ( a).   
10 
 Order any notification or order relating to delimitation of Parlia mentary or assembly  
constituencies (including reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in 
such constituencies) issued under section 8A of this Act or any other Central Act;]  
 (b)  where  the boundaries or name of any district o r any  territorial division  mentioned  in  
the  Order  are  or  is  altered,  make  such amendments  as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for  bringing the Order up -to-date.  
1[(c) make such amendments in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assem bly 
Constituencies Order, 2008 as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the Order up -
to-date by including therein and excluding therefrom the relevant areas, consequent upon the 
exchange of one hundred and eleven enclaves of India and fift y-one enclaves of Bangladesh with 
effect from 31st July, 2015, in pursuance of the Constitution (One Hu ndredth Amendment) Act, 
2015.]  
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon  as may  be  after  it is issued, before 
the House of the  People  and  the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned.]                
2*               *                             *                                 *                        * 
The State Legislative Councils  
10.   Allocation  of  seats  in  the  Legislative  Councils .— (1)  The allocation  of seats in the 
Legislative Councils of the States  having such Councils shall be as shown in the Third Schedule.  
(2)  In  the Legislative Council of each State specified in the  first column  of  the  Third 
Schedule, there shall be the  number  of  seats specified  in the second column thereof opposite to that 
State, and of those seats, — 
(a) the numbers specified in the third, fourth and fifth columns shall be  the number of seats to 
be filled by persons elected , respectively, by  the  electorates  referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and  ( c)  of clause ( 3) of article 171;  
(b)  the  number specified in the sixth column shall be the number  of seats  to  be  filled  by  
persons  elected  by  the  members  of  the Legislative  Assembly  of the State from amongst 
persons who  are  not members of that Assembly;  and  
(c)  the number specified in the seventh column shall be the number of seats  to be filled by 
persons nominated by the Governor 3* * * of the State in acc ordance with the provisions of clause 
(5) of article 171.  
4*                 *                 *                *                 * 
11.   Delimitation of Council Constituencies .—As soon as may be after the commencement of  
this Act, the  President  shall,  by  order, determine — 
(a)  the  constituencies  into which each State having  a  Legislative Council  shall be divided 
for the  purpose of elections to that Council under  each  of  the  sub -clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of  
clause  ( 3)  of article 171;  
(b) the extent of each constituency;  and  
(c) the number of seats allotted to each constituency.  
Provisions as to orders delimiting constituencies  
12.   Power to alter or amend orders .—5[(1)] The President may,  from time  to  time,  after  
consulting the Electi on Commission,  by  order, alter or amend any order made by him under 6* * * 
section 11.  
7[(2)  An  order under sub -section ( 1) may contain provisions for  the allocation  of  any  member   
representing  any  council   constituency   immediately  before  t he  making  of the    order  to  any  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4-3-2016 ). 
2. Omitted by the Act 10 of 2008, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -4-2008).  
3. The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may  be” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
4.  Omitted  by Act 37 of 1957, s. 12.  
5.  Section 12 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 20 of 1960, s. 2.  
6. The words and figures “section 6, section 9, or ” omitted by Act 2 o f 1956, s. 7.  
7.  Ins. by Act 20 of 1960, s.  2.   
11 
 constituency    delimited  a  new  or  altered by the order and for such other  incidental and 
consequential matters as the President may deem necessary.]  
13.  Procedure as to orders delimiting constituencies .— 1*** 
(3)  Every  order made under 2* * * section 11 or section 12 shall  be laid  before Parliament as 
soon as may be after it is made, and  shall be  subject  to such modifications as Parliament may make 
on a  motion made within twenty days from the date on whic h the order is so laid.  
3[PART IIA  
OFFICERS  
13A.  Chief electoral officers .—(1) There shall be for each State a chief electoral  officer  who  
shall be such officer of  Government  as  the Election  Commission  may,  in   consultation  with  that 
Governmen t, designate or nominate in this behalf.  
(2)  Subject  to  the superintendence, direction and  control  of  the Election  Commission, the 
chief electoral officer shall supervise  the preparation,  revision  and correction of all electoral rolls  in  
the St ate under this Act.  
4[13AA.  District election officers .—(1) For each district in a State, 5***, the Election  
Commission  shall,  in consultation with the Government of the State, designate or nominate a district 
election officer who shall be an officer o f Government:  
Provided  that the Election Commission may designate or nominate  more than  one  such officer 
for a district if the Election  Commission  is satisfied  that  the  functions  of the  office  cannot  be  
performed satisfactorily by one officer . 
(2)  Where  more than one district election officer are designated  or nominated  for  a district 
under the proviso to sub -section  ( 1),  the Election  Commission shall in the order designating or 
nominating  the district  election officers also specify the area in respect of  which each such officer 
shall exercise jurisdiction.  
(3) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the chief electoral  officer, the district 
election officer shall coordinate and supervise  all  work  in  the  distri ct or  in  the  area  within  his 
jurisdiction  in  connection with the preparation and revision of  the electoral   rolls   for  all   
parliamentary,  assembly  and   council constituencies within the district.  
(4)  The  district  election  officer shall also  perform  such  other functions  as  may be entrusted 
to him by the Election Commission  and the chief electoral officer.]  
13B.  Electoral registration officers .—(1) The electoral roll 6[7[for each  parliamentary 
constituency in the State of Jammu and  Kashmir  or in a Union territory not having a Legislative 
Assembly], each assembly constituency  and  each  Council constituency] shall be  prepared  and 
revised by an electoral registration officer who shall be such officer of  Government or of a local 
authority as the Election Commission may, in  consultation  with  the  Government  of the  State  in  
which  the constituency is situated, designate or nominate in this behalf.  
(2)  An electoral registrati on officer may, subject to any prescribed restrictio ns, employ such 
persons as he thinks fit for the preparation and revision of the electoral roll for the constituency.  
                                                      
1.  Omitted by Act 2 of 1956, s.  8.  
2.  The words and figures “section 6, section 9, ” omitted by s. 8, ibid.  
3.  Ins. by s. 9, ibid. 
4.  Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 5 (w.e.f.  14 -12-1966).  
5.  The words “other than a Union territory, ” omitted by Act 2 of 2004, s. 2.  
6.  Subs. by Act 103 of 1956, s. 65, for certain words.   
7.  Subs.  by Act 47 of 1966, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f.14 -12-1966)   
12 
 13C.   Assistant electoral registration officers .—(1)  The  Election Commission  may  appoint  
one or more persons as  assistant  elector al registration  officers to assist any electoral registration 
officer in the performance of his functions.  
(2)  Every assistant electoral registration officer shall, subject  to the  control  of the electoral 
registration officer, be  competent  to perfor m  all  or  any of the functions of the  electoral  
registration officer.  
1[13CC.   Chief Electoral Officers, District Election Officers,  etc., deemed  to  be  on 
deputation to  Election  Commission. —The  officers referred  to  in this Part and any other officer 
or staff employed  in connection  with  the  preparation,  revision and  correction  of  the electoral rolls 
for, and the conduct of, all elections shall be deemed to  be on deputation to the Election Commission 
for the period  during which  they a re so employed and such officers and staff shall,  during that 
period, be subject to the control, superintendence and discipline of the Election Commission.]  
PART IIB  
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES  
2[13D.   Electoral  rolls for parliament ary  constituencies .— (1)  The electoral  roll  for  every 
parliamentary constituency, other  than  a parliamentary constituency in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or in a Union  territory  not having a Legislative Assembly, shall consist  of the  electoral   
rolls  for all the assembly  constituencies  comprised within that parliamentary constituency;  and it 
shall not be necessary to  prepare  or  revise  separately the electoral roll  for  any  such parliamentary 
constituency:  
Provided  that  for  the peri od referred to in clause ( 2)  of  article 371A,  it  shall  be necessary to 
prepare and  revise  separately  the electoral  roll  for  that part of the parliamentary  constituency  of 
Nagaland  which comprises the Tuensang district and the provisions  of P art  III  shall apply in 
relation to the preparation and revision  of the  electoral  roll of the said part as they apply in relation 
to  an assembly constituency.  
(2)  The  provisions  of  Part III shall apply in  relation  to  every parliamentary  consti tuency in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in  a Union  territory  not having a Legislative Assembly as they  
apply  in relation to an assembly constituency.]  
PART III  
3[ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR ASSEMBLY 4* * * CONSTITUENCIES ] 
5[14.   Definitions .—In  this  Pa rt, unless  the  context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “constituency ” means an Assembly constituency 4* * * ;  
(b)  “qualifying date ”, in relation to the preparation or revision  of every  electoral rol l under 
this Part, means 6[the 1st day of January] of the y ear in which it is so prepared or revised:]    
7[Provided  that “qualifying date ”, in relation to the preparation  or revision  of  every electoral 
roll under this Part in the  year  1989, shall be the 1st day of April, 1989.]  
15.   Electoral  roll for ever y constituency .—For every  constituency there shall be an electoral 
roll which shall be prepared in accordance with  the provisions of this Act under the superintendence,  
direction and control of the Election Commission.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).    
2. Subs.  by Act 47 of 1966, s. 7, for section 13D (w.e.f.  14 -12-1966).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1956, s. 10, for the heading “REGISTRATION OF PARLIAMENTARY ELECTORS ”. 
4. Certain words omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s.  65.  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1956, s. 11, for s ection  14. 
6. Subs. by Act 58  of 1958, s. 5, for “the 1st day of March ” (w.e.f.1 -1-1959). 
7. Ins. by Act 21 of 1989, s. 3  (w.e.f. 28-3-1989).     
13 
 16.   Disqualifications for regist ration in an elect oral roll .—(1) A person shall be disqualified 
for registration in an electoral roll if he — 
(a) is not a citizen of India;  or  
(b)  is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent  court; or  
(c)  is  for  the  time  being  disqual ified  from  voting  under  the provisions  of any law 
relating to corrupt 1* * * practices and  other offences in connection with elections.  
(2)  The name of any person who becomes  so  disqualified  after registration shall forthwith be 
struck off the el ectoral roll in which it is included:  
2[Provided that the name of any p erson struck off the electoral roll of a constituency by reason of 
a disqualification under clause ( c) of sub -section (1) shall forthwith be re -instated in that roll if  such 
disqualifi cation  is, during the period such roll is in force, removed under any law authorising such 
removal.]  
17.   No  person to be registered in more than  one  constituency .—No person  shall  be 
entitled to be registered in the electoral roll  for more than one  constituency 3* * *.  
18.    No Person  to  be  registered more  than   once   in   any constituency . —No  person  
shall be entitled to be registered  in  the electoral roll for any constituency more than once.  
4[19.  Conditions  of  registration . — Subjec t   to the  foregoing provisions of this Part, every 
person who — 
(a)  is not less than 5[eighteen years] of age on the qualifying date, and  
(b) is ordinarily resident in a constituency,  
shall be entitled  to be registered in the electoral roll  for  that constituency.]  
20. Meaning  of “ordinarily resident ”.—6[(1) A person shall not  be deemed to be ordinarily 
resident in a constituency on the ground only that he owns, or is in possession of, a dwelling house 
therein.  
(1A) A person absenting himself tempora rily from his place of ordinary residence shall not by 
reason thereof cease to be ordinarily resident therein.  
(1B) A member of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State shall not during  the term of his 
office cease to be ordinarily resident in  the con stituency  in  the electoral roll of which he is registered  
as  an elector  at the time of his election as such member, by reason of  his absence  from that 
constituency in connection with his duties as  such member.]  
(2)  A person who is a patient in any  establishment maintained  wholly or  mainly  for the 
reception and treatment of persons suffering  from mental  illness or mental defectiveness, or who is 
detained in  prison or  other  legal custody at any place, shall not by reason thereof  be deemed to  be 
ordinarily resident therein.  
7[(3)  Any person having a service qualification shall be deemed to be ordinarily  resident on any 
date in the constituency in which, but for his  having such service qualification, he would have been  
ordinarily resident o n that date.]  
                                                      
1. The words “and illegal ” omitted by Act 58 of 1960, s.  3 and the S econd Schedule .  
2. Ins.  by Act 73 of 1950, s.  4 . 
3. The words “in the same State ” omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s.  6.  
4. Subs. by s. 7 , ibid., for section   19. 
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 1989, s. 4, for “twenty -one years ” (w.e.f. 28 -3-1989).  
6. Subs. by  Act 58 of   1958, s. 8, for sub-section  ( 1). 
7.  Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s.  8, for sub-section  ( 3)  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).   
14 
 (4)  Any person holding any office in India declared1 by the President in  consultation with the 
Election  Commission  to be   an   office   to   which   the   provisions  of  this  sub -section  apply,            
2*** shall be deemed to be o rdinarily resident 3*** on  any date in the constituency in  which, but  for  
the  holding of any such office 4* * *, he would  have  been ordinarily      resident     5* * *     on     
that      date.  
(5)  The statement of any such person as is referred to  in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) made 
in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed   manner,   that  6[but  for   his   having   the   
service qualification]  or  but for his holding any such office 7* * *  as  is referred  to in                  
sub-section ( 4) he would have been ordinarily resident in  a  specified  place 8* * * on any date, shall, 
in the  absence  of evidence to the contrary, be 6[accepted as correct].  
(6) The wife of any such person as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4) shall if she 
be ordinarily residing with such person 9* * * be deemed to be ordinarily resident on 10*** in the 
constituency specified by such person under sub -section ( 5). 
11[(7)  If  in  any  case a question arises as to  where  a  person  is ordinarily  resident  at  any  
relevant time, the  question  shall  be determined  with  reference to all the facts of the case and  to  
such rules  as  may  be made in this behalf by the  Central  Government  in consultation with the 
Election Commissi on.] 
(8) In sub -sections ( 3) and ( 5) “service qualification ” means — 
(a) being a member of the armed forces of the Union;  or  
(b) being a member of a force to which the provisions of the Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950), 
have been made applicable whether with o r  without modifications;  or  
(c) being a member of an armed police force of a State, who is serving outside that State;  or  
(d) being a person who is employed under the Government of India, in a post outside India.  
12[20A.  Special provisions for citizens of India residing outside India . —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, every citizen of India — 
(a) whose name in not included in the electoral roll;  
(b) who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country; and  
                                                      
1.  The following  offices have been declared by  the  President  by Notification No.  S.O.  959, dated the 18th April, 1960: — 
1.  The President of India.  
2.  The Vice -President of India . 
3.  Governors of States.  
4.  Cabinet Ministers of the Union or of any State.  
5.  The Deputy Chairman and Members of the Planning Commission.  
6.  The Ministers of State of the Union or of any State.  
7.  Deputy Ministers of the Union or of any State.  
8.  The  Speaker  of the House of the People or  of  any  Legislative Assembly.  
9.  The Chairman of any State Legislative Council.  
10. Lieutenant Governors of Union territories.  
11. The  Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or of  any  State Legislative As sembly.  
12.   The  Deputy  Chairman of the Council of States or of  any  State Legislative Council.  
13.  Parliamentary Secretaries of the Union or of any State.   
2. Certain words omitted by  Act 47 of 1966, s. 8  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).   
3. The words “during any period or ” omitted by Act 2 of 1956, s.  14.  
4. The words “or employment ” omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s.  8 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
5. The  words “during that period or ” omitted by Act 2 of  1956,  s. 14.  
6. Subs.   by  Act  47 of 1966, s.  8,  for  certai n  words  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Certain words omitted by s.  8, ibid.  (w.e.f.  14 -12-1966).  
8. The words “during any period or ” omitted by Act 2 of 1956, s.  14.  
9. The words “during any period ” omitted by s.  14, ibid. 
10. The words “during that period ” omitted by s.  14, ibid.   
11. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid.  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
12. Ins. by Act 36 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -2-2011).   
15 
 (c) who is absenting from  his place of ordinary residence in India owing to his employment, 
education or otherwise outside India (whether temporarily or not),  
shall  be entitled to have his name registered in the electoral roll in the constituency in which his place 
of residence i n India as mentioned in his passport is located.  
(2) The time within which the name of persons referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be registered in 
the electoral roll and the manner and procedure for registering of a person in the electoral roll under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every person registered under this section shall, if otherwise eligible to exercise his franchise, 
be allowed to vote at an election in the constituency.]  
1[21. Preparation and revision of electoral roll s. — (1) The electoral roll  for each constituency 
shall be prepared in the prescribed manner by  reference  to  the  qualifying  date and  shall  come  into  
force immediately  upon  its final publication in accordance with the  rules made under this Act.  
2[(2) The said electoral roll — 
(a)  shall,  unless otherwise directed by the Election Commission  for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, be revised in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date — 
(i)  before each general election to the Hous e of the People or to the Legislative Assembly 
of a State;  and  
(ii)  before each  bye -election to fill a casual vacancy  in  a  seat allotted to the  
constituency;  and  
(b) shall be revised in any year in the prescribed manner by reference to  the  qualif ying  date 
if such revision has been directed by  the Election Commission:  
Provided that if the electoral roll is not revised as aforesaid, the validity or continued operation of 
the said electoral roll shall not thereby be affected.]  
(3)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  sub -section  ( 2),   the Election  Commission  may  
at any time, for reasons  to  be  recorded, direct  a special revision of the electoral roll for any  
constituency or part of a constituency in such manner as it may think fit:  
Provided  that  subject  to  the other provisions  of  this  Act,  the electoral  roll  for the 
constituency, as in force at the time of  the issue  of any such direction, shall continue to be in force 
until  the completion of the special revision so directe d. 
3[22. Correction  of entries in electoral rolls .—If  the  electoral registration officer for a 
constituency, on application made to him or on  his own motion, is satisfied after such inquiry as he 
thinks  fit, that any entry in the electoral roll of the  constituency — 
(a) is erroneous or defective in any particular,  
(b)  should be transposed to another place in the roll on the  ground that the person concerned 
has changed his place of ordinary residence within the constituency, or  
(c)  should be deleted o n the ground that the person concerned is dead or  has  ceased  to be 
ordinarily resident in the constituency or is otherwise not entitled  to be registered in that  roll,  
the electoral registration officer shall, subject to such general or special directi ons, if any, as may be 
given by the Election Commission in this behalf, amend, transpose or delete the entry 4[after proper 
verification of facts in such manner as may be prescribed]:  
Provided  that before taking any action on any ground under clause ( a) or  clause  ( b) or any 
action under clause ( c) on the ground that  the person  concerned  has  ceased  to  be  ordinarily  
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 2 of 1956, s.  15, for sections  21 to 25.  
2. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 9, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Subs.  by Act 58 of 1958, s.  9, for s ection   22. 
4.  Ins.  by Act 36 of 2010, s.  3 (w.e.f.  10 -2-2011).    
16 
 resident in the constituency  or that he is otherwise not entitled to be registered in the electoral roll of 
that constituency, the el ectoral registration officer shall give the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in respect of the action proposed to be taken in relation to him 1[after 
proper verification of facts in such manner as may be prescribed].  
2[23.  Inclusio n of names in electoral rolls .— (1) Any person whose name is not included in the 
electoral roll of a constituency may apply to the electoral registration officer for the inclusion of his 
name in that roll.  
(2)  The electoral registration officer shall, if satisfied that the applicant is entitled to be reg istered 
in the electoral roll, direct his name to be included therein 3[after proper verification of facts in such 
manner as may be prescribed]:  
Provided  that if the applicant is registered in the electora l roll of any  other  constituency,  the 
electoral registration  officer shall inform the electoral registration officer of that other constituency 
and that officer shall, on receipt of the information, strike off the applicant's name from that roll 3[after 
proper verification of facts in such manner as may be prescribed].  
(3) No amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry shall be made under  section 22 and no 
direction for the inclusion of a name in  the electoral  roll  of a constituency shall be g iven under this  
section, after  the  last date for making nominations for an election  in  that constituency  or  in the 
parliamentary constituency within which  that constituency is comprised and before the completion of 
that election.]  
4[24. Appeals .—An appeal shall lie within such time and  in  such manner as may be 
prescribed — 
(a) to the 5[district magistrate or additional district magistrate or executive magistrate or 
district collector or an officer of equivalent rank], from any order of the  elector al registration 
officer under section 22 or section 23 6***. 
7[(b) to the chief electoral officer, from any order of the district magistrate or the additional 
district magistrate under clause ( a)] 
25. Fee for applications and appeals .— Every applications u nder  section 22 or section 23 and 
every appeal under section 24 shall be accompanied  by  the  prescribed  fee  which shall,  in  no  case,  
be refunded.]  
8[25A.  Conditions of registration as elector in Sangha constituency in  Sikkim .—
Notwithstanding  an ything contained in sections 15 and 19, for  the Sangha constituency in the State 
of Sikkim, only the  Sanghas belonging  to monasteries, recognised for the purpose of the elections 
held  in  Sikkim in April, 1974, for forming the Assembly for  Sikkim, sha ll be entitled to be 
registered in the electoral roll, and the said electoral  roll shall, subject to the provisions of sections 21 
to 25, be  prepared  or  revised  in such manner as may be  directed  by  the Election Commission, in 
consultation  with the Government of Sikkim.]  
PART IV  
9[ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES ] 
26.   [Preparation  of electoral rolls for  Assembly  constituencies .] Omitted by the Representation 
of the People (Amendment) Act , 1956 (2 of 1956), s.  17. 
27.  Preparation of e lectoral roll for Council constituencies .—(1) In this section, “local 
authorities ’ constituency ”, “graduates' constituency ” and “teachers' constituency ” mean a constituency 
                                                      
1.  Ins.  by Act 36 of 2010, s.  3  (w.e.f.  10 -2-2011).   
2. Subs.   by  Act 47 of 1966, s.  10, f or  s. 23  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Ins.  by Act 36 of 2010, s. 4  (w.e.f.  10 -2-2011).  
4. Ins.  by Act 40 of 1961, s.  3  (w.e.f.  20 -9-1961).   
5. Subs.  by  Act 41 of 2009, s.  2, for  certain words   (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  
6. The word “and” omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s.  11 (w.e.f.  14 -12-1966).  
7. Ins.  by Act 41 of 2009, s. 2  (w.e.f.  1 -2-2010).   
8. Ins.  by Act 10 of 1976, s.  2 and the Schedule .  (w.e.f.  9 -9-1975).  
9. Subs.  by Act 2  of 1956, s.  16, for the heading.   
17 
 for the purpose of elections to a Legislative Council under sub -clause ( a), sub -clause ( b) and                      
sub-clause ( c), respectively, of clause ( 3) of article 171.  
1[(2)  For  the purpose of elections to the Legislative Council  of  a State in any local authorities ’ 
constituency — 
 (a)  the electorate shall consist of members of such local authorities exercising jurisdiction in 
any place or area within the limits of that constituency  as are specified in relation to that State in 
the Fourth Schedule;  
(b)  every  member  of  each  such  local  authority  within  a  local authori ties'  constituency  
shall be entitled to be registered in  the electoral roll for that constituency;  
(c)  the  electoral registration officer for every local  authorities' constituency   shall  maintain  
in  his   office  in  the   prescribed manner  and  form the electoral roll for that  constituency  
corrected up -to-date;  
(d)  in order to enable the electoral registration officer to maintain the  electoral roll corrected 
up-to-date, the chief executive  officer of  every local authority (by whatever desi gnation such 
officer may be known)  shall  immediately inform the electoral  registration  officer about every 
change in the membership of that local authority;  and the electoral  registration officer shall, on 
receipt of the  information, strike  off  fr om  the electoral roll the names of  persons  who  have 
ceased  to  be,  and  include therein the names of  persons  who  have become, members of that 
local authority;  and  
(e)  the  provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 22 and 23 shall apply  in relation  to   local  
authorities'  constituencies  as  they  apply  in relation to assembly constituencies.]  
(3) For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Council of a State in the graduates' 
constituencies and the teachers' constituencies, the State  Government  concerned may, with the 
concurrence of the  Election Commission, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify — 
(a)  the qualifications which shall be deemed to be equivalent to that of a graduate of a 
university in the territory of India, and  
(b)  the   educational  institutions  within the  State  not  lower  in standard than that of a 
secondary school.  
2[(4) The provisions of sections 15, 16, 18, 21, 22 and 23 shall apply in  relation to graduates'  
constituencies and teachers' constituencies as they apply in relation to assembly constituencies.]  
(5) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, — 
3*                *                 *                *                 * 
4[(a)]  every  person  who 5[is] ordinarily resident in  a  graduates' constit uency and has, for at 
at least three years 6[before the qualifying date],  been  either  a graduate of a University in the  
territory  of India     or    in    possession    of  any  of  the  qualifications  specified under clause 
(a) of sub -section ( 3) by th e  State Government  concerned,  shall  be  entitled to be  registered  in  
the electoral roll for that constituency;  and  
7[(b)]  every  person  who 5[is] ordinarily resident  in  a  teachers' constituency,  and has, 
within the six years immediately 6[before  the qualifying  date]  for  a total period of at least three  
years,  been engaged  in teaching in any of the educational institutions  specified under  clause ( b) 
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 2 of 1956 , s. 18, for   sub -section    ( 2). 
2. Subs.  by s.  18, ibid., for sub -section ( 4). 
3. Clause  ( a) omitted by s.  18, ibid. 
4. Clause  (b) re-lettered as cl ause  (a) by s.  18, ibid. 
5. Subs.  by Act 40 of 1961, s.  4, for “on the qualifying date was ” (w.e.f.  20 -9-1961).  
6. Subs.   by  s.   4,  ibid., for “before  that  date ”  (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
7. Clause ( c) re-lettered as clause ( b) by Act 2 of 1956, s.  18.    
18 
 of sub -section ( 3) by the State Government concerned shall  be  entitled  to be registe red in the 
electoral roll  for  that constituency.  
1[(6) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) the qualifying date shall  be the 1st day of 
November of the year in which the preparation or revision of the electoral roll is commenced.]  
2[PART IVA  
MANNER  OF  FILLING  SEATES  IN  THE COUNCIL OF STATES TO BE FILLED BY  
REPRESENTATIVES OF 3[UNION TERRITORIES]  
27A.  Constitution of electoral colleges for the filling of seats in the Council of States allotted 
to Union territories . — (1) 4[For the purpose of  filling any seat] or seats in the Council of States 
allotted to any 6[Union territory] 5* * * in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution there shall be an 
electoral college for 6[each such territory] 7* * *.  
8*               *                 *                 *                 * 
9*               *                 *                 *                  * 
10[11[(3) The electoral college for the Union territory of Delhi shall consist of the elected members of 
the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territo ry under the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 (1 of 1992).]  
12[(4) 13[The electoral college for the Union territory of 14*** Pondicherry] shall consist of the elected 
members of the Legislative Assembly constituted for that territor y under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963).] ] 
15*                *                 *                 *                 * 
16*                *                 *                 *                 * 
27B.   [Electoral  College constituenc ies.] Omitted by  the  Territorial Councils Act , 1956                 
(103 of 1956), s.  65.  
27C.    [Delimitation of Electoral College constituencies .] Omitted  by s. 65, ibid. 
27D.   [Power to alter or amend orders .] Omitte .  by s .  65, ibid. 
27E.   [Procedu re as to orders delimiting constituencies .] Omitted  by the Representation  of  the 
People (Amendment) Act,  1956 (2 of  1956),  s. 21. 
27F.  [Electoral rolls for Council of States constituencies .] Omitted  by s.  22, ibid. 
27G. Termination  of  membership of  electoral  college  for  certain disqualifications .—If  a  
person  who  is a member  of  an  electoral college  becomes  subject  to any disqualification for  
membership  of Parliament  under  the provisions of any law relating to  corrupt  and illegal  p ractices 
and other offences in connection with elections  to Parliament,  he  shall  thereupon  cease  to be  such  
member  of  the electoral college.  
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 40 of 1961 , s.  4, ibid., for sub -section  ( 6) (w.e.f.  20 -9-1961).  
2.  Ins.  by Act 73 of 1950, s.  8.  
3.  Subs.  by the Ada ptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956, for “Part C States ”. 
4.  Subs.  by Act 29 of 1975 ,  s.  11, for certain words (w.e.f.  15 -8-1975).  
5.  The words “or group of such States ” omitted  by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order , 1956.  
6.  Subs., ibid., for “each such State ”. 
7.  The  words “or group of States ” omitted by Act 2  of  1956.  s.  19.  
8.  The p roviso omitted by s.19, ibid. 
9.  Omitted by Act 20 of 1963, s.  57 and  the second Schedule  (w.e.f.  1 -7-1963).  
10. Subs. by Act 103 of 1956, s. 65, for s ub-sections (3), (4) or (5) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
11. Subs.   by  Act 1 of 1992, s.  55, for sub -section  ( 3)  (w.e.f. 2 -10-1993).  
12.  Subs.   by  Act 20 of 1963, s.  57 and  the second  Schedule ,  for  sub -section  ( 4). 
13.  Subs.    by  Act  69  of   1986,  s.   7,  for   certain   words (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
14. The word “Mizoram ” omitted by Act 34 of 1986, s. 7 (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
15.  Omitted by  Act 29 of  1975,  s.   11 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  
16.  Omitted by Act 32 of 1954, s.  7.   
19 
 27H.  Manner of filling of seats in the Council of States allotted to Union territories .— 1* * * 
The seat  or seats in the Council of States allotted to any 2[Union territory] 3* * * in the Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution shall be filled by a person or persons elected by the members of the 
electoral college for 4[that territory] 5* * * in accordance with t he system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote:  
6[Provided  that the person who immediately before the commencement of the  Constitution  
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, is filling the  seat allotted  to  the Part C States  of Manipur and 
Tripura shall, as  from such  commencement,  be deemed to have been duly elected to  fill  the seat 
allotted to the Union territory of Tripura.]  
27-I.  [Special provisions for the filling of the seats in the Council of  States allotted to t he States 
of Ajmer and Coorg and the States of Manipur  and Tripura .] Omitted  by the Adaptation of Laws (No .  
2) Order , 1956.  
27J.  Powers of electoral colleges to elect notwithstanding vacancies therein . —No election by 
the members of an electoral college  7*** under this Act shall be called in question on the ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy in the membership of such college 7* * *.  
27K.    [Electoral  colleges for certain States for  which  Legislative Assemblies  have  been 
constituted .] Omit ted by the Adaptation  of  Laws (No .  2) Order , 1956.]  
PART V  
GENERAL  
28.   Power  to  make  rules .—(1) The   Central  Government  may,   after consulting  the  
Election Commission, by notification in the  Official Gazette, make rules  for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) In  particular  and  without  prejudice to the  generality  of  the foregoing  power,  such  rules  
may  provide for all  or  any  of  the following matters, namely: — 
8[(a) the determination of ordinary residence under sub -section  (7) of section 20;  
(aa)   the  particulars  to  be   entered  in  the  electoral  rolls;]  
(b) the preliminary publication of electoral rolls 9* * *;  
(c)  the  manner  in  which  and the  time  within  which  claims  and objections as to entries in 
elector al rolls may be preferred;  
10*                                 *                                  *                                        *                             * 
 (e)  the  manner  in which notices of claims or  objections  shall  be published;  
(f)  the place, date and time at which claims or objections shall  be heard  and the manner in 
which claims or objections shall be heard and disposed of;  
(g) the final publication of electoral rolls;  
                                                      
1. Certain  words omitted by  the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
2. Subs., ibid.,  for “Part C State ”. 
3. The words “or group of such States ” omitted, ibid. 
4.  Subs., ibid., for “such State ”.  
5. The words “or group of States ” omitted by Act 2 of 1956, s.  23.  
6. Ins.  by t he Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
7. Certain words omitted by Act 49 of 1951, s.  44 and the Fifth Schedule.   
8.  Subs.   by  Act  47  of  1966,  s.   12,  for  clause  (a)  (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
9. Certain words omitted by Act 73 of 1950, s.  9.  
10.   Omitted by Act 20 of 1960, s.  3.   
20 
 1[(h)  the revision and correction of electoral roll and i nclusion of names therein;]  
2[(hh) the procedure for proper verification of facts for amending, transposing or deleting any 
entry in the electoral rolls, under section 22;  
(hhh) the procedure for proper verification of facts for inclusion of or striking of f, names in 
the electoral rolls, under sub -section ( 2) of section 23;]  
(i) any other matter required to be prescribed by this Act.  
3[(3)  Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act  shall be  laid,  as  soon as may 
be after it is made, before  each  House  of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which  may  be comprised in one session or in two or  more  successive sessions,  and  if,  before  
the expiry  of  the  session  immediately following  the  session  o r the successive  sessions  aforesaid,  
both Houses  agree  in making any modification in the rule or  both  Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect  only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case ma y be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment  shall  be without  prejudice  to be 
validity of anything previously  done  under that rule.]  
4[29.   Staff of local authorities to be made available .—Every  local authority  in a State shall, 
when  so requested by the chief  electoral officer  of  the State, make available to any  electoral  
registration officer  such  staff  as may be necessary for the performance  of  any duties  in  connection 
with the preparation and revision of  electoral rolls .] 
30.   Jurisdiction of civil courts barred .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or  is  not  entitled  to 
be registered in an  electoral  roll  for  a constituency;  or  
(b)  to  q uestion  the legality of any action taken by  or  under  the authority  of  an electoral 
registration officer, or of  any  decision given  by  any authority appointed under this Act for the 
revision  of any such roll.  
5[6[31.  Making false declarations .—If any person makes in connection with — 
(a) the preparation, revision or correction of an electoral roll, or  
(b)  the  inclusion or exclusion of any entry in or from an  electoral roll,  
a  statement  or  declaration in writing which is false and  which  he e ither  knows or believes to be 
false or does not believe to be  true, he  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.]  
32.  Breach of official duty in connection with the preparation, etc., of  electoral rolls. —(1) If 
any electoral registration officer,  assistant electoral  registration  officer or other person required by 
or  under this  Act  to  perform  any official  duty  in  connection  with  the preparation,  revision  or  
correction  of an electoral  roll  or  the inclusion  or exclusion of any entry in or from that roll, is  
without reasonable  cause,  guilty  of any act or omission in breach  of  such official  duty, he shall be 
punishable 7[with imprisonment for a  term which  shall no t be less than three months but which may 
extend to two years and with fine].  
(2)  No  suit  or other legal proceeding shall lie  against  any  such officer  or  other  person for 
damages in respect of any such  act  or omission as aforesaid.  
                                                      
1.  Subs.  by Act 2 of 1956, s.  24, for cl ause  (h). 
2.   Ins. by Act 36 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 10 -2-2011).   
3.   Subs.   by  Act  88 of 1976, s.  6, for  sub -section  ( 3).  
4.   Subs.  by Act 2 of 1956, s.  25, for section  29.  
5.  Ins.  by Act 58 of 1958, s.  11.    
6.  Subs.  by Act 20 of 1960, s.  4, for   section   31. 
7.  Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).    
21 
 (3)  No  cour t shall take cognizance of any offence  punishable  under sub -section ( 1) unless there 
is a complaint made by order of, or under authority from, the Election Commission or the Chief 
Electoral Officer of the State concerned.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
22 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See  section  3)  
Allocation of  Seats in the  House of the People  
 
Name of the State/Union 
territory  Number of seats in the House as constituted in 
2004 on the basis of the Delimitation of 
Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
Order, 1976 as amended from time to time  Number of seats in the House as subsequently 
constituted as per the Delimitation of Parliamentary 
and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008  
 Total  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Tribes  Total  Reserved for the 
Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for the 
Scheduled 
Tribes  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
I. STATES  
2[1. Andhra Pradesh  
2. Arunachal Pradesh  
3. Assam  
4. Bihar  
5.Chhattisgarh  
6. Goa  
7. Gujarat  
8. Haryana  
9. Himachal Pradesh  
10. Jammu and Kashmir  
11. Jharkhand  
12. K arnataka  
13. Kerala  
14. Madhya Pradesh  
15. Maharashtra  
16. Manipur  
17. Meghalaya  
18. Mizoram  
19. Nagaland  
20. 3[Odisha]  
21. Punjab  
22. Rajasthan  
23. Sikkim  
24. Tamilnadu  
4[25. Telangana  
26. Tripura  
27. Uttarakhand  
28. Uttar Pradesh  
29. West Bengal  
 
II. UNION 
TERRITORIES  
1. Andaman and Nicobar      
Islands  
2. Chandigarh  
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
4. Delhi  
5.Daman and Diu  
6. Lakshadweep  
7. Puducherry  
  
42 
2 
14 
40 
11 
2 
26 
10 
4 
6 
14 
28 
20 
29 
48 
2 
2 
1 
1 
21 
13 
25 
1 
39 
- 
2 
5 
80 
42 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 
1 
7 
1 
1 
1  
6 
- 
1 
7 
2 
- 
2 
2 
1 
- 
1 
4 
2 
4 
3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
3 
4 
- 
7 
- 
- 
- 
18 
8 
 
 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
-  
2 
- 
2 
- 
4 
- 
4 
- 
- 
- 
5 
- 
- 
5 
4 
1 
- 
1 
- 
5 
- 
3 
- 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
2 
 
 
 
- 
 
- 
1 
- 
- 
1 
-  
25 
2 
14 
40 
11 
- 
26 
10 
4 
6 
14 
28 
20 
29 
48 
2 
2 
1 
1 
21 
13 
25 
1 
39 
17 
2 
5 
80 
42 
 
 
 
1 
 
1 
1 
7 
1 
1 
1  
4 
- 
1 
6 
1 
- 
2 
2 
1 
- 
1 
5 
2 
4 
5 
- 
- 
- 
- 
3 
4 
4 
- 
7 
3 
- 
1 
17 
10 
 
 
 
- 
 
- 
- 
1 
- 
- 
-  
1] 
- 
2 
- 
4 
- 
4 
- 
- 
- 
5 
2 
- 
6 
4 
1 
2 
1 
- 
5 
- 
3 
- 
- 
2] 
1 
- 
- 
2 
 
 
 
- 
 
- 
1 
- 
- 
1 
- 
 543 79 41 543 84 47 
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 10 of 2008, s. 8, for the First and the Second Schedules . 
2.  Subs. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 14 and the Second Schedule , for “1. Andhra Pradesh  42  6  2  42  7  3 ” (w.e.f.  1-3-2014  ). 
3. Subs. by Act 1 5 of 2011, s. 6, for “Orissa”.  
4. Ins. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 14 and the Second Sch edule  (w.e.f. 1-3-2014  ).  
23 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections 7 and 7A)  
Total number of Seats in the Legislative Assemblies  
 
Name of the State/Union 
territory  Number of seats in the House as constituted on 
the basis of the Delimitation of Parliamentary 
and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976 as 
amended from time to time  Number of seats in the House as subsequently 
constituted as  per the Delimitation of Parliamentary 
and Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008  
 Total  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for 
the Scheduled 
Tribes  Total  Reserved for the 
Scheduled 
Castes  Reserved for the 
Scheduled 
Tribes  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
I. STATES  
1[1. Andhra Pradesh  
2. Arunachal Pradesh  
3. Assam  
4. Bihar  
5.Chhattisgarh  
6. Goa  
7. Gujarat  
8. Haryana  
9. Himachal Pradesh  
10. Jammu and Kashmir * 
11. Jharkhand  
12. Karnataka  
13. Kerala  
14. Madhya Pradesh  
15. Maharashtra  
16. Manipur  
17. Meghalaya  
18. Mizoram  
19. Nagaland  
20. Odisha* * 
21. Punjab  
22. Rajasthan  
23. Sikkim  
24. Tamilnadu  
2 [25. Telangana  
3[26.] Tripura  
3[27.] Uttarakhand  
3[28.]Uttar Pradesh  
3[29. ]West Bengal  
 
II. UNION 
TERRITORIES  
1. Delhi  
2. Puducherry  
  
294 
60 
126 
243 
90 
40 
182 
90 
68 
76 
81 
224 
140 
230 
288 
60 
60 
40 
60 
147 
117 
200 
32 
234 
- 
60 
70 
403 
294 
 
 
 
70 
30 
  
39 
- 
8 
39 
10 
1 
13 
17 
16 
6 
9 
33 
13 
34 
18 
1 
- 
- 
- 
22 
29 
33 
2 
42 
- 
7 
12 
89 
59 
 
 
 
13 
5 
  
15 
59 
16 
- 
34 
- 
26 
- 
3 
- 
28 
2 
1 
41 
22 
19 
55 
39 
59 
34 
- 
24 
12*** 
3 
- 
20 
3 
- 
17 
 
 
 
- 
- 
  
175 
60 
126 
243 
90 
40 
182 
90 
68 
- 
81 
224 
140 
230 
288 
60 
60 
40 
60 
147 
117 
200 
32 
234 
119 
60 
70 
403 
294 
 
 
 
70 
30 
  
29 
- 
8 
38 
10 
1 
13 
17 
17 
- 
9 
36 
14 
35 
29 
1 
- 
- 
- 
24 
34 
34 
2 
44 
19 
10 
13 
85 
68 
 
 
 
12 
5 
  
7] 
59 
16 
2 
29 
- 
27 
- 
3 
- 
28 
15 
2 
47 
25 
19 
55 
4[39] 
59 
33 
- 
25 
12*** 
2 
12] 
20 
2 
- 
16 
 
 
 
- 
- 
 
 
*Under the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir, the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of that State excluding the 
24 seats earmarked for Pakistan occupied territory is 87 out of which 7 seats have been reserved for the Schedu led Castes in 
pursuance of the Jammu and Kashmir Representation of the People Act, 1957.  
** Formerly Orissa.  
*** Reserved 1 seat for Sanghas and 12 seats for the Sikkimese of Bhutia Lepcha origin.  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 17, for entry 1 (w.e.f.   1-3-21-014). 
2. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-3-2014).         
3. Entries 25 to 28 renumbered as entries 26 to 29 by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-2014  ). 
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2009, s. 3, for “38” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010 ) 
  
24 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 10)  
Allocation of Seat s in the Legislative Councils  
 
Name of State  Total number of 
seats  Number to be elected or nominated under article 17 1(3) 
  Sub-clause 
(a) Sub-clause 
(b) Sub-clause 
(c) Sub-clause 
(d) Sub-clause 
(e) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2[1. Andhra Pradesh  
3[2. Bihar  
4* 
5[3.] Madhya Pradesh  
6* 
7[5. Maharashtra  
8[6. 9[Karnataka]  
10* 
11[7. Tamil Nadu  
12[7A. Telangana  
13[8. Uttar Ptradesh  
14* 50 
75 
* 
90 
* 
78 
75 
* 
78 
40 
15[100]  
* 17 
24 
* 
31 
* 
22 
25 
* 
26 
14 
36 
* 5 
6 
* 
8 
* 
7 
7 
* 
7 
3 
8 
* 
 5 
6 
* 
8 
* 
7 
7 
* 
7 
3 
8 
* 17 
27 
* 
31 
* 
30 
25 
* 
26 
14 
16[38] 
* 6] 
12] 
* 
12 
* 
12] 
11] 
* 
12] 
6] 
10] 
* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1.   Subs. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 12, for the Third Schedule.    
2.  Subs. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 17, for the existing entry 1  (w.e.f.  1-3-2014) .  
3.   Subs. by Act 30 of 2000, s.17, for entry 2 (w.e.f. 15 -11-2000).   
4.  Entry relating to Bombay omitted by Act 11 of 1960,  s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  
5.  Entry 4 renumbered as entry 3 by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  
6.  Omitted by Act 40 of 1986,  s.   5 (w.e.f.  1 -11-1986).  
7.  Ins. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  
8.  Subs.  by Act 31 of 1987, s.  2, for entry 6.  
9.  Subs.  by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name)  (Adaptation  of Laws  on  Union  Subject s) Order, 1974, s.  3 and 
Schedule, for  “Mysore ” (w.e.f.  1 -11- 1973).  
10.  Omitted by Act 46 of 1969, s.  5 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1970).  
11.  Ins. by Act 16 of 2010, s. 4 (date yet to be notified).  
12.  Ins. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1-3-2014) . 
13. Subs. by Act 29 of  2000, s.18 , for entry 8 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2000).   
14. Omitted by Act 20 of 1969, s.  5 (w.e.f.  1 -8-1969).  
15. Subs. by Ac t 7 of 2004, s. 2,  for “99”.   
16. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “37”  
25 
  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 27(2)] 
 
Local authorities for purposes of elections to Legislative Councils  
 
1*                  *                  *                  *             * 
2[ANDHRA PRADESH  
 
1. Municipal Corporations.  
2. Municipalities.  
3. Nagar Panchayats.  
4. Cantonment Boards.  
5. Zila Praja Parishads.  
6.  Mandal Praja Parishads.]  
3[BIHAR  
 
1.     Nagar Parishads.  
2.     Cantonment Boards.  
3.     Nagar Panchayats.  
4.     Zila Parishads.  
5.    Panchayat Samitis . 
6.    Nagar Nigams (Corporations).  
7.    Gram Panchayats.]  
4*                 *                  *                  *                 * 
 
5[MADHYA PRADESH  
6[1.  Municipalities.  
2.    Janapada  Sabhas.  
3.    Mandal Panchayats.  
4.    Cantonment Boards.  
5.    Notified Area Committees.  
6.    Town Area Committees.]]  
7*                 *                  *                *                  * 
 
8[MAHARASHTRA  
 
9[1.  Municipalities.  
 2.  Contonment Boards.  
10*                 *                  *                  *                  * 
4.  Zilla Parishad.]]  
                                                      
1. The  heading “Andhra Pradesh ” and the entries  relating  thereto omitted   by   Act   34   of   1985,   s.    5   (w.e.f.    1 -6-1985).  
2.  Ins. by Act 1 of 2006,  s.  4.  
3. Subs.  by Act 6 of 2003, s.  2 ., “for “BIHAR ” (w.e.f. 6 -1-2003).  
4. The  heading  “Bombay ”  (that is, Maharashtra)  and  the  entries relating thereto omitted by Act 40 of 1961, s.  6 (w.e.f.  20 -9-1961).  
5. Ins.  by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
6.  Subs.  by Act 37 of 1 957, s. 12, for the exiesting  entries.  
7. The heading “Tamil Nadu ” and the entries relating thereto omitted by  the  Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1986, s.   5 
(w.e.f.  1 -11-1986).  
8.  Ins.  by Act 40 of 1961, s.  6 (w.e.f.  20 -9-1961).  
9.  Subs.  b y Act 2 of 1963, s.  2, for the exiesting  entries.  
10. Omitted by Act 21 of 1989, s.  5.  
  
26 
 1[KARNATAKA]  
2[1.  City Municipal Corporations.  
2.    City Municipal Councils.  
3.    Town Municipal Councils.  
4.    Town Panchayats.  
5.    Zilla Panchayats.  
6.    Taluk Panchayats.  
7.     Grama Panchayats.  
8.     Ca ntonment Boards.]] 
3*                  *                  *                  *                  * 
4[TAMIL NADU  
1. Municipalities as referred to in article 243Q of the Constitution.  
2. Panchayat Union Councils.  
3. Cantonment Board.  
4. District Panchayats re ferred to in the Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 
1994)]  
5[TELANGANA  
1. Municipal Corporations.  
2. Municipalities.  
3. Nagar Panchayats.  
4. Cantonment Boards.  
5. Zila Praja Parishads.  
6. Mandal Praja Parishads. ]   
UTTAR PRADESH  
6[1.   Municipal Corporati ons. 
2.     Municipal Councils.  
3.     Zila Panchayats.  
4.     Nagar Panchayats.  
5.     Kshettra Panchayats.  
6.     Cantonment Boards.]  
7*              *              *                  *                * 
8*               *                  *                  *               * 
[THE  FIFTH  SCHEDULE .] Omitted  by the Government of  Union    Territories   Act ,  1963  (20 of 
1963), s.  57 and the Second Schedule . 
[THE   SIXTH  SCHEDULE .]  Omitted by the  Representation   of   the   People  (Amendment)  Act ,  
1956 (2 of 1956), s.  27. 
[THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE .] Omitted by s.  27, ibid. 
   
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name)  (Adaptation  of Laws  on  Union  Subjects ) Order, 1974, s.  3 and 
Schedule, for “Mysore ” (w.e.f.  1 -11- 1973).   
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1996, s.  2, for “the entries 1 to 5 ”. 
3. Omitted by Act 46 of 1969, s.  5 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1970).  
4. Ins. by Act 16 of 2010, s. 4 (date yet to be notified).  
5. Ins. by Act 6 of 2014, s. 23 (w.e.f.   1-3-2014) .  
6. Subs. by Act 29  of 1996, s.2, for the entries 1 to 6.  
7. Omitted by Act 20 of 1969, s.  5 (w.e.f.  1 -8-1969).    
8. Omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
--------------------------The Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950--------------------------
1 THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1950  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ROAD TRANSPORT  CORPORATIONS  
3. Establishment of Road Transport Corporations in the States.  
4. Incorporation.  
5. Management of Corporation and Board of Directors.  
6. Disqualifications for being chosen as, or for being, a Director of a Corporation.  
7. Resignation of office by the Chairman or a Director.  
8. Removal of Chairman and members from office.  
9. Vacancies amongst members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings of a 
Corporation.  
10. Temporary association of persons with a Board for particular purposes.  
11. Meetings of Board s. 
12. Powe r to appoint committees and delegate functions.  
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments.  
14. Officers and servants of the Corporation.  
15. Managing Director, Chief Accounts Officer and Financial Adviser.  
16. General disqualification of all offic ers and servants.  
17. Appointment of Advisory Council.  
CHAPTER IIA  
SUBSIDIARY CORPORATIONS  
17A. Establishment of subsidiary corporations.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF CORPORATION  
18. General duty of Corporation.  
19. Powers of Corporation.  
19A. Disposal  of unclaimed articles and property.  
19B. Corporation to obtain the approval of the Central Government in certain cases.  
20. Extension of the operation of the road transport service of a Corporation to areas within another 
State.  
21. Carriage of mails.  2 CHA PTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
22. General principle of Corporation’s finance.  
23. Capital of the Corporation.  
24. Additional capital of the Corporation.  
25. Guarantee by the State Government.  
26. Borrowing powers.  
27. Fund of the Corporation.  
28. Payment of interest and dividend.  
29. Provision for depreciation and reserve and other funds.  
30. Disposal of net profits.  
31. Power of the Corporation to spend.  
32. Budget.  
33. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Directions by  the State Government.  
35. Returns and reports.  
36. Power to order inquiries.  
37. Power to control a part  of the undertaking of a Corporation.  
38. Power to supersede a Corporation.  
39. Liquidation of a Corporation.  
40. Compensation for acquisition of road transport undertakings.  
41. Omitted  
42. Power of entry.  
43. Directors , Officers and other employees of a Corporation to be public servants.  
44. Power to make rules.  
45. Power to make regulations.  
45A. Every rule and regulation to be laid before State Legislature.  
46. Penalty for breach of rules.  
47. Special provisions relating to Bombay.  
47A. Special provision for reconstitution or dissolution of certain Corporations.  
48. Transitional provision relating to Bombay State Road Transport Corporation.  
CHAPT ER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE UNION TERRITORY OF DELHI 
49. Prosecution and cognizance of offences.  3 SECTIONS  
50. Appointment of Magistrates.  
51. Composition of offences.  
52. Limitation of time for prosecution.  
53. Power of magistrate to hear ca ses in absence of accused when summoned to appear.  4 THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 64 OF 1950   
[4th December , 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the incorporation and regulation of Road Transport Corporations.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Road  Transport 
Corporations Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***: 
2[Provided  that on and from the commencement of the Delhi Road Transport Laws (Amendment)  
Act, 1971, this Act, as amended by the said Act, shall extend to, and be in  force in, the Union territory of 
Delhi :] 
3[Provided further that  on and from the commencement of the Road Transport Corporations 
(Amendment) Act,  1982, this Act , as amended by the said Act, shall extend to the Union territory  of 
Mizoram.]  
4*   *   *   *   * 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “ancillary service ” means any subsidiary service which provides amenities or facilities to 
persons ma king use of any road transport service of a Corporation;  
5[(aa) “Board ” means the Board of Directors of a Corporation;]  
(b) “Corporation ” means a Road Transport Corporation established under section 3;  
5[(bb) “Director ” means a member of the Board;]  
(c) “extended area ” means any area or route to which the operation of any road transport service 
of a Corporation has been extended in the manner provided in section 20;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;   
(e) “road transport service ” means a ser vice carrying passengers or goods or both by road in 
vehicles for hire or reward;  
(f) “vehicle ” means any mechanically propelled vehicle, used or capable of being used for the 
purpose of road transport, and includes a tram -car, a trolly -vehicle and a trail er; 
(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Motor Vehicles     
Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , have the meaning assigned to them in that Act;  
6*   *   *   *  * 
                                                           
1. The words “except the Union territory of Delhi” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. The proviso added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and t he First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
5. Ins. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
6. Omitted by A.O. (No. 3), 1956.  5 CHAPTER II  
ROAD TRANSPORT  CORPORATIONS  
3. Establishment of Road Transport Corporations in the States .—The State Government having 
regard to — 
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and industry by the development of road transport;  
(b) the desirability of co -ordinating any form of road tr ansport with any other form of transport;  
(c) the desirability of extending and improving the facilities for road transport in any area and of 
providing an efficient and economical system of road transport service therein,  
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Road Transport Corporation for 1[the whole or any 
part of the Union territory  of Delhi ] under such name as may be specified in the notification.  
4. Incorporation .—Every Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name notified under section 3 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
2[5. Management of Corporation and Board of Directors .—(1) The general superintendence, 
direction and management of the affairs and business of a Corporation shall vest in a Board of Directors 
which, with the assistance of its committees and Managing Director, may exercise all such powers and do 
all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation.  
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such other Directors, being not less than five and not 
more than seventeen, as the State Government may think fit to appoint.  
(3) The State Government may, if it so thinks fit appoint one of the other Directors a s the                       
Vice -Chairman of the Board.  
(4) Rules made under this Act shall provide for the representation, both of the Central Govern ment 
and of the State Government concerned, on the Board in such proportion as may be agreed to by both t he 
Government and of appointment by each Government of its own re presentatives thereto and where the 
capital of a Corporation is raised by the issue of shares to other parties under sub -section (3) of                
section 23, provision shall also be made  for the representation of such shareholders on the Board and the 
manner in which the representatives shall be elected by such shareholders.  
(5) The term of office of and the manner of filling casual vacancies among the Directors shall be such 
as may be pr escribed.]  
6. Disqualification s for being chosen as, or for being, a 3[Director  of a Corporation ].—4[(1)] A 
person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a  3[Director of a Corporation] — 
(a) if he is found to be a lunatic or a person of unsound mind; or  
(b) if he has been adjudged insolvent; or  
(c) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; or  
(d) if he has, directly or indirectly, any inte rest in any subsisting contract  made with, or in any 
work being done for, the Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a director) in an 
incorporated company, provided that where he is a shareholder he shall disclose to the State 
Government the nature and extent of shares held by  him in such company; or  
(e) if he has any financial interest in any other road transport undertaking.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “the whole or any part of the State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “member of a Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Section 6 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 28 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  6 1[(2) Nothing in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to disqualify the  2[Managing Director ] 
of a Corporation for being chosen as, or for being,  a 3[Director] thereof.]  
4[(3) Nothing in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to disqualify, — 
(a) any officer or other employee of the Government for being chosen as, or for being, a Director 
of a Corporation ; 
(b) any officer or other employee of  a Corporation for being chosen as, or for being, a Director of 
another Corporation.]  
7. Resignation of office by the Chairman or a 5[Director ].—The Chairman or any other  5[Director] 
of a Corporation may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the  State Government and, on such 
resignation being accepted by that Government, shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
8. Removal of Chairman and members from office .—6[(1)] The State Government may remove 
from office the Chairman or any other  7[Director] of the Corporation who — 
(a) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6; or  
(b) without excuse sufficient in the opinion of the State Government is absent for more than four 
consecutive meetings of the  8[Board].  
9*   *   *   *   * 
10[(2) The State Government may terminate the appointment of any Director after giving him notice 
for such period (being not less than one month) as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the appointment of a Director appointed by the Central Gov ernment shall not be 
terminated under this sub -section without the concurrence of that Government.]  
9. Vacancies amongst members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts or 
proceedings of a Corporation. —No act or proceeding of a 11[Corporation or its Board] shall be invalid 
by reason only of the existence of any vacancy  12[in its Board] or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
10. Temporary association of persons with a  13[Board ] for particular purposes .—(1) A 13[Board] 
may associate with itself for any particular purpose in such manner as may be determined by regulations 
made under this Act any person whose assistance or advice it may desire.  
(2) A person associated with it by the  13[Board] under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a 
right  to take, part in the discussions of the  13[Board] relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to 
vote at a meeting of the  13[Board].  
11. Meetings of 14[Board] .—(1) A 14[Board] shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be provided by r egulations made under this Act:  
Provided that the  14[Board] shall meet at least once in every three months.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 4, for “Chief Executive Officer or General Manager” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “member” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982 ).  
5. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “member” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
6. Section 8 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f 13 -11-1982)  
7. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “member” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
8. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid.,  for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
9. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
10. Ins. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
11. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule,  ibid.,  for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982) .  
12. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “amongst its members” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
13. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
14. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13-11-1982).  7 (2) The person to preside at a meeting of a  1[Board ] shall be the Chairman thereof, or in his                
absence from any meeting , the Vice -Chairman, if any, or in the absen ce of both the Chairman and the 
Vice -Chairman,  2[such Director as may be chosen  by the Directors present] from among themselves to 
preside. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of a  1[Board] shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members 
present, and in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman or, in his absence, any other person presiding 
shall have a second or casting vote.  
12. Power to appoint committees and delegate functions .—3[(1)] A 4[Board] may , from time to 
time by  resolution passed at a meeting — 
(a) appoint committees  5[consisting of Directors] for performing such functions as may be 
specified in the resolution;  
(b) delegate to any such committee or to the 6[Chairman, Vice -Chairman,  Chief Executive 
Officer, the General Manager, the Deputy General Manager or the Chief Accounts Officer of the 
Corporation]  subject to s uch conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the resolution, 
such of its powers and duties as it may think fit;  
(c) authorised the  7[Managing Director]  8[or any other officer of the Corporation] subject to such 
such conditions and limitations,  if any, as may be specified in the resolution to exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as it may deem necessary for the efficient day -to-day administration of its 
business.  
9[(2) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or Managing Director may delegate any of his powers and duties 
duties [including powers and duties delegated to him under sub -section ( 1)] to any officer of the Corpo -
ration, and the officer to whom such powers and duties are delegated, shall exercise and perform such 
powers and duties under the control  and supervision of the Managing Director.]  
10[13. Authentication o f orders and other instruments. —All orders and decisions of the Board 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Secretary or by any such other officer of the Corporation as 
may be authorised in this behalf by the Board or under the regulations made under section 45 and all other 
instruments issued by a Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Managing Director or any 
other officer of the Corporation authorised in like ma nner in this behalf.]  
14.  Officers and servants of the Corporation .—11[(1) Every Corporation shall have a Managing 
Director, a Chief Accounts Officer and a Financial Adviser, appointed by the State Government:  
Provided that the same person may be appointed as the Chief Accounts Officer and the Financial 
Adviser.]   
(2) A Corporation may appoint  12[a Secretary and such other officers and employees] as it consid ers 
necessary for the efficient performance of its functions . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “such member as may be chosen by the members present” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
1982).  
3. Section 12 renumbered as s ub-section ( 1) thereof by s. 6,  ibid. (w.e.f 13 -11-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid.,  for “of its members” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
6. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “ Chairman or Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
7. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 6, for “Chief Executive Officer or General Manager” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
8. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959)  
9. Ins. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 6 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
10. Subs. by s. 7,  ibid.,  for s. 13 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
11. Subs. by s. 8,  ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
12. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “such other officers and servants” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  8 1[(3) The conditions of appointment and  service and the scales of pay of the officers and e mployees of 
of a Corporation shall — 
(a) as respects the Managing Director, the Chief Accounts Officer and the Financial Adviser, or, 
as the case may be , the Chief Accounts Officer -cum-Financial Adviser, be s uch, as may be 
prescribed, and  
(b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such, as may, subject to the provisions of 
section 34, be determined by regulations made under this Act.]  
2[15. Managing Director, Chief Accounts Officer and Financial Adviser .—(1) The Managing  
Director shall be the executive head of the Corporation and all othe r officers and employees of the  
Corporation shall be subordinate to him.  
(2) The Managing Director shall obtain the views of the Chief Accounts Officer and the Financial 
Adviser or, as the case may be, the Chief Accounts Officer -cum-Financial Adviser, on every proposal 
involving revenues, or expenditure from the fund, of the Corporation and shall cause such views to be 
placed before the Board prior to the conside ration of such proposal by the Board.]  
16. General disqualification of all officers and servants .—No person who has directly or 
indirectly, by himself or his partner or agent, any share or interest in any contract, by or on behalf of a 
Corporation, or in a ny other road transport undertaking shall become or remain an  3[officer or other 
employee] of the Corporation.  
17. Appointment of Advisory Council .—The State Government may, after ascertaining the views of 
the Corporation, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Advisory Coun cils 
consisting of such number of persons, on such terms, and for the purpose of advising the Corpora tion on 
such matters, as may be specified in that notification.  
4[CHAPTER IIA  
SUBSIDIARY CORPORATIONS  
17A. Establishment of subsidiary corporations .—(1) Where a Corporation (hereinafter in this 
section referred to as the parent Corporation) is satisfied that it is expedient or necessary so to do for the 
more efficient discharge of its functions under this Act,  it may, with the concurrence of the State                   
Government and the Central Government, frame by notification in the Official Gazette a scheme or 
schemes providing for the establishment of one or more subsidiary corporations.  
(2) A scheme frame d under sub -section ( 1) shall specify the subsidiary corporation or corpora tions 
which shall become established thereunder, the date or dates with effect from which they shall be so 
established, the powers and functions of the parent Corporation which suc h subsidiary corporation or 
corporations may exercise and discharge, the conditions and limitations subject to which such powers 
may be exercised, the management of the affairs of each such subsidiary corporation by a Board of 
Directors, the capital of eac h such subsidiary corporation and all other matters relating to such subsidiary 
corporations corresponding to the various matters for which provisions have been made in this Act with 
respect to the parent Corporation : 
Provided that — 
(a) no subsidiary corpo ration shall start operation on any new route without the previous approval 
of the parent Corporation;  
(b) the representatives of the Central Government on the Board of Directors of a subsidiary 
corpo ration shall be in proportion to its contribution to th e capital of the parent Corporation;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 8, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “officer or servant” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Ins. by s. 10,  ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   9 (c) the liability of the Central Government to provide contribution to the capital of the subsidiary 
corporation or to the parent Corporation shall not be increased without the approval of the Central 
Government;  
(d) a subsidiary corporation shall have a Managing Director, a Chief Accounts Officer and a 
Finan cial Adviser or a Chief Accounts Officer -cum-Financial Adviser, and such officers shall be 
appointed by the State Government;  
(e) the State Government and the paren t Corporation shall have power to give directions to a 
subsidiary corporation in respect of any matter, including directions relating to recruitment conditions 
of service and training of the employees of the subsidiary corporation, wages to be paid to such  
employees, reserves to be maintained by the subsidiary corporation;  
(f) the capital budget, the revenue budget and the annual development plans of a subsidiary 
corpo ration shall be submitted for approval to the parent Corporation and where such budget or  plan 
involves any deficit, also to the State Government.  
(3) Every subsidiary corporation established under a scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) shall be a 
body corporate, by the name specified in the scheme having perpetual succession and a common seal and 
shall by the said name sue and be sued. ] 
 CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF CORPORATION  
18. General duty of Corporation .—It shall be the general duty of a Corpor ation so to exercise its 
powers  as progressively to provide or secure or promote the provision of, an efficient, adequate, 
economical and properly co -ordinated system of road transport services in the 1[Union territory of Delhi 
or part thereof]  for which it is estab lished and in any ext ended area : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing on a Corporation, either directly 
or indirectly, an y form of duty or liability enforceable by proceedin gs before any Court or Tribunal  to 
which it would not otherwise be subje ct. 
19. Powers of Corporation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act,  a Corporation shall have 
power— 
(a) to operate road transport services in the 2[Union territory of Delhi]  and in any extended area;  
(b) to provide for any ancillary service;  
(c) to provide for its employees suitable conditions of service including fair wages, establishment 
of provident fund, living accommodation, places for rest and recreation and other amenities;  
3[(d) to authorise the issue of passes to its employees and other persons either free of cost or at 
concessional rates and on such conditions as it may deem fit to impose;  
(e) to authorise the grant of refund in respect of unused tickets and concessional passes.]  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the powers conf erred by sub -section ( 1) shall include 
power— 
(a) to manufacture, purchase, maintain and repair rolling stock, vehicles, appliances, plant, equip -
ment or any other thing required for the purpose of any of the activities of the Corporation referred to 
in sub-section ( 1); 
Explanation .—In this clause, the expression “manufacture ” does not include the construction of 
the complete unit of a motor vehicle except for purposes of experiment or research;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971,  s. 7(a) and the First Schedule, for “State or part of the State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. Subs. by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, ibid., for “State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
3. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959)  10 (b) to acquire and hold such property, both movable and immo vable, as the Corporation may 
deem necessary for the purpose of any of the said activities, and to lease, sell or otherwise transfer 
any property held by it;  
(c) to prepare schemes for the acquisition of, and to acquire, either by agreement or compulsorily  
in accordance with the law of acquisition for the time being in force in the 1[Union territory of Delhi]  
and with such procedure as may be prescribed, whether absolutely or for any period, the whole or any 
part of any undertaking of any other person to the extent to which the activities thereof consist of the 
operation of road transport services in 2[that Union territory]  or in any extended area;  
(d) to purchase by agreement or to take on lease or under any form of ten ancy any land and to 
erect thereon such buildings as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying on its undertaking ; 
(e) to authorise the disposal of scrap vehicles, old tyres, used oils,  3[any other stores of scrap  
value , or such other stores as may be declared to be obsolete in the prescribed manner].  
(f) to enter into and perform all such contracts as may be necessary for the performance of its 
duties and the exercise of its powers under the Act;  
(g) to purchase vehicles  of such type as may be suitable for use in the road transport services 
operated by the Corporation;  
(h) to purchase or otherwise secure by agreement vehicles, garages, sheds, office buildings, 
depots, land, workshops, equipment, tools, accessories to and spare parts for vehicles, or any other 
article owned or possessed by the owner of any other undertaking  for use thereof by the Corpo ration 
for the purposes of its undertaking;  
(i) to do anything for the purpose of advancing the skill of persons employed by the Corporation 
or the efficiency of the equipment of the Corporation or of the manner in which that equipment is 
operated, including the provision by the Corporation, and the assistance by the Corporation to others 
for the provision of facilities or training, education and research;  
(j) to enter into and carry out agreements with any person carrying on b usiness as a carrier of 
passengers or goods providing for the carriage of passengers or goods on behalf of the Corpo ration by 
that other person at a thorough fare or freight.  
(k) to provide facilities for the consignment, storage and delivery of goods;  
(l) to enter into contracts for exhibition of posters and advertising boards on and in the vehicles 
and premises of the Corporation and also for advertisement on tickets and other forms issued by the 
Corporation to the public;  
(m) with the prior approval of the State Government to do all other things to facilitate the proper 
carrying on of the business of the Corporation.  
4[(n) to determine with the previous approval of the State Government, and in case of a road 
transport service operated in any extended area, also with the previous approval of the Government of 
the State within which such extended area i s situated, fa res and freights for the carriage of passengers 
and goods in any road transport service provided by the Corporation.]  
(3) Nothing in this se ction shall be construed as authorising a Corporation, except with the previ ous 
approval of the State Government — 
(i) to manufacture or maintain anything which is not required directly or indirectly for use for the 
purpose of the undertaking of the Corporation or to repair, store, or provide any service for, any 
vehicle which does not belong to the Corporation or is not used directly or indi rectly for the purpose 
of its undertaking;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “State concerned” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. Subs. by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, ibid., for “that State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 11, for “or any other stores of scrap value” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Ins. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -11-1971).   11 (ii) to purchase any vehicle for the purpose of sale to another per son; 
(iii) to sell or supply to any person lubricants, spare parts, or equipment for or accessories to, 
vehicles;  
(iv) to let vehicles on hire for the carriage of passengers or goods except as expressly provided by 
or under this Act.  
(4) Except as otherwis e provided by this Act nothing in the foregoing provisions shall be con strued as 
authorising the Corporation to disregard any law for the time being in force.  
(5) Where a Corporation acquires the whole or any part of an undertaking of any other person, th e 
Corporation shall, in appointing its  1[officers and other employees] take into consideration the claims of 
employees employed in that undertaking.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall not be construed as limiting any power of a Corporation 
conferred by or under any subsequent provision of this Act.  
2[19A. Disposal of unclaimed articles and property. —(1) When any articles or goods have come 
into the possession of a Corporation for carriage or otherwise and are not claimed by the owner or any 
other person appearing to the Corporation to be entitled thereto, the Corporation shall, if such owner or 
other person is known, cause a notice to be served upon him requiring him to remove the articles or goods 
within seven days of the service of such notice.  
(2) If such owner or other person is not known or the notice cannot be served upon him or he does not 
comply with the requisition in the notice, the Corporation may, after the expiration of such period as may 
be specified by regulation made under this Act, sell the articles or goods by public auction and shall, after 
deducting fr om the sale -proceeds expenses for holding the sale or any amount which may be due to the 
Corporation, credit the surplus sale -proceeds, if any, to the Fund of the Corporation; and th e                
sale-proceeds so credited may be paid on demand to any person who establishes his right thereto in a 
court of competent jurisdiction or within one year of such sale to the satisfaction of the Corporation.  
19B. Corporation to obtain the app roval of the Central Government in certain cases. —In the 
exercise of any of its powers under this Act, the Corporation shall not incur on any single work, service or 
scheme or for any other purpose a capital expenditure of more than twenty -five lakhs of ru pees except 
with the previous approval of the Central Government. ] 
20. Extension of the operation of the road transport service of a Corporation to areas within 
another State .—(1) If a Corporation considers it to be expedient in the public interest to extend the 
operation of any of its road transport services to any route or area situated within another State, it may, 
with the permission of the State Government, negotiate w ith the Government of the other State regard ing 
the proposed extension.  
(2) If the Government of the other State approves the proposed extension, the Corporation shall 
prepare a scheme for the purpose and forward the same to the other Government for its consent, and after 
such consent has been received, the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, sanction the scheme.  
(3) After the scheme has been so sanctioned, it shall be competent for the Corporation to extend the 
operation of its road transport service to such route or area and when the operation of suc h service is so 
extended, the Corporation shall operate the service on that route or in that area subject to the provi sions of 
any law in force in the other State within which such route or area is situated.  
(4) The Corporation may, from time to time, alt er or extend the scheme sanctioned under                
sub-section ( 2) by a supplementary scheme prepared and sanctioned in the manner provided in the 
foregoing provisions of this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 11, for “officers and servants” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Ins. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  12 21. Carriage of mails .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Motor Vehicles                            
Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , a Corporation shall, if so required by the Central Government, carry mails at such 
rates and on such terms and conditions as may be specified in this behalf by 1[that Government ]. 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
22. General principle of Corporation ’s finance .—It shall be the general principle of a Corporation 
that in carrying on its undertaking it shall act on business principles.  
23. Capital of the Corporation .—2[(1) The State Government may  provide to a Corporation 
established by th at Government  any capital that may be required by the Corporation for the purpose of 
carrying on its undertaking or for purposes connected therewith on such terms and conditions, not 
inconsistent wit h the provisions of this Act , as that Government may determine.]  
3[(2) The Corporation may, whether  or not any capital is provided to it under sub -section ( 1), raise by 
the issue  of shares such capital (hereafter in this section referred to as the “authori sed share capital ”) as 
may be authorised in this behalf by the State  Government:  
Provided that where any capital is provided to the  Corporation under sub -section ( 1), no capital may 
be raised under this  sub-section without the previous approval of the Cent ral Government.  
(2A) Any capital raised under sub -section ( 2) with  the previous approval of the Central Govern ment 
may be,— 
(a) in addition to the capital provided to the  Corporation under sub -section ( 1); 
(b) subscribed to by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may  be, by 
converting the whole or any part of the capital provided [whether before  or after the com mencement 
of the Road Transport Corporations (Amendment) Act,  1982] to the Corporation by that G overnment 
under sub -section (1).] 
(3) The  4[authorised share capital] of  the Corporation shall be divided into such number of shares as 
the State  Government may determine; and the number of shares which shall be subscribed by  the State 
Government, 5*** and other parties (including  persons whose undertakings have been acquired by the 
Corporation) shall also be  determined by the State Government 5***. 
(4) The allotment of shares to other parties  mentioned in sub -section ( 3) shall be made by the 
Corporation in such manner as  may be prescribed.  
(5) The shares of the Corporation shall not be  transferable except in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act.  
(6) The Corporation may at any time, with the  previous approval of the State Government, re deem the 
shares issued to the  other  parties under sub -section ( 4) in such manner as may be prescribed.  
24. Additional capital of the Corporation .—If, after the issue of shares under section 23 a 
Corporation requires any further capital, the Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the  State 
Government, raise such additional capital by the issue of new shares and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), 6[(2A)] (3), (4), (5) and ( 6) of the said section shall apply to the issue of such shares.  
25. Guarantee by the State Government .—The shares  of a Corporation shall be guaranteed by the 
State Government as to the payment of the principal and the payment of the annual dividend at such 
minimum rate as may be fixed by the State Government by notification published in the Official Gazette 
at the ti me of issuing the shares.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “ The Central Government in consultation with the State 
Government ” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1971).  
2. Subs. by s. 7 ( a) and the First Schedule, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 13 -11  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 12, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid.,  for “authorised capital” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
5. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
6. Ins. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule (w.e.f . 13-11-1982).  13 1[26. Borrowing powers .—A Corporation may, with the previous approval of the State Gov ernment, 
borrow money for the purpose of raising its working capital or meeting any expenditure of a capital 
nature in the open market or from a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970) , or section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980) , a State  Finance 
Corporation , estab lished under section 3 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , the 
Indust rial Finance Corporation of India, established under section 3 of the Industrial Finance Corporation 
Act, 1948  (15 of 1948),  the Indust rial Development Bank of India, established under section 3 of the 
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964  (18 of 1964) , the Life Insurance Corporation of India, 
established under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956  (31 of 1956) , or any other 
financial institution providing credit which is subject to the control of the Reserve Bank of India. ] 
27. Fund of the Corporation .—(1) Every Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts of the 
Corporation shall be carried thereto and al l payments by the Corporation shall be made therefrom.  
(2) Except as otherwise directed by the State Government, all moneys belonging to that fund shall be 
deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or with the agents of the Reserve Bank of India , 2[or with the 
corresponding new banks constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970) , or section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980) ] or i nvested in such securities as may be approved by 
the State Government.  
28. Payment of interest and dividend .—(1) Where  3[the whole or part of the capital of a 
Corporation] is provided by the Central Government and the State Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23, the Corporation shall pay interest on such capital at such rate as may, from time to time, be 
fixed by the State Government 4*** and such interest shall be deemed to be a part of the expenditure of 
the Corporation.  
(2) Where the Corporatio n 5[raise s the  whole or any part of its capital] by issue of shares, it shall pay 
dividend on such shares at such rate as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Corporation, subject to 
any general limitations which may have been imposed by the State Government 4***, and such dividend 
shall be deemed to be a part of the expenditure of the Corpora tion. 
29. Provision for depreciation and reserve and other funds .—(1) A Corporation shall make such 
provisions for depreciation and for reserve and other funds as the State Gove rnment may, from time to 
time, direct.  
(2) The management of the said funds, the sums to be carried from time to time to the credit thereof 
and the application of the moneys comprised therein shall be determined by the Corporation:  
Provided that no fund shall be utilised for any purpose other than that for which it was created 
without the previous approval of the State Government.  
30. Disposal of net profits .—After making provision for payment of interest and dividend under 
section 28 and for depreciation , reserve and other funds under section 29, a Corporation may utilise such 
percentage of its net annual profits as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government for the 
provision of amenities to the passengers using the road transport services, w elfare of labour employed by 
the Corporation and for such other purposes as may be prescribed with the previous approval of the 
Central Government,  6[and out of the balance such amount as may, with the previous approval of the 
State Government 4***, be spe cified in this behalf by the Corporation, may be utilised for financing the 
expansion programmes of the Corporation and the remainder, if any, shall be made over to the State 
Government for the purpose of road development ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 13, for section 26 (we.f. 13 -11-1982).   
2. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule,  ibid.,  for “the capital of a Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Omitted by Act 71 of  1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “raises its capital” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
6. Subs. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 6, for “and the balance shall be made over to the State Government for the purpose of road 
development” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).   14 31. Power of the Corporation to spend .—A Corporation shall have power to spend such sums as it 
thinks fit on objects authorised under this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out 
of the fund of the Corporation.  
32. Budget .—(1) Every Corporation s hall, by such date in each year as may be prescribed, prepare 
and submit to the State Government for approval a budget for next financial year showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure during that financial year in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of 
a Corporation unless the expenditure of the same is covered by a current budget grant approved by the 
State Government.  
(3) 1[Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in this behalf by the State 
Government, a Corporation may sanction] any re -appropriation within the grant from one head of the 
expenditure to another or from a provision made for one scheme to that in respect of another, su bject to 
the condition that the aggregate budget grant is not exceeded.  
(4) A Corporation may, within such limits and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, incur 
expenditure in excess of the limit provided in the budget approved by the State Gov ernment under any 
head of expenditure or in connection with any particular scheme.  
2[33. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance sheet in 
such form as may be prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of a Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or his nominee and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in  connection 
with the audit of the accounts of a Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts , and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Corporation.  
(4) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Comptroller an d Auditor -General of India or 
any person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the State Government; and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before 3[each 
House of Parliament]. ] 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Directions by the State Government .—(1) The State Government may, after consultation with a 
Corporation established by such Government, give to the Corporation general instructions to be followed 
by the Corporation, and such instructions may include directions relating to the recruitment, conditions of 
service and training of its employees, wages to be paid to the employees, reserves to be maintained by it 
and disposal of its profits or stocks.  
(2) In the exercise of its power s and performance of its duties under this Act, the Corporation shall 
not depart from any general instructions issued under sub -section ( 1) except with the previous permission 
of the State Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 7, for “A Corporation may sanction” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  
2. Subs. by s. 8,  ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  
3. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Sc hedule, for “the Legislature of the State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  15 35. Returns and reports .—(1) Every Corporation shall fu rnish to the State Government such returns, 
statistics, accounts and other information with respect to its property or activities or in regard to any 
proposed scheme as the State Government may from time to time require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provis ions of sub -section ( 1), a Corporation shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the 1[State Government]  a report on the exercise and 
performance by it of its powers and duties under this Act during that year and on its policy and 
programme.  
2[(3) The State Government shall cause the annual report referred to in sub -section ( 2) to be laid 
before 3[each House  of Parliament] .] 
36. Power to order inquiries .—(1) The State Government, with a view to sa tisfy itself that the 
powers and duties of a Corporation established by that Government are being exercised and performed 
properly, may, at any time, appoint any person or persons to make inquiries into all or any of the activi ties 
of the Corporation and to re port to the State Government the result of such inquiries.  
(2) The Corporation shall give to the person or persons so appointed all facilities for the proper 
conduct of the inquiries and shall produce before, or furnish to , the person or persons any docume nt, 
account or information in the possession of the Corporation which such person or persons demand for the 
purposes of the inquiries.  
37. Power to control a part  of the undertaking of a Corporation .—(1) If on receipt of the report of 
any inquiry held unde r section 36 or otherwise, the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to 
do in the public interest, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any 
person to take over from the Corporation, and so long as tha t notification is in force, to administer in 
accordance with such directions as may be issued from time to time by the State Government such part of 
the undertaking of the Corporation as may be specified in the notification, and any person so authorised 
may, for the purpose of so administering the said part of the undertaking exercise all or any of the powers 
of the Corporation or of any officer of the Corporation under this Act, issue such directions as he thinks 
fit to the  4[officers or other employees] of the Corporation and employ any outside agency.  
(2) The State Government may by such notification direct that all charges and expenses incurred by 
the person so authorised together with such remuneration as the State Government may allow from time 
to tim e to such person shall be paid within such time as may be fixed by the State Government from the 
fund of the Corporation, and if the expenses are not so paid, the State Government may make an order 
directing the persons having the custody of that fund to p ay to the person so authorised such expenses in 
priority to any other charges against such fund and he shall, so far as the funds to the credit of the 
Corporation admit, comply with the order of the State Government.  
5[(3) Every notification issued under this section together with a report on the circumstances leading 
to its issue shall be laid before 6[each House of Parliament] , as soon as may be, after it is issued.]  
38. Power to supersede a Corporation .—(1) If the State Government is of opinion that a 
Corporation established by that Government is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the 
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act or has exceeded or abused  
its powers, the State Government may, 7*** by noti fication in the Official Gazette, supersede the 
Corporation for such period as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section the State Government  shall give a 
reasonable time to the Corporation to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanation and objections, if any, of the Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “Central and the State Governments” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).   
3. Subs. by Act 71 of  1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “the Legislature of the State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “officers or servants” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -19-1959).  
6. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “the Legislature of the State” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
7. The words “with the previous approval of the Central Government,” omitted by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, ibid.              
(w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  16 (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -sectio n (1) superseding a Cor poration— 
(a) all the  1[Directors] of the Corporation shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their 
offices as such a  1[Directors];  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or of any other 
law, be exercised or  performed by or on behalf of the Corporation shall, during the period of 
supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the State Government may 
direct;  
(c) all property vested in the Corporation shall, during the period of superses sion, vest in the Sta te 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under             
sub-sectio n (1), the State Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term as it may  consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Corporation in the manner provided in section 5.  
39. Liquidation of  a Corporation .—(1) No provision of any law relating to the winding up of 
companies or corporations shall apply to a Corporation, and no Corporation shall be placed in liquida tion 
save by order of the State Government concerned and save in such manner as may be directed by that 
Government:  
Provided that no such order shall be made by any State Government except with the previous 
approval o f the Central Government.  
(2) In the event of a Corporation being placed in liquidation, the assets of the Corporation, after 
meeting the liabilities, if any, shall be divided among the 2[State Government]  and such other parties, if 
any, as may have subscr ibed to the capital in proportion to the contribution made by each of them to the 
total capital of the Corporation.  
40. Compensation for acquisition of road transport undertakings .—Whenever a Corporation 
acquires under this Act the whole or any part of any  undertaking, there shall be paid by the Corporation 
compensation the amount of which shall be determined in the manner and in accordance with the 
procedure hereinafter set out, that is to say, — 
(a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance 
with such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the amount shall be determined by an arbitral 
Tribunal consisting of one nominee of the Corporation, one nominee of the person to be 
compensated, and  a Chairman to be nominated by the Chief Justice of the 3[High Court of Delhi] ; 
(c) an appeal shall 4[lie to the High Court  of Delhi]  against the decision of the Tribunal and the 
5[order of that High Court ] on such appeal shall be final.  
41. [Corporation to be deemed to be a local authority and provision as to third party                          
risks ].—Omitted by the Road Transport Corporations  (Amendment ) Act, 1959 (28 of 1959),                             
s. 11 (w.e.f.  1-9-1959).  
42. Power of entry .—Whenever it is necessary for a Corporation to carry out any of its works or to 
make any survey, examination or investigation, preliminary or incidental to the exercise of powers or the 
performance of duties by the Corporation under this Act, any  6[officer or other employee] of the 
Corporation generally or specially empowered by the Corporation may, with the previous permission of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “members” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, for “Central and the State Government” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
3. Subs. by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, ibid., for “High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State concerned” 
(w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
4. Subs. by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule,  ibid.,  for “lie to the High Court” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
5. Subs. by s. 7( a) and the First Schedule, ibid.,  for “order of the High Court ” (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “officer or servant” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  17 the District Magistrate, enter upon any land or premises between sunrise and sunset, after giving reason -
able notice of the inten tion to make such entry to the owner or occupier of such land or premises, and at 
any other time, with the consent in writing of the owner of occupier of such land or premises, for the 
purpose of the carrying out of such works or the making of such survey,  examination or investigation.  
43. 1[Directors] , 2[Officers and other employees] of a Cor poration to be public servants. —All 
1[Directors] of a Corporation, and all  2[officers and other employees] of a Corporation , whether appointed 
by the State Government or the Corporation, shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or of any other law , to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Pen al Code  (45 of 1860).  
44. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, 
make rules  to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely:— 
3[(a) the conditions and manner of appointment of Directors of a Corporation, the representation 
in the Board of the Central and State Governme nts, and where shares are issued to other parties under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 23 of such shareholders and generally all matters relating to the constitution 
of the Board;]  
4[(b) remuneration, allowances or fees paid to the Directors of the Corporation  or other persons 
associated with the Board under section 10;]  
(c) the term of office of, the manner of filling casual vacancies among 5[Directors] of the 
Corpora tion; 
(d) the number of  5[Directors] necessary to constitute a quorum at a meeting of the  6[Board];  
(e) the conditions of appointment and service and the scales of pay of the  7[Managing Director, 
the Chief Accounts Officer, the Financial Adviser or, as the case may be, the Chief Accounts                
Officer -cum-Financial Adviser]  of the Corpo ration ; 
(f) the number and term of office of, the allowances to be paid to, the procedure to be followed 
by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of an Advisory Council;  
8[(ff) the procedure in accordance with which any stores may be d eclared obsolete under                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 19 ;] 
(g) the manner in which the shares of the Corporation shall be allotted, transferred or redeemed;  
(h) the manner in which the net profits of the Corporation shall be utilised;  
(i) the date by which, and the form in which, the budget shall be prepared and submitted in each 
year under sub -section ( 1) of section 32;  
9[(j) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared;]  
10*   *   *   *  * 
(l) the form in which the retu rns, statistics or reports shall be submitted under section 35;  
(m) the procedure to be followed by an arbitral Tribunal under section 40;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “members” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 16 and the Sc hedule, ibid.,  for “officers and servants” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).   
5. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for “members” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
6. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
7. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “Chief Executive Officer or General Manager and t he Chief Accounts Officer” 
(w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
8. Ins. by s. 16 and the Schedule,  ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
9. Subs. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 12, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  
10. Omitted by s. 12,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  18 1[(mm) the service of notices and orders under this Act;]  
(n) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
45. Power to make regulations .—(1) A Corporation may with the previous sanction of 2[the State 
Government  and by notification in the Official Gazette ], make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder for the administration of the affairs of the Corporation.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the manner in which, and the purposes for  which, persons may be associated with the  3[Board] 
3[Board] under section 10;  
(b) the time and place of meetings of a the  3[Board] and the procedure to be followed in regard to 
transaction of business at such meetings;  
(c) the conditions of appointment and service  and the scales of pay of officers and  4[other 
employees of the Corporation other than the Managing Director, the Chief Accounts Officer and the 
Financial Adviser or , as the case may be, the Chief Accounts Officer -cum-Financial Adviser];  
5[(d) the issue of  passes to the employees of the Corporation and other persons under section 19;  
(e) the grant of refund in respect of unused tickets and concessional passes under section 19.]  
6[(f) the period after the expiration of which unclaimed articles or goods may b e sold by public 
auction;  
(g) the regulation of the carriage of passengers and goods in the road transport services of the 
Corporation.]  
7[45A. Every rule and regulation to be laid before State Legislature .—Every rule and every 
regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State 
Legislature .] 
46. Penalty for breach of rules .—The State Government may, by rule, provide that the breach of 
any rules made by it under section 44 6[or any regulations made by a Corpor ation under section 45] shall 
be punishable  with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and when the breach is a continuing 
one, with a further fine not exceeding twenty rupees for every day after the date of the first conviction 
during which the offender is proved to have persisted in the o ffence.  
47. Special provis ions relating to Bombay .—(1) The body known as the Bombay State Road 
Transport Corporation  and the Board thereof, referred to in the notification of the Government of 
Bombay, No. 1780/5, dated the 16th November, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as “the existing 
corporation ” and “Board ” respectively) shall, notwithstanding any defect in, or invalidity of, the 
enactment or order under which they were constituted, be deemed for all purposes to have been validly 
constituted as if all the provisions of the said notification had been included and enacted in this section 
and this section had been in force continuously on and from the said date , and accordingly — 
(a) all action by, and all transactions with, the existing Corporation or Board, including any 
action or transaction by which any property, asset or right was acquired or any liability or obligation, 
whether by contract or otherwise, was incurred, shall be deemed to have been validly and lawfully 
taken or done; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 71 of 1971, s.  7(a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).   
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1982, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “Corporation” (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 16 and the Schedule, ibid., for “servants of the Corporation, other than the Chief Executive Officer or General 
General Manager and the Chief Accounts Officer” ( w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 1959, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1959).  
6. Ins. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7 (a) and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  
7. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005)   19 (b) no suit, prosecu tion or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government of Bombay or 
any member of the Board or any officer  or servant of the existing Corporation in respect of any action 
taken by, or in relation to the setting up of, the existing Corporation or B oard merely on the ground of 
any defect in, or invalidity of, the enactment or order under which the existing Corporation or Board 
was constituted.  
(2) On the establishment of a Corporation under section 3 in the State of Bombay (hereinafter referred 
to as “the new Corporation ”),— 
(a) the existing Corporation and Board shall be deemed to be dissolved and shall cease to 
function;  
(b) all property and ass ets vesting in the existing Corporation shall vest in the new Corporation;  
(c) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the existing Corporation, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations, respecti vely, of the new 
Corporation; and  
(d) all licences and permits granted to, all contracts made with, and all instruments executed on 
behalf of, the existing Corporation or Board shall be deemed to have been granted to, made with , or 
executed on behalf, of, the new Corporation and shall have effect accordingly.  
1[47A. Special provision for reconstitution or dissolution of certain Corpo rations.—(1) Where on 
account of the reorganisation of States under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , 2[or any  
other enactment relating to reorganisation of States, the whole or any part of a State in respect of which a 
Corporation was, immediately before the day on which the reorganisation takes place,] functioning and 
operating, is transferred on that day to ano ther State and by reason of such transfer, it appears to the State 
Government necessary or expedient that the Corporation should be reconstituted or re -organised in any 
manner whatsoever or that it should be dissolved, the State Government may frame a sche me for the 
reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the Corporation including proposals regarding the for -
mation of new Corporations the amalgamation of the Corporation with any other Corporation, body 
corporate or a commercial undertaking of anoth er State Government, the transfer of the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the Corporation in whole or in part to any other Corporation, body corporate or a commercial 
undertaking of another State Government, and the transfer or re -employment of any work men of the 
Corporation, and the State Government may forward the scheme to the Central Government for approval.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of framing any scheme under this sub -section, “State Govern ment ”,— 
3[(i) in relation to the Bombay State Road Trans port Corporation, shall mean the                       
Government of the State of Mahar ashtra or of Gujarat as formed under the Bombay Reorganisation 
Act, 19 60 (11 of 1960); ] 
(ii) in relation to the PEPSU Road Transport Corporation, shall mean the Government of the State 
of Punjab, as formed under the provisions of the State s Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) ; 
4[(iii) in relation to the Assam State Road Transport Corporation, shall mean the Government of 
the State of Assam or of Meghalaya as for med under the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 
1971  (81 of 1971) .] 
(2) On receipt of any such scheme, the Central Government may, after consultation with the State 
Governments concerned, approve the scheme with or without modifications and for the  purpose of giving 
effect to the approved scheme, the Central Government may, from time to time, make such order in 
relation thereto as it thinks fit and every order so made shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 87 of 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1956).  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 71, for “the whole or any part of a State in respect of which a Corporation was, immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956,” (w.e.f. 25 -4-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 71, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 25 -4-1960).  
4. Ins. by Act 81 of 1971, s. 73 (w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).   20 (3) Any order ma de under sub -section ( 2) may provide for all or any of  the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the dissolution of the Corporation, notwithstanding anything contained in section 39;  
(b) the reconstitution or reorganisation , in any manner whatsoever, of the Corp oration including 
the establishment, where necessary, of more than one Corporation in any State;  
(c) the amalgamation of two or more Corporations, or of one Corporation with any other body 
corporate or a commercial undertaking of any other State Government ; 
(d) the extension of the area for which the Corporation is established, or the exclusion of any area 
therefrom;  
(e) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of the Corporation 
including the transfer of any licences or perm its granted to the Corporation , to any other Corporation, 
body corporate or a commercial undertaking of any other State Government, and the terms and 
conditions of such transfer;  
(f) the transfer or re -employment of any workmen of the Corporation to, or by ,                          
any such transferee , and, subject to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation                 
Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , 1[or any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States] , the terms and 
conditions of service appli cable to such workmen after such transfer or re -employment;  
(g) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to give effect to 
the approved scheme.  
(4) Where an order is made under this section transferring the assets, rights and liabilities of any 
Corporation, then, by virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the Corporation shall vest 
in, and be the assets, rights and liabilities of, the transferee.]  
1[48. Trans itional provision relating to Bombay State Road Transport Corporation .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47A , it shall be lawful for the Government of the State of 
Bombay to frame a scheme under sub -section ( 1) thereof and forward the same to t he Central 
Government before the 1st day of May, 1960, and in such a case, the power conferred on the Central 
Govern ment to make an order under sub -section ( 2) thereof may be exercised before that day but no order 
so made shall take effect till that day.]  
2[CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE UNION TERRITORY OF DELHI 
49. Prosecution and cognizance  of offences .—(1) No court shall proceed to the trial of any offence 
made punish able by or under this Act except on the complaint of, or on an information received from, the 
General Manager of the new Corporation or a person authorised by him by general or special order in this 
behalf in writing.  
(2) All offences against this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, or any bye -law continued  
thereunder, whether committed within or without the limits of the Union territory of Delhi, shall be 
cognizable  by a Magistrate.  
50. Appointment of Magistrates .—(1) The State Government may appoint one or more magistrates 
of the first or second class for the trial of offences against this Act or any rule or regulation made 
thereunder or any bye -law continued thereunder and may prescribe the time and place at which such 
magistrate or magistrates shall sit for the despatch of business.  
(2) Such magistrates a nd the members of their staff shall be paid such salary, pension, leave and other 
allowances as may, from time to time, be fixed by the State Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 71 (w.e.f. 25 -4-1960).  
2 Ins. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( a) and the Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-1971).  21 (3) The new Corporation shall out of its fund, pay to the State Government the amounts of the salary, 
pension, leave and other allowances as fixed under sub -section ( 2) together with all other incidental 
charges in connection with the establishments of the said magistrates.  
(4) Such Magistrates shall have jurisdiction over the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(5) For the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , all magistrates appointed 
under this section shall be deemed to be magistrates appointed under section 12 of that Code.  
51. Composition of offences .—(1) The General Manager  of the new Corporation or any officer or 
other employee specially empowered by him in this behalf in writing may, either before or after the 
institution of the proceedings com pound any offence made punishable by, or under this Act.  
(2) Where an offence h as been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence so compounded.  
52. Limitation of time for prosecution .—No person shall be liable to punishment for any offence 
against this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder  or any bye -law continued thereunder , unless 
complaint of such offence is made before a Magistrate within six months next after, — 
(a) the date of the commission of such offence, or  
(b) the d ate on which the commission or existence of such offence was first brought to the notice 
of the complainant.  
53. Power of magistrate to hear cases in absence of accused when summoned to appear .—If any 
person summoned to appear before a magistrate to answer  a charge of an offence against this Act or any 
rule or regulation made thereunder, or any bye -law continued thereunder, fails to appear at the time and 
place mentioned in the summons, or on any date to which the hearing of the case is adjourned, the 
magis trate may hear and determine the case in his absence, if — 
(a) service of the summons on such person is proved to his satisfaction, and  
(b) no sufficient cause is shown for the non -appearance of such person . 
--------------------------The Special Criminal Courts (Jurisdiction) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE SPECIAL CRIMINAL COURTS (JURISDICTION) ACT, 1950  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definition.  
3. Jurisdiction of special Criminal Courts to try offences with respect to matters in the Union List.  
4. Power to add to Schedule . 
5. Repeal of Ordinance . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE SPECIAL CRIMINAL COURTS (JURISDICTION) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1950  
[10th March,  1950 .] 
An Act to confer upon special criminal Courts, constituted by or under certain State laws, 
jurisdiction to try offences against laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the 
Union List.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Special Criminal Courts (Jurisdiction)              
Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except  1[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States].  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “special Criminal Court ” means any special Court of criminal jurisdiction 
constituted by or under any law included in the Schedule.  
3. Jurisdiction of special Criminal Courts to try offences with respect to matters in the Union 
List.—Notwithstanding anything contained in law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful for any special 
Criminal Court to try offences against laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, if such court is otherwise competent to try such of fence under the law 
constituting it.  
4. Power to add to Schedule .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add 
to the Schedule any other State law providing for the trial of offences by special Criminal Courts, and any such 
addition shall take effect as if such law had been included in the Schedule by this Act.  
5. Repeal of Ordinance .—(1) The Special Criminal Courts (Jurisdiction) Ordinance, 1950  (7 of 1950) , is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or a ny action taken in the exercise of any power conferred 
by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers 
conferred by or under this Act as if this Act were in force on the day on which such thing was do ne or action 
was taken.  
  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
 
Year No.  Short title  
1947  6 The Bombay Public Security Measures Act, 1947  
1948  62 The Central Provinces and Berar Public Safety Act, 1948.   
1949  3 The West Bengal Special Courts Ordinance, 1949  
1[1950  10 The West Bengal Special Courts Act, 1950]  
2[1950  19 The Assam Special Courts Act, 1950.]  
3[1949  21 The West Bengal Criminal Law Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1949.]  
4[1952  1 The Tribunals of Criminal Jurisdiction Ordinance, 952 (W est Bengal 
Ordinance. (1 of 1952).]  
 
________  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.R.O. 12, dated 18th April, 1950, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.R.O. 29, dated 29th April, 1950, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.R.O. 117, dated 6th April,  1949, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.R.O. 672, dated 15th April, 1952, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3.  
 
--------------------------The Telegraph Wires (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE TELEGRAPH WIRES (UNLAWFUL POSSESSION) ACT, 1950  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Duty to declare possession of telegraph wires.  
4. Duty to have telegraph wires converted or sold . 
4A. Prohibition of sale or purchase of telegraph wires.  
5. Penalty for unlawful possession of telegraph wires . 
6. Penalty for contravention of provisions of section 3 or section 4 . 
6A. Powers of search and seizure.  
  6B. Confiscation of telegraph wires, conveyan ces, etc.  
7. Cognizance of offences . 
8. Power to make rules.  
 
  2 
 THE TELEGRAPH WIRES (UNLAWFUL POSSESSION) ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 74 OF 1950  
[28th December,  1950 .] 
An Act to regulate the possession of telegraph wires and to provide for the punishment of the 
offence of  unlawful possession thereof.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Telegraph Wires 
(Unlawful Possession) Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force in any State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint for such State, and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r ules made under this Act;  
2[(b) telegraph wire means any copper wire the diameter of which in millimetres, is — 
(i) not less than 2.43 and not more than 2.53; or  
(ii) not less than 2.77 and not more than 2.87; or  
(iii) not less than 3.42 and not more than 3 .52.] 
3. Duty to declare possession of telegraph wires .—Every person in possession of telegraph wires 
shall, within six months from the commencement of this Act, make a declaration in writing, in such form 
and to such authority as may be prescribed, stating the quantity of telegraph wires in his possession.  
4. Duty to have telegraph wires converted or sold .—Every person in possession of telegraph wires 
which exceed ten pounds in weight shall, within one year from the commencement of this Act, have the  
whole of the quantity as is in excess of  ten pounds converted into ingots:  
Provided that it shall be open to any such person to sell the whole or any part of the telegraph wires in 
his possession at such price and to such authority as may be prescribed.  
3[4A. Prohibition of sale or purchase of telegraph wires .—No person shall, after the 
commencement of the Telegraphs Wires (Unlawful Possession) Amendment Act, 1953  (53 of 1953) , sell 
or purchase any quantity of telegraph wires except with the permission of such authority as may be 
prescribed.]  
4[5. Penalty for unlawful possession of telegraph wires .—Whoever is found or is proved to have 
been in possession of any quantity of telegraph wires shall unless he proves that the telegraph wires came 
into his possess ion lawfully, be punishable, — 
5[(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with 
fine, or with both, and, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to be recorded in the judgment 
of the Court, the term of  such imprisonment shall not be less than one year and such fine shall not be 
less than one thousand rupees;]  
                                                           
1. Came into force in the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir on 1st April, 1951, vide S.R.O. 364, dated the 
9th March, 1951, see Gazette of India Part II, s. 3, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir on 15th July, 1954, vide S.R.O., 2251, 
dated the 1st July, 1954, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3, in Dadra and Nagar Haveli on 1 st September, 1965, vide S.O. 2523, 
dated the 7 th August, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
This Act has been extended to the Union  territory of Goa, Daman an d Diu, vide S.O. 2735, dated 1 st September, 1962, see 
Gazette of India Part II, s. 3( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-1962); Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the Schedule I             
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and the Union territory o f Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Schedule.                  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1975, s. 2 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 7 -8-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 53 of 1953, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1953).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 1962, s. 2, for section 5 (w.e.f. 30 -3-1962).  
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 1975, s. 3 , for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 7 -8-1975).  3 
 (b) for the second or a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years and also with fine and in the absence of s pecial and adequate reasons  1[to be recorded in the 
judgment of the Court, the term of such imprisonment] shall not be less than two years and such fine 
shall not be less than two thousand rupees:  
Provided that where a person has made a declaration under s ection 3 in relation to any quantity of 
telegraph wires, the burden of proving, in respect of the quantity so declared that it came into his 
possession lawfully, shall not be on such person.]  
6. Penalty for contravention of provisions of section 3 or section 4 .—Any person who fails to 
make a declaration as required by section 3 or  2[contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 4A] 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with 
both) . 
3[6A. Powers  of search and seizure .—(1) A police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector may 
seize , or search any place and seize ,— 
(i) any telegraph wire;  
(ii) any conveyance or animal used for the transport of such telegraph wire,  
if a reasonable suspicion exists that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is about to be, 
contravened in respect of such telegraph wire.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to searches and 
seizure shall, so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures made under this section.  
6B. Confiscation of telegraph wires, conveyances, etc .—Where any person has been convicted for 
the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, the telegraph wires in r elation to which the 
contravention has been made, and any conveyance or animal used for the transport of such telegraph 
wires, shall be liable to confiscation by the Court unless the owner of the conveyance or animal proves 
that it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the 
person in charge of the conveyance or animal  and that each of them had taken all reasonable precautions 
against such use:  
Provided that where any such conveyance or animal is used for  the transport of goods or passengers 
for hire, the owner of the conveyance or animal shall be given an option to pay in lieu of the confiscation 
of the conveyance or animal, a fine not exceeding the market price of the conveyance or animal on the 
date of seizure thereof or the value of the telegraph wires in relation to which the contravention has been 
made, whichever is less:  
Provided further that any telegraph wires, so seized and confiscated shall be handed over by the Court 
to such authority as may be specified by the Central Government.]  
7. Cognizance of offences .—4[(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under  
this Act, except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a person who is a 
public  servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ).] 
(2) No Court inferior to that of a presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try  any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
8. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which , and the authorities to which, declarations under section 3 may be made;  
                                                           
1. Subs. Act 44 of 1975, s. 3, for “to be mentioned in the judgment of the Court, such imprisonment”  (w.e.f. 7 -8-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1953, s. 5, for “fails to comply with the pro visions of section 4” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1953).  
3. Ins. by 44 of 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-8-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 7 -8-1975).  
 4 
 (b) the authorities to which, and the prices at which, telegraph wires may be sold under section 4.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall  be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session  2[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session imm ediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of n o effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -3-1962).  
2. Subs.  by Act 44 of 1975, s. 6,  for “or in two suecessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following” ( w.e.f. 7-8-1975).  
 
--------------------------The Transfer of Prisoners Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE TRANSFER OF PRISONERS ACT, 1950  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Removal of prisoners from one State to another . 
4. [Repealed .] 
  2 
 THE TRANSFER OF PRISONERS ACT, 1950  
ACT NO. 29 OF 19501 
[12th April, 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the removal from one State to another of persons confined in a prison . 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Transfer of Prisoners Act, 1950.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2* * *. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “court ” includes any officer lawfully exercising civil, c riminal or revenue jurisdiction ; 
3[(b) “Government ” or “State Government ”, in relation to a Part C State, means the administrator 
thereof; ] 
(c) “prison ” includes any place which has been declared by State Government, by general or 
special order, to be a subsidiary jail.  
3. Removal of prisoners from one State to another .—(1) Where any person is c onfined in a prison 
in a State, — 
(a) under  sentence of death, or  
(b) under, or in lieu of, a sentence of imp risonment or transportation, or  
(c) in d efault of payment of a fine, or  
(d) in default of giving security for keeping the peace or for maintaining good behaviour;  
the Government of that Stat e may, with the consent of the Government of any other State, by order, 
provide for the removal of the prisoner from that prison to any prison in the other State.  
(2) The officer in charge of the prison to which any person is removed under sub -section ( 1) shall 
receive and detain him, so far as may be, according to the exigency of any writ, warrant or order of the 
court by which such person has been committed, or until such person is discharged or removed in due 
course of law.  
4. [Amendment of section  29, Act III of  1900 .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1957           
(36 of 1957), s. 2 and Sch edule  I.  
 
 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to — 
Kohima  and Mokakchung Districts by Reg. 7 of 1961;  
Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963;  
Goa, Daman and Diu by notification No. GSR 430, dated 9 -3-1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, s. 3( i). 
2. The words “extends to the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and  the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Law s (No. 3) Order, 1956, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
--------------------------The Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950--------------------------
1 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES (LAWS) ACT 1950  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Power to extend enactments to certain Union territories . 
3. Extension of laws to Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur . 
4. Repeals and Savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE UNION TERRITORIES (LAWS) ACT 1950  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1950  
[15th April, 1950 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of laws to certain  1[Union territories.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the 1[Union Territories] (Laws)            
Act, 1950.  
(2) It shall come into force on the 16th day of April, 1950.  
2. Power to extend enactments to certain Union territories .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Offic ial Gazette, extend to  2[the Union territory of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh , Manipur  
or Tripura  or to any part of such territory], with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any 
enactment which is in force in a  3[State] at the date of the notif ication,  4* * *.  
3. Extension of laws to Tripura, Vindhya Pradesh and Manipur .—(1) The Acts and Ordinances 
specified in the Schedule to the Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949  (59 of 1949) , are hereby extended to,  
and shall be in force in, the States of Tripura  and Vindhya Pradesh, as they are generally in force in the  
territories to which they extend immediately before the commencement of this Act.  
(2) 5[Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2A), the Acts and ordinances referred to in 
sub-section (1)], are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in, the State of Manipur as they are 
generally in force in the territories to which they extend immediately before the commencement of                 
this Act : 
Provided that the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  in its application to the State of Manipur shall have 
effect as if — 
(a) in section 361, for the word “eighteen ” the word “fifteen ” had been substituted, and  
(b) in section 375, for the word “sixteen ” in clause Fifthly the word “fourteen ” had been 
substituted, and for the word “fifteen ” in the Exception the word “thirteen ” had been substituted.  
6[(2A) The Acts specified in Part A of the Schedule to this Act shall not extend to the State of 
Manipur, and the Acts specified in Part B thereof shall extend to, and be in force in that State only as 
from the date of commencement of the Union Territories (Laws) Amendment Act, 1956  (68 of 1956) , and 
shall with effect from that date, be amended to the manner and to the extent specified in the said Part.]  
(3) For the purpose of facilities the application in the said States of any such Act or Ordinance as 
aforeaid any Court or other authority may construe the Act or Ordinance with such alterations not 
affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it  to the matter before the Court or other 
authority.  
6[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 4, any reference to the State of Manipur 
or Tripura in relation to any period after the 31st October, 1956, shall be construed as a reference to  the 
Union territory of Manipur or Tripura as the case may be].  
4. Repeals and Savings .—Section 7 of the Delhi Laws Act, 1912  (13 of 1912) , the Ajmer Merwara 
(Extension of Laws) Act, 1947  (52 of 1947) , and any law which immediately  7[before the coming into 
force of any Act or Ordinance extended by this Act to any of the States of Manipur, Tripura and Vindhya 
Pradesh  is in force in that State and corresponds to the Act or Ordinance as so  extended], are hereby 
repealed : 
Provided that th e repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operations of any such law, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part C States”.  
2. Subs. ibid., for certain words.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “Part A State”.  
4. Certain words, bracke ts and letters, omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1956, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
6. Ins. by s. 2,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
7. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words ( w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  3 
 (b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any such law; or  
(c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any s uch penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that,  subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken , including 
any appointment or delegation made, notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation, 
form, bye -law or scheme framed, certificate, patent, permit or licen ce granted or registration effected, 
under such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under section 2 or, as the case may be, under 
the corresponding provision of the Act or Ordinance  1[as extended] to the State by section 3, and shall 
continue in  force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the 
said section 2 or, as the case may be, under the said Act or Ordinance.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1956 , s. 3, for “as now extended” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  4 
 1THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3 ( 2A)] 
Part A 
Acts not extended to Manipur by this Act  
 
Year  Number  Short Title  
1 2 3 
1866  
1872  
 
1879  XXI 
XV 
2* 
XVIII  The Converts ’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866  
The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872  
   *                     *                     *                      *                    
The Legal Practitioners Act, 1879  
 
Part B  
Acts extended to Manipur by this Act as from the commencement  of the Union Territories’ (Laws) 
Amendment Act, 1956.  
 
Year  Number  Short Title  Amendment (if any)  
1 2 3 4 
1873  X The Indian Oaths Act, 1873  In section 1, for the second paragraph, the following paragr aph 
shall be substituted , namely :—“It extends to the whole of India 
except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
1882  IV The Transfer of Property Act, 
1882.   
1887  VII The Suits Valuation Act, 1887.  
1898  V The Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898.  (1) In section 1, in sub -section ( 2), the words “and the Union 
territory of Manipur ” shall be omitted, and  
(2) in section 93A, in sub -section ( 1), the words “or in the Union 
territory of Manipur ” shall be omitted.  
1908  V The Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908.  In section 1, in sub -section ( 3) the word “and” at the end of  
clauses (c)  and clause ( d) shall be omitted.  
1925  XXXIX  The Indian Succession Act, 1925 .  
_________  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1956 , s. 4, for the original Schedule.  
2. Entry relating to the Married Women’s Property Act , 1874 (3 of 1874) omitted by Act 61 of 1959, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1960).  
