--------------------------The All-India Services Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE ALL -INDIA SERVICES ACT, 1951  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definition . 
2A. Other All -India Services  
3. Regulation of recruitment and conditions of service . 
4. Continuance of existing rules . 
  2 
 THE ALL -INDIA SERVICES ACT, 1951 
ACT NO. 61 OF 1951 
[29th October, 1951 .] 
An Act to regulate the recruitment, and the conditions of service o f persons appointed, to the 
All-India Services common to the Union and the States.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the All -India Services Act, 1951.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, the expression “an All -India Service ” means the service known as the 
Indian Administrative Service or the service known as the Indian Police Service,  1[or any other 
servic e specified in section 2A].  
2[2A. Other All -India Services .—With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall b e constituted the following 
All-India Services and different  dates may be appointed for different services, namely: — 
1. The Indian Service of Engineers (Irrigation, Power, Buildings and Roads);  
2. The Indian Forest Service;  
3. The Indian Medical and Health Service.]  
3. Regulation of recruitment and conditions of se rvice .—(1) The Central Government may, 
after consultation with the Governments of the States concerned,  3[including the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir  4[and by notification in the Official Gazette] ] make rules for the regulation of recruitment, 
and the conditions of service  of persons appointed to an All -India Service.  
5[(1A) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier  than the date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or 
any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the 
interests of any person to whom such rule may be applicable.]  
6[(2) Every rule made by the Cent ral Government under this section and every regulation made 
under or in pursuance of any such rule, shall be laid , as soon as may be after such rule or regulation is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in such rule or regulation or both Houses agree that such rule or 
regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.]  
4. Continuance of existing rules .—All rules in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act and applicable to an All -India Service shall continue t o be in force and shall be deemed to be 
rules made under this Act.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1963, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 1958, s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1975, s. 3.  
5. Ins. by Act 23 of 1975, s. 2.  
6. Subs. by Act 19 of 1975, s. 3, for sub-section ( 2). 
--------------------------The Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE ASSAM (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES)  ACT, 1951  
________ ____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Alteration of the boundaries of Assam.  
3. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE ASSAM (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES)  ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1951  
[1st September , 1951.]  
An Act to alter the boundaries of the State of Assam consequent on the cession of a strip of 
territory comprised in that State to the Government of Bhutan.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951.  
2. Alteration of the boundaries of Assam .—On and from the commencement of this Act, the 
territory of the State of Assam shall cease to comprise the strip of territory specified in the Schedule, 
which shall be c eded to the Government of Bhutan, and the boundaries of the state of Assam shall be 
deemed  to have been altered accordingly.  
3. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—In the first paragraph of Part A of the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “TERRITORIES OF STATES ”, after the words 
“Assam Tribal Areas ”, the foll owing words shall be inserted , namely:— 
“but shall not include the territories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Act, 1951 ”.  
_______  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
 (See section 2)   
The strip of territory measuring 32.81 square miles lying to the south of Bhutan within 26o 45' and 27o 
North Latitude and 91o 15' and 91o 45' East Longitude, demarcated on the west, no rth and east by 
boundary pillar  Nos. 90, 91, 92, 93 and 94 erected in 1930 -31, and on the south by bound ary pillar Nos.  
90, 91, 92, 93 and 94 erected in 1950.  
______  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
--------------------------The Companies (Donations to National Funds) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE COMP ANIES (DONATIONS TO NATIONAL FUNDS) ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 54 OF 19511 
[17th October,  1951.]  
An Act to enable companies to make donations to National funds.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Companies (Donations to National 
Funds) Act, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, — 
(a) “company” means a company as defined in section 2 of the companies Act, and includes a 
company deemed to be incorporated and registered under that Act by virtue of section 2B thereof;  
(b) “the Companies Act” means the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913).  
3. Power of companies to make donations to certain National Funds. —Any company may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the companies Act  or in any other law for the time  being in force 
regulating the affairs thereof, and notwithstanding that the memorandum or articles of association of the 
company do not enable it so to do, by an extra ordinary resolution passed in accordance with the 
provisions contained in section 81 of the Companies Act, authori se the making of donations to the 
Gandhi National Memorial Fund or the Sardar Vallabhbhai National Memorial Fund, or to any other 
Fund establi shed for a Charitable purpose which by reason of its national importance has been approved 
by the Central Government for the purposes of this section.  
4. [Repeal of Act  35 of 1948.] —Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 
and Sched ule I.  
 
                                                           
1. Extended to the Union territory of P ondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Schedule.  
--------------------------The Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE DISPLACED PERSONS (DEBTS ADJUSTMENT)  ACT, 1951  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Over -riding effect of Act, rules and orders.  
4. Tribunals competent to exercise jurisdiction under this Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
DEBT ADJUSTMENT  PROCEEDINGS  
5. Application by displaced debtors for adjustment of debts.  
6. Rejection of application in certain cases.  
7. Issue of notice.  
8. Objection by respondents.  
9. Proceeding  after service of notice on respondents.  
10. Claims by creditors agains t displaced debtors.  
11. Procedure on creditors petition.  
12. Objection by creditor to schedule of assets.  
13. Claims by displaced creditors against persons who are not displaced debtors.  
14. Procedure on displaced creditor’s petition.  
15. Consequences of application by displaced debtor.  
16. Debts secured on immovable property.  
17. Debts secured on movable property.  
18. Claims against insurance companies.  
19. Calls on shares in companies.  
20. N o calls to be made on displaced person or bank when company or co -operative society is in 
liquidation.  
21. Power to revise certain decree s and settlemen ts.2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Apportionment of joint debts.  
23. Simplified  procedure in certain cases.  
24. Presumption respecting registered documents.  
25. Application of Act V of 1908.  
26. Signing and verification of applications and written statements.  
27. Contents of decrees.  
28. Execution of decrees.  
CHAPTER III  
RELIEFS  
29. Cesser of accrual of interest.  
30. Exemption from arrest.  
31. Further reliefs in the matter of attachment of property.  
32. Scaling down of debts.  
33. Matters to be taken into account in directing payment by instalments.  
34. Variation of maintenance allowances.  
35. Taxation of lawyer’s fees.  
36. Extention of period of limitation  
37. Curtailment of period of limitation for execution of certain decrees.  
38. Sale of immovable prop erty in execution.  
39. Encouragement of settlements.  
CHAPTER IV  
APPEALS  
40. General provisions  relating to appeals.  
41. Restrictions on right of appeal in certain cases  
42. Parties to appeals  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Registration of certain societies and companies under Indian law . 
44. Bar of further application in certain cases . 
45. Amendment of application .  3 
  
SECTIONS  
46. Service of notices . 
47. Effect of failure on the part of displaced debtor to disclose certain matters.  
48. Proceedings not to abate on death of debtor . 
49. Past transactions not to be affected . 
50. Disp laced  debtor not to be deemed insolvent . 
51. Compromises or arrangements between banks and their debtors not to be reopened in certain 
cases.  
52. Communication of contents of decre es to prescribed authority . 
53. Application of the Limitation Act.  
54. Order XXXVIII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure not to apply.  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
56. Delegation of powers.  
57. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
58. Power of State Government to make rules.  
58A. Laying of rules.  
59. Repeals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 THE DISPLACED PERSONS (DEBTS ADJUSTMENT)  ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 70 OF 1951  
[7th November , 1951 .] 
An Act to make certain provisions for the adjustment and settlement of debts due by 
displaced persons,for the recovery of certain debts due to them and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Displaced Persons 
(Debts Adjustment) Act, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such1 date as the Central Government may, by notifi cation in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States or for different 
parts thereof.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires. — 
(1) “company ” means a company as defined in the Indian Companies Act,1913  (7 of 1913), and 
includes a company deemed to be registered under that Act by reason of any of the provisions 
contained in this Act;  
(2) “Companies Act ” means the Indian Companies Act, 1913 ( 7 of 1913);  
(3) “compensation ” means any compensation paid, whether in cash or in kind, in respect of any 
immovable property in West Pakistan belonging to a displaced person under any general scheme 
arrived at in this behalf between the Government of India and  the Government of Pakistan or framed 
by the Government of India;  
(4) “co-operative society ” means a co -operative society registered under the Co -operative 
Societies Act, 1912 ( 2 of 1912), or under any other law for the time being in force in any State for  the 
registration of co -operative societies;  
(5) “Co-operative Societies Act ” means the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 ( 2 of 1912), and 
includes any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co -operative societies;  
(6) “debt” means any pecuniary liability, whether payable presently or in future, or under a decree 
or order of a civil or revenue court or otherwise, or whether a scertained or to be ascertained ,  
which ,— 
(a) in the case of a displaced person who has left or been di splaced from his place of 
residence in any area now forming part of West Pakistan, was incurred before he came to reside in 
any area now forming part of India;  
                                                           
1. 10th December, 1951, vide Notification No. 68(21)/51 -Prop., in respect of the States of Delhi, Ajmer, Punjab, Uttar 
Pradesh and  Bombay,  dated 7th December, 1951, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part I., sec. 1. all other Stats of 
India, 20th December, 1951: see Notification No. S.R.O. 200 5, dated  13th December, 1951, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, 1951, Part II, sec. 3.  5 
 (b) in the case of a displaced person who, before an after the 15th day of August, 1947, has 
been residing in any area now forming part of India was incurred before the said date on the 
security of any immovable property situate in the territories now forming part of West Pakistan:  
Provided that where any such liability was incurred on the security o f immovable properties 
situate both in India and in West Pakistan, the liability shall be so apportioned between the said 
properties  that the liability in relation to each of the said properties  bears the same proportion to 
the total amount of the debts as  the value of each of the properties as at the date of the transaction 
bears to the total value of the properties furnished as security, and the liability, for the purposes of 
this clause, shall be the liability which is relatable to the property in West P akistan;  
(c) is due to a displaced person from any other person (whether a displaced person or not)  
ordinarily residing in the territories to which this Act extends;  
and includes  
any pecuniary liability incurred before the commencement of this Act by any such person as is 
referred to in this clause which is based on, and is solely by way of renewal of, any such liability 
as is referred to in sub -clause ( a) or sub -clause ( b) or sub -clause  (c): 
Provided that in the case of a loan, whether in cash or in kind,  the amount originally advanced 
not the amount for which the liability has been renewed shall be deemed to be the extent of the 
liability;  
but does not include  
any pecuniary liability due under a decree passed after the 15th day of August, 1947, by any co urt 
situate in West Pakistan or any pecuniary liability the proof of which depends merely on an oral 
agreement;  
(7) “displaced bank ” means a banking company which, before the 15th day of August, 1947, 
carried on the business of banking, whether wholly or p artially, in any area now forming part of West 
Pakistan and is declared to be a displaced bank within the meaning of this Act by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(8) “displaced creditor ” means a displaced person to whom a debt is due from any other person, 
whether a displaced person or not;  
(9) “displaced debtor ” means a displaced person from whom a debt is due or is being claimed;  
(10)“displaced person ” means any person who, on account o f the setting up of the Dominions of 
India and Pakistan, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in any area 
now forming part of West Pakistan, has, after the 1st day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced from, 
his place of r esidence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in India, and includes any 
person who is resident in any place now forming part of India and who for that reason is unable or has 
been rendered unable to manage, supervise or control any immovabl e property belonging to him in 
West Pakistan, but does not include a banking company;  
(11) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(12) “Tribunal ” means any civil court specified under section 4 as having authority to exercise 
jurisdict ion under this Act;  
(13) “verified claim ” means any claim registered under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950 
(44 of 1950) in respect of which a final order has been passed under that Act relating to its verification 
and valuation;  
(14) “West Pakista n” means the territories of   Pakistan excluding the Province of  East Bengal.  6 
 3. Over -riding effect of Act, rules and orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this 
Act, the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder shall have  effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, or in any decree or order of a court, or in any contract between the parties.  
4. Tribunals competent to exercise jurisdiction under this Act .—The State Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify any civil court or class of civil courts as the Tribunal or 
Tribunals having authority to exercise jurisdiction under this Act and may define the areas in which 
and the extent to whic h such jurisdiction may be exercised.  
CHAPTER II  
DEBT ADJUSTMENT  PROCEEDINGS  
5. Application by displaced debtors for adjustment of debts .—(1) At any time within one year 
after the date on which this Act comes into force in any local area, a displaced debtor may make an 
application for the adjustment of his debts to the Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
he actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
(2) Every application by a displaced debt or shall contain the following particulars, namely: — 
 (a) the place where he resides;  
 (b) the trade, calling, profession or other employment in which he is now engaged and in 
which he was engaged in West Pakistan before he became a displaced person;  
 (c) his average annual income in India during the three years immediately preceding the 
application;  
 (d) the income -tax  and super -tax, if any, to which he has been assessed for the three years 
immediately preceding the application;  
 (e) such other particular s as may be prescribed;  
and shall be accompanied by the following schedules, namely: — 
(i) a schedule containing full particulars of all his debts, whether owed jointly or individually, 
with the names and addresses of his creditors and joint -debtors, if any, so far as they are known 
to, or can by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence be ascertained by him;  
(ii) a schedule of all his properties, both movable and immovable (including claims due to 
him) which are not liable to attachment either under  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908               
(Act 5 of 1908), as amended by section 31 of this Act or under any other law for the time being in 
force, a specification of the values thereof and of the places where the same may be found;  
(iii) a schedule of all his properties, both movable and immovable (including claims due to 
him) which are not included in the schedule under item ( ii) of this clause; and  
(iv) a schedule of all his properties in respect of which a claim has been submitted to the 
registeri ng officer under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950 ( 44 of 1950), and, where any 
order has been passed in relation to the verification and valuation of the claim under that Act, with 
a certified copy of the order.  
(3) All persons whose names are show n in any schedule as having claims against the displaced 
debtor and all persons whose names are shown as joint -debtors shall be deemed to be the respondents 
to the application and there shall be filed along with the application, or with the permission of t he            7 
 Tribunal at any later state of the proceedings, as many copies of the application and as many envelops 
and notices in the prescribed form duly addressed to the respondents as there are respondents.  
6. Rejection of application in certain cases .—Where an application made under section 5 does 
not comply with any of the requirements of that section, the Tribunal may either reject it, or grant to 
the applicant such further time as it thinks fit to comply with such requirements.  
7. Issue of notice .—If the application is not rejected under section 6, the Tribunal shall, after 
causing the date for the hearing of the application to be entered in the notices referred to in section 5, 
cause them to be served on the respondents.  
8. Objection by respondents .—In response to a notice under section 7, the respondent may show 
cause against the application by filing a written statement containing his objections to the application:  
Provided that where he does not appear in person or through any authorised agent, t he written 
statement may be sent by registered post, acknowledgement due, to the Tribunal after having been 
signed in the presence of a civil judicial officer or a magistrate or any other prescribed office and duly 
attested by such officer or magistrate.  
9. Proceeding after service of notice on respondents .—(1) If there is a dispute as to whether the 
applicant is a displaced person or not or as to the existence or the amount of the debt due to any 
creditor or the assets of any displaced debtor, the Tribunal  shall decide the matter after taking such 
evidence as may be adduced by all the parties concerned and shall pass such decree in relation thereto 
as it thinks fit.  
(2) If there is no such dispute or if the respondents do not appear or have no objection to  the 
application being granted, the Tribunal may, after considering the evidence placed before it, pass such 
decree in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
10. Claims by creditors against displaced debtors .—Any displaced person having a claim 
against a displa ced debtor may make an application, in such form as may be prescribed, for the 
determination thereof to the Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the displaced debtor 
actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, together with a 
statement of the debts owed to the creditor with full particulars thereof.  
11. Procedure on creditors petition .—(1) Where an application under section 10 has been 
made   the Tribunal shall cause notice thereof to be served on  the displaced debtor calling upon him 
either to show cause, if any, against the application or to make an application on his own behalf under 
section 5.  
(2) If, in response to a notice under sub -section ( 1), the displaced debtor makes an application in 
accordance with the provisions of section 5, the Tribunal shall proceed further in the matter as if it had 
commenced with an application by the displaced debtor under section 5, and all the other provisions 
of this Act shall apply accordingly; but, if the di splaced debtor does not choose to make any such 
application, the Tribunal shall, after considering such evidence, if any, as may be produced before it, 
determine the claim and pass such decree in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
(3) The period of limitat ion specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 in respect of an application by 
a displaced debtor shall not apply to an application made under sub -section ( 2). 
12. Objection by creditor to schedule of assets .—(1) Any creditor of a displaced  debtor may 
make an application to the Tribunal stating that the displaced debtor, who has made an application 
under section 5 or sub -section ( 2) of section 11, has concealed any part of his assets, and the Tribunal 
shall, after giving due notice thereof to the displaced d ebtor, determine the matter.  8 
 (2) If the Tribunal finds that the displaced debtor has wilfully and fraudulently omitted to include 
such assets in his application, the Tribunal may dismiss the application or refuse to allow to the 
displaced debtor any of the  reliefs under this Act to which he would otherwise have been entitled or 
pass such other order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
13. Claims by displaced creditors against persons who are not displaced debtors .—At any 
time within one year after the dat e on which this Act comes into force in any local area, any displaced 
creditor claiming a debt from any other person who is not a displaced person may make an 
application, in such form as may be prescribed, to the Tribunal within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction he or the respondent or, if there are more respondents than one, any of such respondents, 
actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or personally works for gain, together with a 
statement of the debt owing to him with full parti culars thereof.  
14. Procedure on displaced creditor's petition .—(1) Where an application under section 13 has 
been made to the Tribunal, the Tribunal shall cause notice thereof to be given to the debtor, calling 
upon him to show cause, if any, against the application.  
(2) If there is a dispute as to whether the applicant is a displaced creditors or not or as to the 
existence of the debt or as to the amount thereof, the Tribunal shall decide the matter, after taking 
such evidence as may be produced before it , and pass such decree in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
(3) If there is no such dispute or if the debtor does not appear or has no cause to show, the 
Tribunal may, after considering the evidence placed before it, pass such decree in relation thereto a s it 
thinks fit.  
15. Consequences of application by displaced debtor .—Where a displaced debtor has made an 
application to the Tribunal under section 5 or under sub -section ( 2) of section 11, the following 
consequences shall ensue, namely: — 
(a) all proceedings pending at the date of the said application in any civil court in respect of 
any debt to which the displaced debtor is subject (except proceedings by way of appeal, or review 
or revision against decrees or orders passed against, the displaced d ebtor) shall be stayed, and the 
records of all such proceedings other than those relating to the appeals, reviews or revisions as 
aforesaid shall be transferred to the Tribunal and consolidated;  
(b) all attachments, injunction orders appointing receives or  other processes issued by any 
such court and in force at the date of the said application in respect of any such debt shall cease to 
have effect and no fresh process shall, except as hereinafter expressly provided, be issued:  
Provided that where an order appointing a receiver ceases to have effect under this section, 
the receiver shall, within fourteen days from the date on which his appointment ceases to have 
effect or within such further time as the Tribunal may in any case allow, submit to the Tribunal 
instead of to the court which appointment him his outstanding accounts, and the Tribunal shall, in 
relation to such accounts, have the same powers with respect to the receiver as the court which 
appointed him had or could have had;  
(c) no fresh suit or oth er proceeding [other than any such appeal, review or revision as is 
referred to in clause ( a)] shall be instituted against a displaced debtor in respect of any debt 
mentioned by him in the relevant schedule to his application;  
(d) any immovable property be longing to the displaced debtor and liable to attachment shall 
not be transferred except under   the  authority   of  the Tribunal and on such terms as it thinks fit,  9 
 until the application of the displaced debtor has been finally disposed of or any decree passed 
against him is satisfied in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
16. Debts secured on immovable property .—(1) Where a debt incurred by a displaced person is 
secured by a mortgage, charge or lien on the immovable property belonging to him in W est Pakistan, 
the Tribunal may, for the purpose of any proceeding under this Act, require the creditor to elect to 
retain the security or to be treated as an unsecured creditor.  
(2) If the creditor elects to retain the security, he may apply to the Tribuna l, having jurisdiction in 
this behalf as provided in section 10, for a declaration of the amount due under his debt.  
(3) Where in any case, the creditor elects to retain his security if the displaced debtor receives any 
compensation in respect of any such property as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the creditor shall be 
entitled — 
(a) where the compensation is paid in cash, to a first charge thereon:  
Provided that the amount of the debt in respect of which he shall be entitled to the first charge 
shall be  that amount as bears to the total debt the same proportion as the compensation paid in 
respect of the property bears to the value of the verified claim in respect thereof and to that extent 
the debt shall be deemed to have been reduced;  
(b) where the comp ensation is by way of exchange or property, to a first charge on the 
property situate in India so received by way of exchange:  
Provided that the amount of the debt in respect of which he shall be entitled to the first charge 
shall be that amount as bears t o the total debt the same proportion as the value of the property 
received by way of exchange bears to the value of the verified claim in respect  thereof and to that 
extent the debt shall be deemed to have been reduced.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in this section, where a debt is secured by a mortgage of 
agricultural lands belonging to a displaced person in West Pakistan and the mortgage was with 
possession, the m ortgage e shall, if he has been allotted lands in India in lieu of the lands of which  he 
was in possession in West Pakistan, be entitled to continue in possession of the lands so allotted until 
the debt is satisfied from the usufruct of the lands or is redeemed by the debtor:  
Provided that in either case the amount of the debt shall be onl y that amount as bears to the total 
debt the same proportion as the value of the lands allotted to the creditor in India bears to the value of 
the lands left behind by him in West Pakistan and to that extent the debt shall be deemed to have  been  
reduced.  
(5)  Where a creditor elects to be treated as an unsecured creditor, in relation to the debt, the 
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.  
17. Debts secured on movable property .—(1) Where in respect of a debt incurred by a 
displaced debtor and secure d by the pledge of movable property belonging to him, the creditor had 
been placed in possession of such property at any time before the debtor became displaced person, the 
following rules shall regulate the rights and liabilities of the creditor and the d ebtor, namely: — 
(a) the creditor may, if he is still in possession of the pledged property, realise the sum due to 
him by the sale of such property after giving to the debtor reasonable notice of the sale;  
(b) the creditor shall not be entitled , in any case where the pledged property is no longer in his 
possession or is not available for redemption by the debtor, to recover from the debtor the debt or 
any part thereof for which the pledged property was security;  10 
 (c) the debtor shall not be liable, in the  case of a sale by the creditor of any pledged property, 
whether under clause ( a) or otherwise, to pay the balance where the proceeds of such sale are less 
than the amount of the debt due;  
(d) the creditor shall , in any case where the proceeds of the sale of the pledged property are 
greater than the amount of the debt  due, pay over the surplus to the debtor.  
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this section, the creditor shall be deemed to be in possession 
of the pledged property in any case in which the pledged property, although not delivered to him was 
delivered to a person authorised by him or was being held by the debtor on behalf of the creditor, and 
the ownership or possession thereof could not have been transferred to a third party without the 
express consent or permission of the creditor.  
Explanation II .—Where any motor vehicle or other movable property has been purchased with 
money the whole or any part of which has been advanced by a creditor who retains the ownership 
thereof by way of security b ut allows the debtor to use it with his permission, the property shall for 
the purposes of this section be deemed to be pledged property of the debtor in the possession of the 
creditor.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the creditor s hall be entitled to receive, 
and to give a valid discharge in respect of, any sum due under this Act or under any other law for the 
time being in force from an insurance company in respect of any claim arising out of the loss or 
destruction of the pledged property, but the creditor shall, in any case where the sum received from 
the insurance company is greater than the amount of the debt due to him, pay over the surplus to the 
debtor.  
18. Claim against insurance companies .—(1) Where any property in West Pak istan belonging 
to a displaced person was insured with any insurance company before the 15th day of August, 1947, 
against any risk arising out of fire or theft or riot and civil commotion and there has been a loss in 
respect of such property arising out of  any such risk at a time when the contract of insurance was in 
force, such company shall not be entitled to refuse payment of the sum due under any claim in relation 
thereto on the ground that — 
(a) no report was lodged with the police within the agreed tim e, or 
(b) the claim was not made to the company within the agreed time, or  
(c) in the case of a policy covering any risk arising out of riot and civil commotion, the 
disturbances in West Pakistan were not in the nature of a riot and civil commotion, the 
disturbances in West Pakistan we re not in the nature of a riot or civil commotion, or  
(d) the displaced person has not fulfilled any other condition of the contract which in the 
opinion of the Central Government is of a technical nature and which the Central  Government 
has, by notification in the Official Gazette, specified as a condition of the contract for the 
purposes of this section , 
and any contract to the contrary, to the extent to which it is in contravention of the provisions of this 
sub-section, shal l be deemed to have had no effect.  
(2) Where a loss has been incurred in respect of any property in the circumstances specified in 
sub-section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, in every proceeding where it is necessary to do so, determine 
respectively the amount of  the loss, the amount for which the property was insured on the date of such 
loss, and the amount, if any, paid by the insurance company, and shall make a report thereof to such 
board or other authority as may be prescribed, and the prescribed board or oth er authority shall,  after  11 
 taking into account such matters as may be prescribed as being relevant thereto, and subject to any 
rules made in this behalf, in turn propose to the Tribunal the amount for which the claim against the 
insurance company shall be decreed , and the Tribunal shall pass a decree accordingly.  
(3) The amount realised from the insurance company under any decree passed under                 
sub-section ( 2) shall first be applied towards the satisfaction of the debt due from the displaced 
person, and the balance, if any, shall be refunded to the displaced person.  
(4) An application under this section may be made either by a displaced person having a claim 
against the insurance company in the circumstances specified in sub -section ( 1) or by a n assignee or 
any other person having an interest in the claim of any such displaced person, to the Tribunal within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the displaced person actually and voluntarily resides or carries 
on business or personally works for gain or, in the case of a displaced bank making an application 
under this section, within whose limits the bank carries on business, for the determination of the 
amount due in respect of the claim in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(5) To every proceeding under sub -section ( 4) the insurance company and all persons interested in 
the claim shall be made parties:  
Provided that the Tribunal may at any stage of the proceedings direct that the name of any person 
whose presence before the Tribu nal may be necessary in order to enable the Tribunal effectually and 
completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved, be added to the proceeding.  
(6) No application under this section shall be entertained in any case where no claim has been 
made to the insurance company within one year after the date of the loss.  
Explanation .—A claim shall be deemed to have been made within the meaning of this sub -section 
if intimation thereof has been given to the insurance company within one year after  the date of the 
loss notwithstanding that the intimation does not specify the amount of the claim or is not in the form, 
if any, required by the contract of insurance or in any other specified form.  
19. Calls on shares in companies .—(1) Where a company or  a co-operative society has made 
any call upon a displaced person or a displaced bank in respect of any moneys remaining unpaid on 
any share held by him or it on the 15th day of August, 1947, in the company or co -operative society, 
as the case may be, and there has been a failure on the part of the shareholder to pay any moneys due 
in respect of such call, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies 
Act, or in the memorandum or articles of association or the Co -operative Societ ies Act, no interest 
shall be payable in respect of any such moneys due and the company or the co -operative society, as 
the case may be, shall not be entitled to forfeit the share or any part thereof , and any forfeiture made 
before the commencement of thi s Act in respect of any share in the circumstances specified in this 
sub-section shall be deemed to have had no effect, and no person shall he deemed to have ceased to be 
a member of the company or co -operative society merely by reason of such forfeiture.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, or in the memorandum or articles 
of association, of the Co -operative Societies Act, it shall be lawful for a displaced person or a 
displaced bank to apply to the company or the co -operative socie ty, as the case may be, for the 
conversion of any partly paid -up share held by him or it in the company or society into such smaller 
number  of fully paid -up shares as the society or company may have issued and in respect of which 
calls have already been ma de. 
(3) Where any share forfeited before the commencement of this Act has been disposed of by the 
company in accordance with its articles of association and it is not possible for the company to give to   12 
 the displaced person the relief to which he is entitled under this section without increasing its capital, 
the capital of the company shall be deemed to have been increased to the extent to which it is 
necessary to provide that relief.  
(4) if the company or the co -operative society refuses to comply wi th any such request as is 
contained in an application under sub -section ( 2), the Tribunal may, on application made to it in this 
behalf and if satisfied that there is no cause for such refusal, issue a direction to the company or the 
co-operative society a ccordingly, and the company or society shall be bound  comply therewith and 
every such direction shall take effect from the date thereof.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this section, nothing contained herein shall affect the validity of 
any action taken by the company or its board of directors in pursuance of the provisions of the 
Companies Act or of the memorandum or articles of association relating to the company.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall have effect for a period of ten years from the 15 th day of 
August, 1947, and thereafter shall cease to have effect except as respects things done or omitted to be 
done.  
20. No calls to be made on displaced person or bank when company or co -operative society 
is in liquidation .—(1) Where a company or a co -operative society is being wound up, no displaced 
person or displaced bank shall be called upon, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 
the Companies Act, or in the memorandum or articles of association or the Co -operative Societies 
Act, to make any contribution to the assets of the company or co -operative society, as the case may 
be, in respect of any share held by him or it in the company or society on the 15th day of            
August, 1947.  
(2) The provisions of this section shall have eff ect for a period of ten years from the 15th day of 
August, 1947, and shall also apply in respect of any calls made and not satisfied before that date, and 
shall cease to have effect after the expiry of the said period except as respects things done or omit ted 
to be done.  
21. Power to revise certain decree and settlement s.—(1) Where before the commencement of 
this Act, a decree has been passed by a civil court against, or a settlement has been entered into by, a 
displaced debtor in respect of any debt, the T ribunal shall, on the application of such debtor revise it 
so as to bring it into accord with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In determining the amount due under any such decree or settlement, the Tribunal shall accept 
as binding the findings of the court which passed the decree or the facts contained in the settlement, as 
the case may be, to the extent to which the findings or the facts are not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the Tribunal shall not determine any claim under any such decree until any appeal 
or revision filed against it has been finally decided or the period allowed for any appeal therefrom has 
expired, and in all such cases the findings of the Tribunal shall be based on the final decree.  
(3) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this section,  Tribunal shall in respect of any debt revise 
any settlement arrived at before the commencement of this Act between an insurance company and a 
displaced person or between an insurance company and a displaced bank having an inte rest in the 
claim of a displaced person against the insurance company and arriving at such settlement by virtue of 
that interest:  
Provided that payment in full has been made in pursuant of such settlement.  13 
 22. Apportionment of joint debts .—Where a debt is due from a displaced person jointly with 
another person, the Tribunal shall, for the purposes of this Act, apportion the liability between them 
according to the following rules, namely: — 
(a) if the liability of each debtor is defined, then according to the  defined share of each;  
(b) if the debt was taken for any trade or business of the joint debtors then according to the 
shares held by each of the joint debtors in the trade or business;  
(c) if the debt was not taken in any defined shares or for any trade o r business in which the 
partners have any defined share, the debt shall be apportioned into as ma ny parts as there are joint 
debtors, and each joint debtor shall be liable only for the part apportioned to him;  
(d) if one joint debtor is a placed is a displ aced person and another is not, the sum apportioned 
to the non -displaced person shall not be deemed to be a debt within the meaning of this Act and 
the creditor may in respect of such debt seek any remedy open to him in a civil court or otherwise;  
(e) if the debt was taken by a joint Hindu family, the members of the joint Hindu family shall 
be deemed to be joint debtors within the meaning of this section and the debt shall be apportioned 
amongst the members thereof in the same proportion in which shares wou ld be allotted to them on 
partition:  
Provided that the share of any member of such a joint family any of whose male lineal 
ascendants in the male line of ascent is alive and joint with such member shall be deemed to be 
included in the share of his oldest s urviving ascendant in the made line of ascent, and such 
member shall not be separately regarded as a joint debtor for the purpose of this clause;  
(f) if the liability is secured by a mortgage of movable and immovable properties, the debt 
shall be apportion ed between the two properties in the same proportion as the value of each 
property bears to the total value of the properties.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the value of the movable property shall be 
deemed to be the value thereof immediate ly before the date on which the debtor became a 
displaced person, and the value of the immovable property shall be deemed to be the value of the 
verified claim in respect thereof;  
(g) where the relationship between the joint debtors is that of principal an d surety, nothing 
contained in this Act shall prevent the institution of a suit for the recovery of the debt against the 
surety but no decree shall be passed in such suit for an amount in excess of the amount decreed or 
which can be decreed against the pri ncipal debtor in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the total amount which may be recovered from the principal debtor and the 
surety shall not exceed the amount decreed or which can be decreed by the Tribunal against the 
principal de btor in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
23. Simplified procedure in certain cases .—In the determination of any individual debt which 
does not exceed five thousand rupees, — 
(a) it shall not be necessary for the Tribunal to take down the evidence  of the witnesses in 
writing at length but the Tribunal, as the examination of each witness proceeds, shall make a 
memorandum of the substance of what he deposes and such memorandum shall be written and 
signed by the Tribunal and shall form part of the rec ord; 
(b) the decision of the Tribunal need not contain more than the points for determination and 
the decision thereon.  14 
 24. Presumption respecting registered documents .—It shall be presumed until the contrary is 
proved that any document registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 ( 16 of 1908) or any 
certified copy thereof and produced before the Tribunal has been proved.  
25. Application of Act V of 1908 .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in any 
rules made thereunder, all proceedin gs under this Act shall be regulated by the provisions contained in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
26. Signing and verification of applications and written statements .—Every application and 
the schedules, if any, attach ed thereto and ev ery written statement filed before the Tribunal for any 
relief under this Act shall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), for the signing and verification of pleadings . 
27. Contents of decrees .—In all cases in which the Tribunal passes a decree on the application of 
a displaced person, it shall prepare a complete schedule of the creditors and of the assets and liabilities 
of the displaced person.  
28. Execution of decrees .—It shall be competent for the civil court which has been specified as 
the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act to execute any decree or order passed by it as the Tribunal in 
the same manner as it could have done if it were a decree or order passed by it as a civil court.  
CHAPT ER III  
RELIEFS  
29. Cesser of accrual of interest .—(1) On and from the 15th day of August, 1947, no interest 
shall accrue or be deemed to have accrued in respect of any debt owed by a displaced person, and no 
Tribunal shall allow any future interest in respect of any decree or order passed by it:  
Provided that — 
(a) where the debt is secured by the pledge of shares, stocks, Government securities or 
securities of a local authority, the Tribunal shall allow, for the period commencing from the 15th 
day of Au gust, 1947, and ending with the date of commencement of this Act, interest to the 
creditor at the rate mutually agreed upon or at a rate at which any dividend or interest has been 
paid or is payable in respect thereof, whichever is less;  
(b) in any other c ase the Tribunal may, if it thinks it just and proper to do so after taking into 
account the paying capacity of the debtor as defined in section 32, allow, for the period mentioned 
in clause ( a), interest at a rate not exceeding four per cent. per annum si mple.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the interest payable in respect of any monies advanced 
by a creditor, including an insurance company, on the security of a policy of life insurance of a 
displaced debtor in order to keep it alive.  
30. Exempt ion from arrest .—No displaced person shall be liable to arrest or imprisonment in 
execution of any decree for the recovery of any debt whether passed before or after the 
commencement of this Act.  
31. Further reliefs in the matter of attachment of property .—Section 60 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908) shall, in relation to the execution of any decree for a debt  against a 
displaced person (whether passed before or after the commencement of this Act), have effect, as if — 
(1) for clause ( c) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), the following clauses had been substituted, 
namely: — 
“(c) houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land 
immediately appertaining thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to an 15 
 agriculturist and not proved by the decree -holder to have been let out on rent or otherwise to 
any person other than the father, mother, wife, son, daughter, daughter -in-law, brother, sister or 
other dependent of the judgement -debtor or to have been lef t vacant for a period of one year or 
more;  
(cc) milch animals, whether in milk or in calf, kids,   animals used for the purpose of 
transport or draught cart and open spaces or enclosures belonging to an agriculturist and 
required for use in case of need for  tying cattle, parking carts or stacking fodder or manure;  
(ccc) one main residential house and other buildings attached to it (with the materials and 
the sites thereof and the land immediately appertaining thereto and necessary for their 
enjoyment) belong ing to a judgement -debtor other than an agriculturist and occupied by him; ”. 
(2) in clause ( i), for the words “hundred rupees ” the words “two hundred and fifty rupees ” had 
been substituted;  
(3) after clause ( p), the following clauses had been inserted; nam ely:— 
“(q) two -thirds of the agricultural produce of the judgement -debtor;  
(r) so much of any other property of the judgement -debtor as constitutes the means of his 
livelihood and as is likely, in the opinion of the court, to yield to him an income of not less 
than two hundred and fifty rupees a month;  
(s) any loan advanced or agreed to be advanced by or on behalf of  or out of  the funds of 
the Central Government or a State Government, or any asset created from any such loan; ”. 
Explanation .—Where any such asset as is referred to in clause ( s) has been created partly from 
such loan and partly from the private funds of the judgement -debtor, that portion of the asset which 
has been created from the private funds shall, if severable from the remaining portion, be liable to 
attachment or sale.  
32. Scaling down of debts .—(1) Where, on the application of a displaced debtor under section 5 
or sub -section ( 2) of section 11, the Tribunal has determined the amount due in respect of each debt in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shall proceed to determine the paying capacity of the 
debtor.  
(2) If the paying capacity of the debtor is equal to or exceeds the aggregate sum of all the debts so 
determined (exclusive of any debt in respect of which the credito r has elected to retain the security in 
accordance with the provisions of section 16), the Tribunal shall pass a decree for the aggregate sum 
so determined, specifying the amount due to each creditor and shall allow repayment thereof in 
instalments , in acc ordance with the provisions contained in section 33, unless for reasons to be 
recorded it directs otherwise.  
(3) If the paying capacity of the debtor is less  than the aggregate sum referred to in                   
sub-section  (2), the Tribunal shall divide  the decree into two parts and provide in the first part thereof 
(hereinafter referred to as the first part of the decree) that the sum equivalent to the paying capacity 
shall, subject to the provisions contained in section 33, be realised from the assets of the debtor in 
India, and provide in the second part thereof (hereinafter referred to as the second part of the decree) 
that the balance shall be realised, subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 6) from any 
compensation which the debtor may receive:  
Provided that if no such compensation is received, the balance shall be irrecoverable.  16 
 (4) A creditor who has elected to retain the security under section 16 shall have no right to realise 
any money due to him from the assets of the debtor in Indi a, but nothing in this sub -section shall 
affect any of the rights given to him by section 16.  
(5) A creditor shall have the right at any time at least six months before the receipt by the debtor 
of compensation to apply that the whole or the balance of the  first part of the decree, in so far as any 
debt due to him is concerned, may be added to the second part of the decree, and thereupon he shall 
have no right to realise any money from the assets of the debtor in India.  
(6) For the purposes of this Act, the  amount payable from the compensation for the satisfaction of 
the second part of the decree shall be that amount as bears to the aggregate amount of all the debts in 
the second part of the decree [including therein any sum added to it under sub -section ( 5) and the sum 
determined in favour of the secured creditor in the manner specified in the proviso to clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 16] as the compensation in respect of the property of the debtor payable to 
him under the Displace Persons (Claims)  Act, 1950 ( 44 of 19 50) bears to the verified claim; and the 
balance of the compensation, if any , shall be refunded to the displaced debtor.  
(7) Every instalment paid by the displaced debtor in respect of the first part of the decree and any 
sum payable fr om the compensation in accordance with sub -section ( 6) shall be distributed rateably 
amongst the decree -holders, if more persons than one are entitled thereto:  
Provided that the secured creditor who has not elected to be treated as an un secured creditor un der 
section 1 6 shall be entitled to a prior charge on the amount payable from the compensation.  
(8) Where a displaced person receives compensation by way or exchange of property, then, 
subject to the prior charge, if any, of a creditor under section 16, th e aggregate sum payable in respect 
of the second part of the decree shall be a second charge upon the property received by way of 
exchange, but the amount of the second charge shall be that amount as bears to the total sum the same 
proportion as the value of the property received by way of exchange bears to the value of the original 
property verified and valued under the Displaced Persons (Claims) Act, 1950 ( 44 of 1950).  
(9) Where a displaced person makes a default in the payment of any instalment fixed in respect of 
the first part of the decree or does not pay the amount determined in accordance with sub -section ( 4) 
of section 16 or sub -section ( 8) of this section for which the first or the second charge may have been 
created upon the property received by w ay of exchange, the creditor may apply for the execution of 
the decree by the attachment and sale of the attachable assets of the judgement -debtor or by the sale of 
the property obtained by way of exchange upon which the charge has been created, as the cas e may 
be, and the amount realised by such execution shall be distributed rateably among the decree -holders:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  affect the rights of any chargeholders.  
(10) For the purposes of this Act, where the compe nsation is paid in cash, the amount which shall 
be available for purposes of satisfaction of the debts in the second part of the decree shall in no case 
exceed seventy -five per  cent. of the amount of such compensation; and where it is by way of 
exchange of  property, the extent of the property which shall be available for the said purposes shall in 
no case exceed seventy -five per  cent. in value of such property.  
Explanation .—In this section the expression “paying capacity ” means the aggregate of the market 
value of all the attachable assets in India of the displaced debtor plus the income which is likely to 
accrue to him for the next three years succeeding, excluding from the computation of such income a 
sum calculated at t he rate of two hundred and fifty rupees a month.  17 
 33. Matters to be taken into account in directing payment by instalments .—(1) In directing 
payment of any sums by instalments under the first part of the decree, the Tribunal shall take into 
account among ot her matters — 
(a) the present income of the displaced debtor from all sources and the income that is likely to 
accrue to him in future;  
(b) the size of the family dependent upon him for the ordinary necessaries of life and the 
expenditure likely to be incur red for the education and marriage of the children of the displaced 
person dependent upon him.  
(2) Where a displaced creditor is a minor, or a widow or a person who, by reason of any physical 
disability, is permanently disabled from earning his livelihood,  the Tribunal may direct that any 
instalment payable to him or her shall be twenty -five per cent. higher than what would otherwise have 
been directed to be paid, and where it does so, it shall also direct that the instalments of other decree -
holders shall be proportionately reduced.  
34. Variation of maintenance allowances .—Where a displaced debtor has been ordered to pay 
an allowance periodically to any person for his maintenance under any decree or order of a court, or is 
liable to pay such allowance under  any agreement voluntarily entered into, the rate at which such 
allowance is payable may be varied by the Tribunal on application made to it in his behalf, if the 
Tribunal thinks that such variation is necessary, and such variation shall have effect for su ch period as 
the Tribunal may direct, notwithstanding anything in any decree, order or agreement to the contrary.  
35. Taxation of lawyer ’s fees .—In directing payment of costs by any person as costs in respect 
of fees to any legal practitioner employed in a ny proceeding before it, the Tribunal shall be guided by 
any rules for the time being in force regulating the payment of such costs in proceedings of a similar 
nature before the ordinary civil courts, and shall not award more than one -half of what in its o pinion 
the costs before the civil court would have been.  
36. Extension of period of limitation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Limitation Act, 1908 ( 9 of 1908) or in any special or local law or in any agreement, — 
(a) any suit or other legal proceeding in respect whereof the period of limitation was extended 
by section 8, or the Displaced Persons (Institution of Suits) Act, 1948 ( 47 of 1948), and  
(b) any suit or other legal proceeding for the enforcement of a claim against an insurance 
company not falling within the provisions of clause ( a) in respect whereof the cause of action had 
arisen, whether wholly or in part, in the territories now situate  in West Pakistan and the institution 
of the suit or other legal proceeding has become barred  by reason of a condition in the contract, 
which, but for the condition, would have been governed by the provisions contained in clause ( a), 
may be instituted at any time within one year from the commencement of this Act.  
37. Curtailment of period of limit ation for execution of certain decrees .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), or in any other 
law for the time being in force, no order for the execution of a decree in respect of a debt again st a 
displaced person shall be made upon an application presented after the expiration of — 
(a) in the case of decr ees passed before the commencement of his Act, six years from such 
commencement;  
(b) in the case of decree s passed after the commencement of this Act, six years from the date 
of the decrees;  18 
 (c) in the case of decrees directing payment of money to be made at prescribed intervals or o n 
certain dates, six years from the date of default in making the payment in re spect of which the 
decree -holder seeks to have the decree executed:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as extending the limit of time for 
execution as provided in section 48 of the said Code for an application for the execution of a 
decree passed before the commencement of this Act.  
38. Sale of immovable property in execution .—(1) Where in the execution of any decree for the 
recovery of a debt against a displaced person his immovable property is sought to be sold, the court 
executing t he decree shall, in the first instance, determine the market value of the property and, if the 
value so determined is less than or equal to the amount of the decree together with the proportionate 
amount of any prior encumbrance, the court shall transfer t he property to the decree -holder.  
(2) If the value determined under sub -section ( 1) is greater than the amount of the decree together 
with the proportionate amount of any prior encumbrance, the court shall determine the portion of such 
property the value o f which is equal to the amount of the decree with the proportionate amount of 
such prior encumbrance, and may, if it is reasonable or convenient to do so, transfer that portion to the 
decree -holder.  
(3) Where any property is transferred under the provision s of this section to the decree -holder, the 
decree shall be deemed to be satisfied to the extent of the value of the property so transferred:  
Provided that if the decree -holder does not desire to take the property or, in the opinion of the 
court, it is not  reasonable or convenient to transfer the property to him, the property may be sold by 
public auction, but irrespective of the price fetched at the public auction the market value of the 
property as determined under this section (and not the amount payable  to the decree holder out of the 
sale proceeds of the public auction) shall be deemed to be the amount which has been paid to the 
decree -holder in respect of the decree, and satisfaction thereof shall be entered accordingly.  
39. Encouragement of settlement s.—If the displaced debtor and the creditor or, where there are 
more creditor than one, such number thereof as hold more than two -thirds in value of the debts due 
from the displaced debtor enter into an agreement for the adjustment of the liabilities, the Tribunal 
shall, if an application is made to it in this behalf, after giving due notice to the other creditors 
affected, adjust the remaining debts accordingly if the terms of the agreement are just and fair, and 
pass a decree accordingly.  
CHAPTER IV  
APPEALS  
40. General provisions relating to appeals .—Save as otherwise provided in section 41, an 
appeal shall lie from — 
(a) any final decree or order of the Tribunal, or  
(b) any order made in the course of execution of any decree or order of the Tribunal, which if 
passed in the course of execution of a decree or order of a civil court would be appealable under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908),  
to the High Co urt within the limits of whose jurisdiction the Tribunal is situate.  
41. Restrictions on right of appeal in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 40, where the subject -matter of the appeal relates to the amount of a debt and such amo unt on 
appeal is less than rupees five thousand, no appeal shall lie.  19 
 42. Parties to appeals .—For the purpose of any appeal under this Act, it shall be sufficient if 
only such persons as, in the opinion of the appellant, are necessary parties to the appeal  for the 
purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between them, are impleaded as respondents 
to the appeal:  
Provided that where it appears to the High Court at the hearing that any person who was a party to 
the proceeding before the Tribuna l from whose decree the appeal is preferred but who has not been 
made a party to the appeal is interested in the result of the appeal, the Court may adjourn the hearing 
to a future date to be fixed by the Court and direct that such person be made a respond ent. 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Registration of certain societies and companies under Indian law .—(1) Where the 
registered office of any society or company registered before the 15th day of August, 1947, under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 ( 21 of 1860), or the Cooperative Societies Act, 1912 ( 2 of 1912), or 
under any other law then in force in any Province for the registration of co -operative societies or the 
Indian Companies Act, 1913 ( 7 of 1913), is situated in the territory now forming part of We st 
Pakistan but a majority of its members for the time being are resident in India, or , in the case of a 
company, more than thirty -three and one -third per cent.  of its shares in value are being held by 
persons resident in India, the society, or company, as  the case may be, may apply within one year 
from the commencement of  this Act to the Registrar of Societies, Co -operative Societies or 
Companies, as the case may be, within the local limits of whose , jurisdiction the majority of the 
members of the governin g body reside or carry on business, for the recognition of the society or 
company as such in India.  
(2) The Registrar, after making such inquiry into the matter as he deems fit, may either accord 
such recognition or refuse to do so.  
(3) An appeal shall lie  from the order of the Registrar under sub -section ( 2) to the State 
Government and no order passed by the Registrar or by the State Government on appeal shall be 
called in question in any court.  
(4) Where the Registrar accords recognition to a society, co -operative society or company, he 
shall cause necessary entries thereof to be made in his register and thereupon, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in any instrument the 
society or the company, as t he case may be, shall be deemed to have been formed and registered 
under the relevant law as in force in India, and every such society or company shall among other 
matters, have the right to deman ed and receive any moneys due to it from any person residing  or 
carrying on business in India.  
44. Bar of further application in certain cases .—Subject to the other provisions contained in 
this Act, where an application made by a displaced  debtor  under section 5 or under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 11, or by a displ aced creditor under section 13 has been dismissed, no further application for 
the same purpose shall lie.  
45. Amendment of application s.—Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any application or in any 
schedule annexed thereto arising from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by 
the Tribunal, either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties.  
46. Service of notices .—Every   notice issued under this Act shall be served by registered post, 
acknowledgment due, unless the Tribunal for reasons to be recorded, directs service in any of the 20 
 other modes specified in Order V of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908           
(Act 5 of 1908).  
47. Effect of failure on the part of displaced debtor to disclose certain matters .—Where a 
displaced debtor has not mentioned in the relevant schedule to his application any debt owing by him 
or any property, movable or immo vable, belonging to him, whether such property is liable to 
attachment or not liable to attachment at all, nothing contained in this Act shall prevent — 
(a) in the case of the debt, the creditor from instituting any proceeding for the recovery 
thereof under  any law for the time being in force other than this Act; and  
(b) in the case of the property, from being attached or otherwise dealt with under any such 
law. 
48. Proceedings not to abate on death of debtor .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, no proceeding before a Tribunal shall be deemed to abate by reason merely of the death of the 
debtor who is a party to the proceeding, and  a decree may be passed notwithstanding the death and 
such decree shall have the same force and effect as if it had be en passed before the death took place:  
Provided that the Tribunal on an application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal 
representative of the deceased debtor to be made a party to the proceeding, and any person so made a 
party may make any defence a ppropriate to his character as legal representative of the deceased 
debtor:  
Provided further that nothing contained herein shall be deemed to render the legal representative 
of the deceased debtor liable to satisfy the decree except to the extent to which any of the assets of the 
deceased debtor have devolved on him.  
49. Past transactions not to be affected .—(1) If before the commencement of this Act a 
displaced debtor has satisfied or discharged any of his liabilities in any manner whatsoever, such 
transac tions shall not be affected by anything contained in this Act.  
(2) Where the Tribunal has determined the amount due in respect of any debt in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, any payments (including payments by way of interest) made by the 
displ aced debtor towards the debt prior to such determination shall be adjusted towards the amount so 
determined:  
Provided that no creditor shall be called upon to refund any amount paid to him if it is found that 
it is in excess of the amount determined as bei ng due to him under this Act.  
50.  Displaced  debtor not to be deemed insolvent .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force relating to insolvency, no displaced debtor shall be deemed to be 
insolvent or to have been adjudicated as such within the meaning of any law for the time being in 
force relating to insolvency by reason only of his applying to get his debts adjusted under this Act, 
and no petition in insolvency shall lie against a displaced debtor in respect of a ny debt incurred by 
him before the 15th day of August, 1947.  
51. Compromises or arrangements between banks and their debtors not to be reopened in 
certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no compromise or arrangement 
arrived at, wheth er before or after the commencement of this Act, between a displaced debtor and a 
bank relating to the repayment, discharge or satisfaction of any debt owing by the displaced debtor to 
the bank shall be reopened by the Tribunal, and nothing contained in th is Act shall affect any such 
compromise or arrangement:  21 
 Provided that there is in force in respect of the bank compromise or arrangement between it and 
its own creditors or any class of such creditors which has been duly sanctioned by the court under 
section 153 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 ( 7 of 1913): and  
Provided further that the particulars specified in clause ( c), (cc), (ccc), (i) (q), (r) and (s) of the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), as 
amended by section 31 of this Act, shall not be liable to attachment or sale in any proceeding against 
the displaced debtor.  
52. Communication of contents of decrees to prescribed authority .—(1) Every Tribunal shall 
communicate to the prescri bed authority, in such manner as may be prescribed , the amount of the 
prior charge declared under sub -section ( 3) of section 16, and shall also forward to it a copy of the 
decree passed on the application of a displaced debtor under section 5 or sub -sectio n (2) of section 11 
and also of any order passed under sub -section ( 5) of section 32, specifying the amount due to the 
creditor mentioned therein on the date of the order.  
(2) The prescribed authority shall scale down the debts reported to him in accordanc e with         
sub-section ( 6) of section 32 and shall, subject to any rules made in this behalf, meet the prior charge 
of the secured creditor in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of section 16 in the first instance and 
thereafter distribute the balance of t he compensation available for distribution within the meaning of 
sub-section ( 10) of section 32 rateably amongst the other decree -holder whose decrees have been 
reported to him:  
Provided that in making any such rateable distribution the prescribed authority shall have due 
regard to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 33.  
(3) The balance from the amount of the compensation payable shall be refunded to the displaced 
debtor.  
(4) Any amount paid by the prescribed authority to any decr ee-holder under the provisions of this 
section shall, to that extent, be a valid discharge of the debt due by the displaced debtor.  
53. Application of the Limitation Act .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this   Act, 
the Indian Limitation Act, 19 08 (9 of 1908) shall apply to the institution of any proceeding under this 
Act, and, for the purpose of determining and computing the period of limitation prescribed by that Act 
in relation thereto, every application made under this Act shall be deemed to be a suit for the purpose 
of that Act.  
54. Order XXXVIII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure not to apply .—
Nothing contained in Order XXXVIII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908    
(Act 5 of 1908) relating to arrest a nd attachment before judgement, shall apply to any proceeding 
under this Act.  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government or any person, in respect of anything done or intend ed to be done by 
it or him in good faith in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.  
56. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act  may also be exercised by such officer 
or authority subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by any officer or 
authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the direction.  
57. Power of Central Government to  make rules .—(1) The Central Government may b y 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  22 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in               
sub-section  (1), the rules so made may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the additional, particulars, if any, which an application under section 5, should contain;  
(b) the form in which notices under this Act may be issued;  
(c) the form in w hich applications under section 10 or section 13 may be made;  
(d) the registers which should be maintained under this Act;  
(e) the authorities required to be prescribed under this Act ; 
(f) the board or other authority to which any report under sub -section (2) of section 18 may be 
made and the maters which  such board or other authority should take into account in making its 
report.  
58. Power of State Government to make rules .—The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, makes rules providing for — 
(a) the distribution of business amongst the various Tribunals within the State;  
(b) the manner is which copies of documents produced before the Tribunals should be 
certified;  
(c) the returns to be made by the Tribunals and the authorities t o which they may be so made.  
1[58A. Laying of rules.—(1) Every rule made by the state Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the state Legislature.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the sess ion immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule thereafter have effect only in such  modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such  modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.]  
59. Repeals .—Save as otherwise provided to section 36, the Displaced Persons (Insti tution of 
Suits) Act, 1948 ( 47 of 1948) and the Displaced Persons (Legal Proceedings) Act, 1949                  
(25 of 1949) shall cease to apply to displaced persons as defined in this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 20 of 1983 s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 5 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE FINANCE COMMISSION (MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS) ACT, 1951  
_______ ___ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definition.  
3. Qualifications for appointment as, and the manner of selection of, members of the Commission.  
4. Personal interest to disqualify members . 
5. Disqualifications for being a member of the Commission.  
6. Term of office of members and eligibility for reappointment.  
7. Conditions of service and salaries and allowances of members . 
8. Procedure and powers of the Commission . 
 
  2 
 THE FINANCE CO MMISSION (MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS) ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1951  
[16th May,  1951 .] 
An Act to determine the qualifications requisite for appointment as members of the Finance 
Commission and the manner in which they shall be selected, and to prescribe their powers.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions)                   
Act, 1951.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “the Commission ” means the Finance Commission constituted by the 
President pursuant to clause ( 1) of article 280 of the Constitution.  
3. Qualifications for appointment as, and the manner of selection of, members of the 
Commission .—The Chairman of the Commission shall be s elected from among person s who have had 
experience in public affairs, and the four other members shall be selected from among person s who— 
(a) are, or have been , or are qualified to be appointed as Judges of a High Court; or  
(b) have special knowledge of t he finances and accounts of Government; or  
(c) have had wide experience in financial matters and in administration; or  
(d) have special knowledge of economies.  
4. Personal interest to disqualify members .—Before appointing a person to be a member of the 
Commission, the President shall satisfy himself that that person will have no such financial or other 
interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a member of the Commission; and the President 
shall also satisfy himself from time to time with respect to every member of the Commission that he has 
no such interest and any person who is, or whom the President proposes to appoint to be, a member of the 
Commission shall, whenever required by the President so to do, furnish to him such informati on as the 
President considers necessary for the performance by him of his duties under this section.  
5. Disqualifications for being a member of the Commission .—A person shall be disqualified for 
being appointed as, or for be ing, a member of the Commission, — 
(a) if he is of unsound mind;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he has been convicted of an offence  involving moral turpitude;  
(d) if he has such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a 
member of t he Commission.  
6. Term of office of members and eligibility for reappointment .—Every member of the 
Commission shall hold office for such period as may be specified in the order of the President appointing 
him, but shall be eligible for reappointment : 
Provi ded that he may, by letter addressed to the President, resign his office.  
7. Conditions of service and salaries and allowances of members .—1[(1)] The members of the 
Commission sh all render whole time or part -time service to the Commission as the President may in each 
case specify, and there shall be paid to the members of the Commission such fees or salaries and such 
allowances as the Central Government may, by rules made  1[by notification in the official Gazette] in this 
behalf, determine.  
  
                                                           
1. Section 7 r enumbered a s sub-section ( 1) there of by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  3 
 1[(2) Every ru le made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive session s and if, bef ore the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any modification 
in the rule or both houses agree  that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only  
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
8. Procedure and powers of the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall determine their 
procedure and in the performance of their functions shall have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) summo ning and enforcing the a ttendance of witnesses ; 
(b) requiring the production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office.  
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish information on such points or 
matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the 
consideration of the Commission  2[and any person so required shall, notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub -section ( 2) of section 54 of the Indian Income  Tax Act, 1922 or in any other law for the time being 
in force, be deemed to be legally bound to furnish such information within the meaning of section 176 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for t he purposes of sections 480 and 482 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 ( 5 of 1898).  
Explanation. —For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
Commission's jurisdiction shall be the limits of the territory of India.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Added by Act 13 of 1955, s. 2.  
--------------------------The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
4. [Omitted .] 
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  ADVISORY  COUNCIL  AND DEVELOPMENT  COUNCILS  
5. Establishment and constitution of Central Advisory Council and its functions.  
6. Establishment and constitution of Development Councils and their functions.  
7. Reports and accounts of Development Councils.  
8. Dissolution of Development Councils.  
9. Imposition of cess on scheduled industries in certain cases.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF SCHEDULED INDUSTRIES  
10. Registration of existing industrial undertakings.  
10A. Revocation of registration in certain cases.  
11. Licensing of new industrial undertakings.  
11A. Licence for producing or manufacturing new articles.  
11B. Power of Central Government to specify the requirements which shall be complied with by 
small scale industrial under takings.  
12. Revocation and amendment of licences in certain cases.  
13. Further provision for licensing of industrial undertakings in special cases.  
14. Procedure for the grant of licence or permission.  
15. Power to cause investigation to be made into sche duled industries or industrial undertakings.  
15A. Power to investigate into the affairs of a company in liquidation.  
16. Powers of Central Government on completion of investigation under section 15.  
17. [Omitted .] 
18. Power of person or body of persons app ointed under section 15 to call for assistance in any 
investigation.  
CHAPTER IIIA  
DIRECT MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS BY  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT IN 
CERTAIN CASES  
18A. Power of Central Government to assume management or control of an industrial undertaking in 
certain cases.  
18AA. Power to take over industrial undertakings without investigation under certain circumstances.  
18B. Effect of notified order under section 18A.  2 SECTIONS  
18C. Contracts in bad faith, etc., may be cancelled or varied.  
18D. No right to compensation for termination of office or contract.  
18E. Application of Act 7 of 1913.  
18F. Power of Central Government to cancel notified order under section 18A.  
 CHAPTER IIIAA  
MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS OWNED BY COMPANIES IN LIQUIDATION  
18FA. Power of Central Government to authorise, with the permission of the High Court, persons to 
take over management or control of industrial undertakings.  
CHAPTER IIIAB  
POWER TO PROVIDE RELIEF TO CERTAIN INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS  
18FB. Power of Central Government to make certain declara tions in relation to industrial 
undertakings, the management or control of which has been taken over under section 18A, 
section 18AA or section 18FA.  
CHAPTER IIIAC  
LIQUIDATION OR  RECONSTRUCTION OF COMPANIES  
18FC. Power of Central Government to call for report on the affairs and working of managed  
company . 
18FD. Decision of Central Government in relation to managed Company.  
18FE.  Provisions where Government decides to follow the course of action specified in                          
section 18FD ( 1). 
18FF. Provisions where Government decides to follow the course of action specified in                        
section 18FD ( 2). 
18FG. Preparation of inventory of assets and liabilities and list of members and creditors of managed 
company.  
18FH. Stay of suits and other proceedings.  
CHAPTER III  B 
CONTROL OF SUPPLY, DISTRIBUTION, PRICE, ETC., OF CERTAIN ARTICLES  
18G. Power to control supply, distribution, price, etc. , of certain articles.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Powers of inspection.  
20. General prohibition of taking over management or control of industrial undertakings.  
21. Certain administrative expenses of Development Councils to be paid from moneys provided by 
Parliament.  
22. Power  of the Central Government to issue directions to Development Council . 
23. Decision of Central Government final respecting certain matters.  
24. Penalties.  
24A. Penalty for false statements.  
25. Delegation of powers.  3 SECTIONS  
26. Power to issue directions.  
27. Cognizance of offences.  
28. Burden of proof in certain cases.  
29. Jurisdiction of courts . 
29A. Special provision regarding fines.  
29B. Power to exempt in special cases.  
29C. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
29D. Debts incurred by the authori sed person to have priority.  
29E. Validation  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Application of other laws not barred.  
32. [Repealed. ] 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 4 THE INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 65 OF 1951  
[31st October , 1951 .] 
 An Act to provide for the development and regulation of certain industries.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament as follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the In dustries (Develo pment 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1*** 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared  that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control  the industries specified in the First 
Schedule.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Advisory Council ” means the Central Advisory Council established under  section  5; 
3[(aa) “ancillary industrial undertaking ” means an industrial undertaking which,  in accordance 
with the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section  11B and the  requirements specified under that                         
sub-section, is entitled to be regarded as  an ancillary industrial under  taking for the purposes of this 
Act;] 
4[5[(ab)] “current assets ” means bank balances and cash and include s such other assets or 
reserves as are expected to be realised in cash or sold or consumed within a period of not more than 
twelve months in the ordinary course of business, such as , stock -in-trade, amounts due from sundry 
debtors  for sale of goods  and for services rendered, advance tax payments and  bills  receivable, but  
does not include sums credited to a provident fund, a pension fund, a gratuity fund or any other fund 
for the welfare of the employees, maintained by a company owning an industrial undertaking;  
5[(ac)] “current liabilities ” means liabilities which must be  met on demand or within a period of 
twelve months from the date they are incurred ; and includes any current liability which is suspended 
under section 18FB ;] 
(b) “Development Council ” means a Development Council established under section  6; 
6[(bb) “existing industrial undertaking ” means— 
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking pert aining to any of the industries specified in the 
First Schedule as originally enacted, an industrial under taking which was in existence on the 
commencement of  this Act or for  the establishment of which effective steps had been taken 
before such  commencement,  and 
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking pertaining to any of the industries added to 
the First  Schedule by an amendment thereof, an industrial undertaking which is in existence on 
the coming  into force of such amendment or for the es tablishment of which effective steps had 
been taken before  the coming into force of such amendment ;] 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1961, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -12-1961).  
2. 8th May, 1952, vide notification No. S.R.O. 811 (E), dated 8th May, 1952, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
15th February, 1962, vide notification No. S.R.O. 458/IDRA/1/1/62 (E), in respect of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
dated 7th February, 1962, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
5. Clauses ( aa) and ( ab) re-lettered  as clause ( ab) and ( ac) thereof by Act 4 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).   5 (c) “factory ” means any premises, including the precincts thereof, in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on or is ordinarily so  carried  on— 
(i) with the aid of power, provided that fifty or more workers ar e working or were working 
thereon on any day of the preceding twelve months ; or 
(ii) without the  aid of power, provided that  one hundred or more workers are working  or 
were working thereon on any day of the preceding twelve months and provided further that in no 
part of such premises any manufacturing process is being carried on  with  the aid of power ; 
1[(cc) “High Court ” means the High Court having jurisdiction in relation to the place at which the 
registered office of a company is situate; ] 
(d) “industrial  undertaking ” means any undertaking pertaining to a scheduled industry carried 
on in one or more factories by any person or authority including Government ; 
2[(dd) “new article ”, in relation to an industrial undertaking wh ich is registered or in respect of 
which  a licence  or permission has been issued under this  Act, means— 
(a) any article which falls under an item in the First Schedule other t han the item  under whic h 
articles   ordinarily   manufactured or produced in the  industrial undertaking at the date of 
registration or issue of the licence  or permission, as the case may be,  fall; 
(b) any article which bears a mark as defined in the Trade Marks Act,  1940  (5 of 1940 ), or 
which is the subject of a patent, if at the da te of registration  or issue of the licence or permission, as the 
case may be , the industrial  undertaking was not manufacturing or producing such article bearing 
that mark or which is the subject of that patent;]  
(e) “notified order ” means an order notified in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “owner ” in relation to an industrial undertaking  means the person who , or the authority 
which, has the  ultimate  control over the affairs of the un dertaking, and , where the said affairs are 
entrusted to a manager, managing  director or managing agent, such manager, managing director or 
managing  agent  shall  be deemed to be the owner of the undertaking ; 
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act ; 
(h) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to t his Act; 
(i) “schedule d industry ” means any of the industries specified in the First Schedule;  
3[(j) “small scale industrial undertaking ” means an industrial undertaking which, in accordance 
with the requirements specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 11B, is entitled to be regarded as a 
small scale industrial undertaking for the purposes of this Act; ] 
1[4[(k)] words and expressions used herein but not defined in this Act and defined  in the 
Companies Act,  1956  (1 of  1956 ), have the  meanings respectively  assigned to them in that Act. ] 
4. [Saving .]—Omitted  by the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment                                    
Act, 1953 (26 of 1953), s. 3 (w.e.f . 1-10-1953).  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  ADVISORY  COUNCIL  AND DEVELOPMENT  COUNCILS  
5. Establishment and constitution of Central Advisory Council and its functions .—(1) For the 
purpose of advising it on matters concerning the development and regulation of scheduled industries, the 
Central Government may, by notified order, establish a Council to be called the Central Advisory 
Council.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).   
4. Clause ( j) re-lettered as clause ( k) thereof by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).   6 (2) The Advisory Council shall consist of a Chairman and  such other members, not exceeding thirty 
in number, all of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government from among persons who are in its 
opinion capable o f representing the interests of — 
(a) owners of industrial undertakings in scheduled industries;  
(b) persons employed in industrial under takings in scheduled industries ; 
(c) consumers of goods manufactured or produced by scheduled industries;  
(d) such other class of persons including primary producers, as in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Advisory Council.  
(3) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of the Advisory Council, shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Central Government shall consult the Advisory Council in regard to — 
(a) the making of any rules, other than the first rules to be made under sub -section ( 3); 
1* * * * * 
and may consult the Advisory Council in regard to any other matter connected with the administration of 
this Act in respect of which the Central Government may consider it necessary to obtain the advice of the 
Advisory Council.  
6. Establishment and constitution of Development Councils and their functions .—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notified order establish for any scheduled industry or group of scheduled 
industries, a body of persons to be called a Development Council which shall consist of members who in 
the opinion  of the Central Government are — 
(a) persons capab le of representing the interests of owners of industrial undertakings in the 
scheduled industry or group of scheduled industries;  
(b) persons having special knowledge of matters relating to the technical or other aspects of the 
scheduled industry o r group of scheduled industries ; 
(c) persons capable of representing the interests of persons employed in industrial undertakings in 
the scheduled industry or group of scheduled industries;  
(d) persons not belonging to any of the aforesaid categories, who are capa ble of representing the 
interests of consumers of goods manufactured or produced by the scheduled industry or group of 
scheduled industries.  
(2) The number and the term of office of, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among members of a Development Council shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Development Council shall be, by virtue of this Act, a body corporate by such name as may 
be specified in the notified order establishing it and may hold and transfer property and shall by the said 
name sue and be sued.  
(4) A Development Council shall perform such functions of a kind specified in the Second Schedule 
as may be assigned to it by the Central Government and for whos e exercise by the Development Council 
it appears to the Central Government expedient to provide in order to increase the efficiency or 
productivity in the scheduled industry or group of scheduled indus tries for which the Development  
Council is established,  to improve or develop the service that such industry or group of industries renders 
or could render to the community, or to enable such industry or group of industries to render such service 
more economically.   
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 26 of 1953, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  7 (5) A Development Council shall also perform  such other functions as it may be required to perform 
by or under any other provision of this Act.  
7. Reports and accounts of Development Councils .—(1) A Development Council shall prepare and 
transmit to the Central Government and the Advisory Council, an nually, a report setting out what has 
been done in the discharge of its functions during the financial year last completed.  
(2) The report shall include a statement of the accounts of the Development Council for that year, and 
shall be transmitted as soon as accounts therefor have been audited, together with a copy of any report 
made by the auditors on the accounts.  
(3) The statement of account shall be in such form as may be prescribed, being a form which shall 
conform to the best commercial standards, and  the statement shall show the total of remuneration and 
allowances paid during the year to members and officers of the Council.  
(4) A copy of each such report of a Development Council, or made by the auditors on its accounts, 
shall be laid before Parliamen t by the Central Government.  
8. Dissolution of Development Councils .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a 
Development Council should cease to continue in being, by notified order, dissolve that Development 
Council.  
(2) On the dissoluti on of a Development Council under sub -section ( 1), the assets of the Development 
Council, after its liabilities, if any, are met therefrom, shall vest in the Central Government for the 
purposes of this Act.  
9. Imposition of cess on scheduled industries in certain cases .—(1) There may be levied and 
collected as a cess for the purposes of this Act on all goods manufactured or produced in any such 
scheduled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the Centra l Government by notified order a du ty 
of excise at such rate as may be specified in the notified order, and different rates may be specified for 
different goods or different classes of goods:  
Provided that no such rate shall in any case exceed two annas pe r cent . of the value of the goods.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section , the expression “value ” in relation to any goods shall be deemed to 
be the wholesale cash price for which such goods of the like kind and quality ar e sold or ar e capable of 
being sold for delivery at the place of manufacture and at the time of their removal therefrom, without any 
abatement or deduction whatever except trade discount and the amount of duty then payable.  
(2) The cess shall be payable at such intervals, within such time and in  such manner as may be 
prescribed, and any rules made in this behalf may provide for the grant of a rebate for prompt payment of 
the cess.  
(3) The said cess may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(4) The Central Government may ha nd over the proceeds of the cess collected under this section in 
respect of the goods manufactured or produced by any scheduled industry or group of scheduled 
industries to the Development Council established for  that industry or group of industries, and where it 
does so, the Development Council s hall utilise the said proceeds — 
(a) to promote scientific and industrial research with reference  to the scheduled industry or group 
of scheduled industries in respect of which the Develop ment Council is establish ed; 
(b) to promote improvements in design and quality with reference to the prod ucts of such industry 
or group of industries;  
(c) to provide for the training of technicians and labour in such industry or group of industries;  
(d) to meet such expenses in t he exercise of its functions and its administrative expenses as may 
be prescribed.  8 CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF SCHEDULED INDUSTRIES  
10. Registration of existing industrial undertakings .—1[(1) The owner of every existing industrial 
undertaking, not being the Central Government, shall, within such period as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to industrial undertakings generally 
or with respect to any class of them, register the undertaking in the  prescribed manner.]  
(2) The Central Government shall also cause to be registered in the same manner every existing 
industrial undertaking of which it is the owner.  
2[(3) Where an industrial undertaking is registered under this section, there shall be issu ed to the 
owner of the undertaking or the Central Government, as the case may be, a certificate of registration  
3[containing  the productive capacity of the industrial undertaking and such other particulars as may be 
prescribed].]  
4[4) The owner of every in dustrial undertaking to whom a certificate of registration has been issued 
under this section before the commencement of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 1973 (67 of 1973), shall, if the undertaking falls within such class of unde rtakings as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, produce, within such 
period as may be specified in such notification, the certificate of registration for entering therein the 
productive capacity of t he industrial undertaking and other prescribed particulars.  
(5) In specifying the productive capacity in any certificate of registration issued under sub -section ( 3), 
the Central Government shall take into consideration the productive or installed capacity  of the industrial 
undertaking as specified in the application for registration made under sub -section ( 1), the level of 
production immediately before the date on which the application for registration was made under                 
sub-section ( 1), the le vel of the highest annual production during the three years immediately preceding 
the introduction in Parliament of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 1973, the 
extent to which production during the said period was utilised for exp ort and such other factors as the 
Central Government may consider relevant including the extent of under -utilisation of capacity, if any, 
during the relevant period due to any cause.]  
5[10A. Revocation of registration in certain cases .—If the Central Government is satisfied that the 
registration of any industrial undertaking has been obtained by misrepresentation as to an essential fact or 
that any industrial undertaking has ceased to be registrable under this Act by reason of any exemption 
granted und er this Act becoming applicable thereto or that for any other reason the registration has 
become useless or ineffective and therefore requires to be revoked , the Central Government may after 
giving an opportunity to the owner of the undertaking to be heard  revoke the registration.]  
11. Licensing of new industrial undertakings .—(1) No person or authority other than the Central 
Government, shall, after the commencement of this  Act, establish any new industrial undertaking, except 
under and in accordance with a licence issued in that behalf by the Central Government:  
Provided that a Government other than the Central Government may, with the previous permission of 
the Central Government, establish a new industrial undertaking.  
(2) A licence or permission under s ub-section ( 1) may contain such conditions including, in 
particular, conditions as to the location of the undertaking and the minimum standards in respect of size to 
be provided therein as the Central Government may deem fit to impose in accordance with th e rules, if 
any, made under section 30.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. Subs. by Act 67 of 1973, s. 2, for “containing such particulars as may be prescribed” (w.e.f. 7 -2-1974).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -2-1974).  
5. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  9 1[11A. Licence for producing or manufacturing new articles .—The owner of an industrial 
undertaking not being the Central Government which is registered under section 10 or in respect of which 
a licence or permission has been issued under section 11 shall not produce or manu facture any new article 
unless— 
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking registered under section 10, he has obtained a licence 
for produ cing or manufacturing such new article; and  
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking in respect of which a licence or permission has been 
issued under section 11, he has had the existing licence or permission amended in the prescribed 
manner.]  
2[11B.  Power of Central Government to specify the requirements which shall be complied with 
by small scale industrial undertakings .—(1) The Central Government may, with a view to ascertaining 
which ancillary and small scale industrial undertakings need supportive  measures, exemptions or other 
favourable treatment under this Act to enable them to maintain their viability and str ength  and so as to be 
effective in — 
(a) promoting in a harmonious manner the industrial economy of the country and easing the 
problem of un employment, and  
(b) securing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so 
distributed as best to subserve the common good,  
specify, having regard to the factors mentioned in sub -section ( 2), by notified order, the requirements 
which shall be complied with by an industrial undertaking to enable it to be regarded, for the purposes of 
this Act, as an ancillary, or a small scale, industrial undertaking and different requirements may be so 
specified for different purpose s or with respect to industrial undertakings engaged in the manufacture or 
production of different articles:  
Provided that no industrial undertaking shall be regarded as an ancillary industrial undertaking unless 
it is, or is proposed to be, engaged in — 
(i) the manufacture of parts, components, sub -assemblies, toolings or intermediates; or  
(ii) rendering of services, or supplying or ren dering, not more than fifty per  cent. of its production 
or its total services, as the case may be, to other units for production of other articles.  
(2) The factors referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) the investment by  the industrial undertaking in — 
(i) plant and mac hinery, or  
(ii) land,  buildings, plant and machinery ; 
(b) the nature of ownership of the industrial undertakings;  
(c) the smallness of the number of the workers employed in the industrial undertaking;  
(d) the nature, cost and quality of the product of the industrial undertaking;  
(e) foreign exchange, if any, required for the import of any plant or machiner y by the industrial 
undertaking ; and  
(f) such other relevant factors as may be prescribed.  
(3) A copy of every notified order proposed to be made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediat ely following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the proposed notified order or both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the proposed notified order, the notified order shall not be made,  or, as the case may be, shall be made 
only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 26 of 1953, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).   
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).  10 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an industrial undertaking which, according 
to the law for the time being in force, fell, immediately before the commencement of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1984 (4 of 1984), under the definition of an ancillary , or 
small scale , industrial undertaking, shall, after such commencement, continue to be regarded as an 
ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertaking for the purposes of this Act until the definition aforesaid is 
altered or superseded by any notified order made under sub -section ( 1).] 
12. Revocation and amendment of licences in certain cases .—(1) If the Central Government is 
satisfied, either on a reference made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that any person or authority, to 
whom or to which, a licence has been issued under section 11, has, without reasonable cause, failed to 
establish or to take effective steps to establish the new industrial undertaking in respect of which the 
licence has been issued wit hin the time specified therefor  or within such extended time as the Central 
Government may think fit to grant in any case, it may revoke the licence.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Central Government may also vary or 
amend any licence issued under section 11:  
Provided that no such power shall be exerci sed after effective steps have been taken to establish the 
new industrial undertaking in accordance with the licence issued in this behalf.  
1[(3) The provisions of this section shall apply in relation to a licence issued under section 11A or 
where a licenc e has been amended under that section, to the amendment thereof, as they apply in relation 
to a licence issued under section 11.]  
2[13. Further provision for licensing of industrial undertakings in special cases .—(1) No owner 
of an industrial undertaking, other than the C entral Government, shall — 
(a) in the case of an industrial undertaking required to be registered under section 10 , but which 
has not been registered within the time fixed for the purpose under that section, carry on the business 
of that und ertaking after the expiry of such period, or  
(b) in the case of an industrial undertaking the registration in respect of which has been revoked 
under section 10A 3***, carry on the business of the undertaking after the revocation, or  
(c) in the case of an industrial undertaking to which the provisions of this Act did not originally 
apply but became applicable after the commencement of this Act for any reason, carry on the 
business of the undertaking after the expiry of three months from the date on which th e provisions of 
this Act became so applicable, or  
(d) effect any substantial expansion of an industrial undertaking which has been registered 4[or in 
respect of which a licence or permission has been issued], or  
(e) change the location of the whole or any part of an industrial undertaking which has been 
registered,  
except under, and in accordance with, a licence issued in that behalf by the Central Government, and , in 
the case of a State Government, except under and in accordance with the previous permissio n of the 
Central Government.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 and of section 12 shall apply, so far as may be, in 
relation to the issue of licences or permissions to any industrial undertaking referred to in this section as 
they apply in  relation to the issue of licences or permissions to a new industrial undertaking.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “substantial expansion ” means the expansion of an 
existing industrial undertaking which substantially increases the productive  capacity of the undertaking, 
or which is of such a nature as to amount virtually to a new industrial undertaking, but does not include 
any such expansion as is normal to the undertaking having regard to its nature and the circumstances 
relating to such ex pansion.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section 13 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. The words “on the ground that it had been obtained by misrepresentation as to an essential fact” omitted by                            
Act 71 of 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  11 14. Procedure for the grant of licence or permission .—Before granting any licence or permission 
under  1[section 11, section 11 A 2[section 13  or section 29 B]], the Central Government may require such 
officer or authority as it may appoint for the purpose, to make a full and complete investigation in respect 
of applications received in this behalf and report to it the result of such investigation and in making any 
such investigation, the officer or authority shall follow such procedure as may be pre scribed.  
 15. Power to cause investigation to be made into scheduled industries or industrial 
undertakings .—Where the Central Gov ernment is of the opinion that — 
(a) in respect of any scheduled industry or industri al undertaking or undertakings — 
(i) there has been, or is likely to be, a substantial fall in the volume of production in respect of 
any article or class of articles relatable to that industry or manufactured or produced in the 
industrial undertaking or undertakings, as the case may be; for which,  having regard to the 
economic conditions prevailing, there is no justification; or  
(ii) there has been, or is likely to be, a marked deterioration in the quality of any article or 
class of articles relatable to that industry or manufactured or produced in  the industrial 
undertaking or undertakings, as the case may be, which co uld have been or can be avoided ; or 
(iii) there has been or is likely to be a rise in the price of any article or class of articles 
relatable to that industry or manufactured or produ ced in the industrial undertaking or 
undertakings, as the case may be, for which there is no justification; or  
(iv) it is necessary to take any such action as is provided in this Chapter for the purpose of 
conserving any resources of national importance wh ich are utilised in the industry or the 
industrial undertaking or undertakings, as the case may be; or  
3[(b) any industrial undertaking is being managed in a manner  highly detrimental to the scheduled 
industry concerned or to public interest ;] 
the Central Government may make or cause to be made a full and complete investigation into the 
circumstances of the case by such person or body of persons as it may appoint for the purpose.  
4[15A. Power to investigate into the affairs of a company in liquidation .—(1) Where a company, 
owning an industrial undertaking  is being wound up by or under the supervision of the High Court, and 
the business of such company is not being continued, the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that 
it is necessary, in the interes ts of the general public and, in particular, in the interests of production, 
supply or distribution of articles or class of articles relatable to the concerned scheduled industry, to 
investigate into the possibility of running or re -starting the industrial  undertaking, make an application to 
the High Court praying for permission to make, or cause to be made, an investigation into such possibility 
by such person or body of persons as that Government may appoint for the purpose.  
(2) Where an application is ma de by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), the High Court 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for 
the time being in force, grant the permission prayed for.]  
16. Powers of Central Go vernment on completion of investigation under section 15 .—(1) If after 
making or causing to be made any such investigation as is referred to in section 15 the Central 
Government is satisfied that action under this section is desirable, it may issue such directions to the 
industrial undertaking or undertakings concerned as may be appropriate in the circumstances for all or 
any of the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) regulating the production of any article or class of articles by the industrial undertaking  or 
undertakings and fixing the standards of production;  
(b) requiring the industrial undertaking or undertakings to take such steps as the Central 
Government may consider necessary to stimulate the development of the industry to which the 
undertaking or  undertakings relates or relate ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 10, for “section 11 or section 13 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Subs. by Act 71 of 1956, s. 3, for “or section 13 ” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).   
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 11, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
4. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).   12 (c) prohibiting the industrial undertaking or undertakings from resorting to any act or practice 
which might reduce its or their product ion, capacity or economic value ; 
(d) controlling the prices, or regulating the distribution, of any article or class of articles which 
have been the subject -matter of investigation.  
(2) Where a case relating to any industry or industrial undertaking or undertakings is under 
investigation, the Central Government may issue at any time any direction of the nature referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) to the industrial undertaking or undertakings concerned , and any such direction shall have 
effect until it is varied or revoked by the Central Government.  
17. [Special provisions for direct control by Central Gover nment in certain cases .]—Omitted by the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act , 1953 (26 of 1953), s. 12 ( w.e.f.  1-10-1953).  
18. Power of person or body of persons appointed under section 15 to call for assistance in any 
investigation .—(1) The person or body of persons appointed to make any investigation under section 15  
1[or section 15 A] may choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge of any matter relating to 
the investigation to assist him or it in holding the investigation.  
(2) The person or body of persons so appointed shall have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence on oath (which he or it is 
hereby empowered to admi nister) and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the 
production of documents and material objects, and the person or body of persons shall be deemed to be a 
civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1898 (5 of 1898).  
2[CHAPTER IIIA  
DIRECT MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS BY  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT IN 
CERTAIN CASES  
18A. Power of Central Government to assume management or control of an industrial 
undertaking in certain cases .—(1) If the Central  Government is of opinion that — 
(a) an industrial undertaking to which directions have been issued in pursuance of section 16 has 
failed to comply with such directions, or  
(b) an industrial undertaking in respect of which an investigation has been made under section  15 
(whether or not any directions have been issued to the undertaking in pursuance of section 16), is 
being managed in a manner highly detrimental to the scheduled industry concerned or to public 
interest,  
the Central Government may, by notified order, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the 
management of the whole or any part of the undertaking or to exer cise in respect of the whole or any part 
of the undertaking such functions of control as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Any notified order issued under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect for such period not exceeding 
five years a s may be specified in th e order : 
3[Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it is expedient in the public interest that 
any such notified order should continue to have effect after the expiry of the period of five years 
aforesaid, it may from time to time issue directions for such continuance for such period, not exceeding 
two years at a time, as may be specified in the direction, so however that the total period of such 
continuance (after the expiry of the said period of five years) does not exceed  4[twelve year s]; and where 
any such direction is issued, a copy thereof shall be laid, as soon as may be, before both Houses of 
Parliament .] 
Explanation .—The power to authorise a body of persons under this section to take over the 
management of an industrial undertaking which is a company includes also a power to appoint any 
individual, firm or company to be the managing agent of the industrial undertaking on such terms and 
conditions as the Central Government may think fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 of 1965, s. 2, for the proviso (w.e.f. 29 -3-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1974, s. 2, for “ten years” (w.e.f. 29 -6-1974).   13 1[18AA. Power to take over industrial undertakings without investigation under certain 
circumstances .—(1) Without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, if, from the documentary or 
other evidence in its possession, the Central Government is satisfied, in relation to a n indust rial 
undertaking, that — 
(a) the persons in charge of such industrial undertaking have, by reckless investments or creation 
of incumbrances on the assets of the industrial undertaking, or by diversion of funds, brought about a 
situation which is likely to a ffect the production of articles manufactured or produced in the industrial 
undertaking, and that immediate action is necess ary to prevent such a situation ; or 
(b) it has been closed for a period of not less than three months (whether by reason of the 
voluntary winding  up of the company owning the industrial undertaking or for any other reason) and 
such closure is prejudicial to the concerned scheduled industry and that the financial condition of the 
company owning the industrial undertaking and the conditi on of the plant and machinery of such 
undertaking are such that it is possible to re -start the undertaking and such re -starting is necessary in 
the interests of the general public,  
it may, by a notified order, authorise any person or body of persons (herea fter referred to as the 
“authorised person ”) to take over the management of the whole or any part of the industrial undertaking 
or to exercise in respect of the whole or any part of the undertaking such functions of control as may be 
specified in the order.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 18 A shall, as far as may be, apply to a notified order 
made under sub -section ( 1) as they apply to a notified order made under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 A. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall apply to an industrial undertaking 
owned by a company which is being wound up by or under the supervision of the Court.  
(4) Where any notified order has been made under sub -section ( 1), the person or body of persons 
having for the  time being, charge of the management or control of the industrial undertaking, whether by 
or under the orders of any court or any contract, instrument or otherwise, shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in such order, contract, instrument or other arr angements forthwith make over the charge of 
management or control, as the case may be, of the industrial undertaking to the authorised person.  
(5) The provisions of sections  18B to 18 E (both inclusive) shall , as far as may be, apply to , or in 
relation to, the industrial undertaking, in respect of which a notified order has been made under sub -
section ( 1), as they apply to an industrial undertaking in relation to which a notified order has been issued 
under section 1 8A.] 
18B.  Effect of notified order under section 18 A.—(1) On the issue of a notified order under section 
18A authori sing the taking over of the management  of an industrial undertaking, — 
(a) all persons in charge of the management, including persons holding office as managers or 
directors of the in dustrial undertaking immediately before the issue of the notified order, shall be 
deemed to have vacated their office s as such;  
(b) any contract of management between the industrial undertaking and any managing agent or 
any director thereof holding office as such immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be 
deemed to have been terminated;  
(c) the managing agent, if any , appointed under section 18 A shall be deemed to have been duly 
appointed as the managing agent in pursuance of the Indian Com panies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913), and 
the memorandum and articles of association of the industrial undertaking, and the provisions of the 
said Act and of the memorandum and articles shall, subject to the other provisions contained in this 
Act, apply accordingl y, but no such managing agent shall be removed from office except with the 
previous consent of the Central Government ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  14 (d) the person or body of persons authorised under section 18 A to take over the management shall 
take all such steps as may be necessary to take into his or their custody or control all the property, 
effects and actionable claims to which the industrial undertaking is or appears to be entitled, and all 
the property and effects of the industrial undertaking shall be deemed to be in the custo dy of the 
person or, as the case may be, the body of persons as from the date of the notified order ; and  
(e) the persons, if any, authori sed under section 18 A to take over the management of an industrial 
undertaking which is a company shall be for all purposes the directors of the industrial undertaking 
duly constituted under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913), and shall alone be entitled to 
exercise all the powers of the directors of the industrial undertaking, whether such powers are derived 
from the said Act or from the memorandum or articles of association of the industrial undertaking or 
from any other source . 
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to the control of the Central Government, 
the person or body of persons  authori sed to take over the management of an industrial undertaking, shall 
take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently managing the business of the industrial 
undertaking and shall exercise such other powers and have such other duti es as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where any person or body of persons has been authori sed to exercise any functions of control in 
relation to an industrial undertaking, the undertaking shall be carried on pursuant to any directions given 
by the authori sed perso n in accordance with the provisions of the notified order, and any person having 
any functions of management in relation to the undertaking or part thereof shall comply with all such 
directions.  
(4) The person or body of persons authori sed under section  1[18A] shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the memorandum or articles of association of the industrial undertaking, exercise his or their 
functions in accordance with such directions as may be given by the Central Government so, however, 
that he or  they shall not have any power to give any other person any directions under this section 
inconsistent with the provisions of any Act or instrument determining the functions of the authority 
carrying on the undertaking except in so far as may be specifical ly provided by the notified order.  
18C.  Contracts in bad faith, etc., may be cancelled or varied .—Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in section 18 B, the person or body of persons authori sed under section 18 A to take 
over the management of an ind ustrial undertaking may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make an application to any court having jurisdiction in this behalf for the purpose of 
cancelling or varying any contract or agreement entered into, at any time before the issue of the notified 
order under section 18A, between the industrial undertaking and any other person and the court may, if 
satisfied after due inquiry that such contract or agreement had been entered into in bad faith and is 
detrimental to the interests of the industrial undertaking, make an order cancelling or varying (either 
unconditionally or subject to such co nditions as it may think fit to impose) that contract or agreement, and 
the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly.  
18D. No right to compensation for termination of office or contract .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time  being in force, no person who ceases to hold any office by reason of the 
provisions contained in clause  (a) of section 18 B, or whose contract of management is terminated by 
reason of the provisions contained in clause  (b) of that section, shall be entitle d to any compensation for 
the loss of office or for the premature termination of his contract of management:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of any such person to recover 
from the industrial undertaking moneys recover able otherwise than by way of such compensation.  
18E. Application of Act 7 of 1913 .—(1) Where the management of an industrial undertaking, being 
a company as defined in the Indian Companies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913)  is taken over by the Central 
Government, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act or in the memorandum or articles 
of association o f such undertaking, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such undertaking or any other person  to nominate 
or appoint any person to b e a director of the undertaking ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “18”  (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  15 (b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such undertaking shall be given 
effect to unless approved by the Central Government;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such undertaking or for the appointment of a receiver in 
respect thereof shall lie in any court except with the consent of the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), and to the other provisions contained          
in this Act and subject to such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the Indian Companies 
Act, 1913  (7 of 1913) , shall continue to apply to such undertaking in the same manner as it applied 
thereto before the issue of the notified order under section 18A.  
 18F. Power of Central Government to cancel notified order under section 18 A.—If at any time it 
appears to the Central Government on the app lication of the owner of the industrial undertaking or 
otherwise that the purpose of the order made under section 18 A has been fulfilled or that for any other 
reason it is not necessary that the order should remain in force, the Central Government may, by notified 
order, cancel such order and on the cancellation of any such order the management or the control, as the 
case may be, of the industrial undertaking shall vest in the owner of the undertaking.  
1[CHAPTER IIIAA  
MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS OWNED BY COMPANIES IN LIQUIDATION  
 18FA.  Power of Central Government to authorise, with the permission of the High Court, 
persons to take over management or control of industrial undertakings .—(1) If the Central 
Government is of opinion that there are possibilities of running or re -starting an industrial undertaking, in 
relation to which an investigation has been made under section 15 A, and that such industrial undertaking 
should be run or re -started, as the case may be, for maintaining or increasing the production, supply or 
distribution of articles or class of articles relatable to the scheduled industry, needed by the general 
public, that Government may make an application to the High Court pray ing for permission to appoint 
any person or body of persons to take over the management of the industrial undertaking or to exercise in 
respect of the whole or any part of the industrial undertaking such functions of control as may be 
specified in the appl ication.  
(2) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 1), the High Court shall make an order 
empowering the Central Government to authorise any person or body of persons (hereinafter referred to 
as the “authorised person ”,) to take over the manageme nt of the industrial undertaking or to exercise 
functions of control in relation to the whole or any part of the industrial undertaking (hereinafter referred 
to as the “concerned part ”) for a period not exceeding five years : 
Provided th at if the Central Go vernment is  of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of the general 
public that the authorised person should continue to manage the industrial undertaking , or continue to 
exercise functions of control in relation to the concerned part, as the case may be, after the expiry of the 
period of five years aforesaid, it may make an application to the High Court for the continuance of such 
management or functions of control, for such period , not exceeding two years at a time, as may be 
specified in the appl ication and thereupon the High Court may make an order permitting the authorised 
person to continue to manage the industrial undertaking or to exercise functions of control in relation to 
the concerned part:  
Provided further that the total period of such c ontinuance (after the expiry of the initial period of five 
years) shall not, in any case, be permitted to exceed  2[twelve years].  
(3) Where an order has been made by the High Court under sub -section ( 2), the High Court shall 
direct the Official Liquidator or any other person having, for the time being, charge of the management or 
control of the industrial undertaking, whether by or under the orders of any Court, or any contract or 
instrument or otherwise, to make over the management of such undertaking or t he concerned part, as the 
case may be, to the authorised person and thereupon the authorised person shall be deemed to be the 
Official Liquidator in respect of the industrial undertaking or the concerned part, as the case may be.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1974, s. 2, for “ten years” (w.e.f. 29 -6-1974).   16 (4) Before making over the  possession of the industrial undertaking or the concerned part to the 
authorised person, the Official Liquidator shall make a complete inventory of all the assets and liabilities 
of the industrial undertaking or the concerned part, as the case may be, in the manner specified in section 
18FG and deliver a copy of such inventory to the authorised person, who shall, after verifying the 
correctness thereof, sign on the duplicate copy thereof as evidence of the receipt of the inventory by him.  
(5) On taking ove r the management of the industrial undertaking, or on the commencement of the 
exercise of functions of control in relation to the concerned part, the authorised person shall take 
immediate steps to so run the industrial undertaking or the concerned part as  to ensure the maintenance of 
production.  
(6) The authorised person may, on such terms and conditions and subject to such limitations or 
restrictions as may be prescribed, raise any loan for the purpose of running the industrial undertaking or 
the concerne d part, and may, for that purpose, create a floating charge on the current assets of the 
industrial undertaking or the concerned part, as the case may be.  
(7) Where the authorised person is of opinion that the replacement or repair of any machinery of the 
industrial undertaking or the concerned part is necessary for the purpose of efficient running of the 
industrial undertaking or such part, he shall , on such terms and conditions and subject to such limitations 
or restrictions as may be prescribed, make suc h replacement or repair, as the case may be.  
(8) The loan obtained by the authorised person shall be recovered from the assets of the industrial 
undertaking or the concerned part, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(9) For the purpose of running the industrial undertaking, or exercising functions of control in relation 
to the concerned part, the authorised person may employ such of the former employees of the industrial 
undertaking whose services became discharged by reason of the winding  up of the company owning such 
undertaking and every such person employed by the authorised person shall be deemed to have entered 
into a fresh contract of service with the company.  
(10) The proceedings in the winding  up of the compa ny in so far as they relate to — 
(a) the industrial undertaking, the management of which has been taken over by the authorised 
person under this section, or  
(b) the concerned part in relation to which any function of control is exercised by the authorised 
person und er this section,  
shall, during the period of such management or control, remain stayed, and, in computing the period of 
limitation for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation or liability in relation to such undertaking 
or the concerned part, the period during which such proceedings remained stayed shall be excluded.  
CHAPTER IIIAB  
POWER TO PROVIDE RELIEF TO CERTAIN INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS  
18FB.  Power of Central Government to make certain declarations in relation to industrial 
undertakings, the management or control of which has been taken over under section 18 A,              
section 18 AA or section 18 FA.—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied, in relation to an 
industrial undertaking or any part thereof, the management or control of which has been taken over under 
section 18 A, whether before or after the commencement of the Industries (Developmen t and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 1971 (72 of 1971) , or under section 18AA or section 18 FA, that it is necessary so to do 
in the interests of the general public with a view to preventing fall in the volume of production of any 
scheduled industry, it may, b y notified order, declare that — 
(a) all or any of the enactments specified in the Third Schedule shall not apply or shall apply with 
such adaptations , whether by way of modification, addition or omission (which does not, however, 
affect the policy of the sa id enactments) to such industrial undertaking, as may be specified in such 
notified order, or  17 (b) the operation of all or any  of the contracts, assurances of property, agreements, settlements, 
awards, standing orders or other instruments in force (to which  such industrial undertaking or the 
company owning such undertaking is a party or which may be applicable to such industrial 
undertaking or company) immediately before the date of issue of such notified order shall remain 
suspended or that all or any of th e rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising 
thereunder before the said date, shall remain suspended or shall be enforceable with such adaptations 
and in such manner as may be specified in the notified order.  
(2) The notified order  made under sub -section ( 1) shall remain in force, in the first instance, for a 
period of one year, but the duration of such notified order may be extended from time to time by a further 
notified order by a period n ot exceeding one year at a time : 
Provided  that no such notified order shall , in any case, remain in force — 
(a) after the expiry of the period for which the management of the industrial undertaking was 
taken over under section 18 A, section 18 AA or section 18FA, or  
(b) for more than  1[eight years] in the aggregate from the date of issue of the first notified order,  
whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any notified order made under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law, agreement or instrument or a ny decree or order of a court, tribunal, 
officer or other authority or of any submission, settlement or standing order.  
(4) Any remedy for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation or liability referred to in  
clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) and suspended or modified by a notified order made under that sub -section 
shall, in accordance with the terms of the notified order, remain suspended or modified, and all 
proceedings relating thereto pending before any court, tribunal, officer or other a uthority shall 
accordingly remain stayed or be continued subject to such adaptations, so, however, that on the notifi ed 
order ceasing to have effect — 
(a) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining suspended or modified shall become 
revived and enforceable as if the not ified order had never been made ; 
(b) any proceeding so remaining stayed shall be proceeded with, subject to the provisions of any 
law which may then be in force, from the stage which had been reached when the proceedings 
became  stayed.  
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation or 
liability referred to in clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1), the period during which it or the remedy for the 
enforcement thereof remained suspended shall be excluded.  
CHAPTER IIIAC  
LIQUIDATION OR RECONSTRUCTION OF COMPANIES  
 18FC.  Power of Central Government to call for report on the affairs and working of managed 
company .—Where the management or control of an industrial undertaking has been taken over under 
section 18 A, whether before or after the commencement of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 1971 (72 of 1971), or under section 18 AA or section 1 8FA, the Central Government 
may, at any time during the continuance of such management or control, call for a report from the 
authorised person on the affairs and working of the industrial undertaking and in submitting the report the 
authorised person shal l take into account the inventory and the lists of members and creditors prepared 
under section 18 FG. 
18FD.  Decision of Central Government in relation to managed Company .—(1) If, on receipt of 
the report submitted by the authorised person, the Ce ntral Gove rnment is satisfied, — 
(a) in relation to the company owning the industrial undertaking, which is not being wound up by 
the High Court, that the financial condition and other circumstances of the company are such that it is 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1979, s. 2, for “five years” (w.e.f. 30-12-1978).  18 not in a position to meet its current liabilities out of its current assets, that Government may, if it 
considers necessary or expedient in the interests of the general public so to do, by order, decide that 
the industrial undertaking should be sold as a running concern as provided in section 18FE and 
proceeding s should simultaneously be started for the winding  up, by  the High Court, of the company ; 
(b) in relation to the company, owning the industrial undertaking, which is being wound up by the 
High Court, that its assets and liabilities are such that in the int erests of its credit ors and contri butories 
the industrial undertaking should be sold as a running concern as provided in section 18 FE, it may, by 
order , decide accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if , on receipt of the re port submitted by 
the authorised person, the Centra l Government is satisfied that — 
(a) in the interests of the general public, or  
(b) in the interests of the shareholders, or  
(c) to secure the proper management of the company owning the industrial undertak ing, 
it is necessary so to do, that Government may, by order, decide to prepare a scheme for the reconstruction 
of the company ow ning the industrial undertaking : 
Provided that no such scheme shall be prepared in relation to a company which is being wound up by 
or under the supervision of the High Court, except with the previous permission of that Court.  
(3) The powers exercisable by the Central Government under section 18F, in relation to an 
undertaking taken over under section 18A, shall also be exercisable in relation to an undertaking taken 
over under section 18AA or section 18 FA, but such powers shall not be exercised after the making of an 
order under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 2) of th is section.  
18FE.  Provisions where Government decides to follow the course of action specified in                
section 18 FD ( 1).—(1) The provisions hereinafter laid down shall apply where the Central Government 
decides that the course of action specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 1 8FD should be followed, 
namely :— 
(a) the decision of the Central Government that the course of action specified in clause  (a) of  
sub-section ( 1) section 18FD should be followed in relation to a company owning an                      
industrial undertaking shall be deemed to be a ground specified in section 433 of the Companies                   
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), on which the company ma y be wound up by the High Court ; 
(b) the authorised person shall, as soon a s may be, after the decision specified in clause  (a) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18FD has been taken by the Central Government, present an application to  
the High Court for the winding up of the company owning the industrial undertaking;  
(c) when an appl ication is made by the authorised person, under clause  (b), for the winding up, by 
the High Court, of the company owning the industrial undertaking, the Hig h Court shall order the 
winding up of the company and shall, notwithstanding anything contained in t he Companies                  
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), appoint the authorised person as the Official Liquidator in relation to such 
undertaking;  
(d) whenever the Central Government decides under clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of                            
section 18FD that the industrial undertaking should be sold as a running concern, it shall cause a copy 
of its decision to be laid before the High Court;  
(e) until the industrial undertaking referred to in clause  (a) or clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18 FD is sold or purchased in pursuance of this section, the authorised person shall continue to 
function as the Official Liquidator in relation to the said undertaking in the winding  up proceedings of                    
the company, and thereafter the O fficial Liquidator appointed by the Central Government under 
section 448 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall take over and function as the Official 
Liquidator in the said proceedings.  
(2) The authorised person shall make a report to the Central G overnment as to what should be the 
reserve price for the sale of the industrial undertaking as a running concern.  19 (3) In making a report under sub -section ( 2), the authoris ed person shall have regard to — 
(a) the financial condition of the company owning the industrial undertaking on the date on which 
the ord er under section 18 FD is made — 
(i) as disclosed in its books of account,  
(ii) as disclosed in its balance -sheet and profit and loss account during a period of five years 
imme diately preceding the said date; 
(b) the condition and nature of the plant, machinery, instruments and other equipment from the 
point of view of their suitability for profitable use in the running of the industrial undertaking;  
(c) the total amount of liability on account of secured  and unsecured debts including overdrafts, if 
any, drawn on banks, liabilities on account of terminal benefits to the employees and other 
borrowings and  other  liabilities of the company; and  
(d) other relevant factors including the factor that the industri al undertaking will be sold free from 
all incumbrances.  
(4) Notice of the reserve price determined by the authorised person shall be given in such manner as 
may be prescribed to the members and creditors of the company owning such industrial undertaking to  
make representations within a specified time to the Central Government through the authorised person 
and the Central Government shall, after considering the representations received and the report of the 
authorised person, determine the reserve price.  
(5) The authorised person shall thereafter, with the permission of the High Court, invite tenders from 
the public in such manner as may be determined by the High Court for the sale of the industrial 
undertaking as a running concern subject to the condition th at it will be sold to the person offering the 
highest price which shall not be less than the reserve price determined under sub -section ( 4): 
Provided that the High Court shall not refuse to grant such permission if it is satisfied that the 
company is not i n a position to meet its current liabilities out of its current assets.  
(6) The industrial undertaking shall be sold to the highest bidder, as a running concern, only if the 
price offered by him therefore is not less than the reserve price.  
(7) Where no of fer of price is equal to, or more than, the reserve price, the industrial undertaking shall 
be purchased by the Central Government at the reserve price.  
(8) (a) The amount realised from the sale of the industrial undertaking as a running concern together 
with any other sum which may be realised from any contributory, purchaser or any other person from 
whom any money is due to the company shall be utilised in accordance with the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 to 1956), in discharging the liabilitie s of the company and distributing the 
balance, if any, amongst the members of the company.  
(b) In other respects, the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956), relating to the winding 
up of a company by the High Court shall, as far as may be, appl y. 
(9) When an industrial undertaking is sold to any person under sub -section ( 6), or purchased by the 
Central Government under sub -section ( 7), there shall be transferred to and vested in the purchaser, free 
from all incumbrances, all such assets relating  to the industrial undertaking as are referred to in sub -clause 
(i) of claus e (a) of section 18 FG and existing at the time of the sale or purchase.  
18FF.  Provisions where Government decides to follow the course of action specified in section 
18FD ( 2).—(1) Where in any case the Central Government decides that the course of action specified in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 18FD should be followed, it shall, subject to the provisions of that sub -section, 
cause to be prepared, by the authorised person, a scheme fo r the reconstruction of the company, owning 
the industrial undertaking, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained and the authorised 
person shall submit the same for the approval of that Government.  20 (2) The scheme for the reconstruction of th e company owning the industrial undertaking may contain 
provisions for all or any of th e following matters, namely :— 
(a) the constitution, name and registered office, the capital, assets, powers, rights, interests, 
authorities and privileges, the liabiliti es, duties and obligations of the company on its reconstruction;  
(b) any change in the Board of directors, or the appointment of a new Board of directors of the 
company on its reconstruction and the authority by whom, the manner in which and the other terms 
and conditions on which, such change or appointment shall be made and in the case of appointment of 
a new Board of directors or of any director , the period for which such appointment shall be made;  
(c) the vesting of controlling interest, in the reconstructed company, in the Central Government 
either by the appointment of additional directors or by the allotment of additional shares;  
(d) the alte ration of the memorandum and articles of association of the company, on its 
reconstruction, to give effect to such reconstruction;  
(e) subject to the provisions of the scheme, the continuation by or against the company , on its 
reconstruction, of any action  or proceedings pending against the company immediately before the 
date of its reconstruction;  
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the members and creditors have in or against the 
company before its reconstruction to such extent as the Centra l Government may consider necessary 
in the interests of the general public or in the interests of the members and creditors or for the 
maintenance of the business of the company :  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorise the reduction of the 
interest or rights of any creditor (including Government) in respect of any loan or advance made by 
that creditor to the company after the date on which the management of the industrial undertaking of 
the company has been taken over un der section 18A, section 18AA, or section 18FA ; 
(g) the payment in cash or otherwise to the creditors in ful l satisfaction of their claim — 
(i) in respect of their interest or rights in or against the company before its reconstruction; or  
(ii) where their i nterest or rights in or against the company has or have been reduced under 
clause (f), in respect of such  interest, or rights as so reduced;  
(h) the allotment to the members of the company for shares held by them therein before its 
reconstruction [whether their interest in such shares has been reduced under clause  (f) or not], of 
shares in the company on its reconstruction and where it is not pos sible to allot shares to any 
members, the payment in cash to those members in fu ll satisfaction of their claim — 
(1) in respect of their interest in shares in the company before its reconstruction; or  
(2) where such interest has been reduced under clause  (f), in respect of their interest in shares 
as so reduced;  
(i) the offer by the Central Government to acquire by negotiations with the members of the 
company their respective shares on payment in cash to those members who may volunteer to sell their 
shares t o the Central Government in fu ll satisfaction of their claim — 
(1) in respect of their interest in shares in the company before its reconstruction; or  
(2) where such interest has been reduced under clause  (f), in respect of their i nterest in shares 
as so re duced ; 
(j) the conversion of any debentures issued by the company after the taking over of the 
management of the company under section 18 A or section 18 AA or section 18 FA or of any loans 
obtained by the company after that date or of any part of such debentures or loans, into shares in the 
company and the allotment of those shares to such debenture -holders o r creditors, as the case may be ; 
(k) the increase of the capital of the company by the issue of new shares and the allotment of such 
new shares to the Central Gove rnment ; 21 (l) the continuance of the services of such of the employees of the company as the Central 
Government may specify in the scheme in the company itself, on its reconstruction, on such terms 
and conditions as the Central Government thi nks fit;  
(m) notwithstanding anything contained in clause  (l), where any employees of the company 
whose services have been continued under clause  (l) have, by notice in writing given to the company 
at any time before the expiry of one month next following the date on which the scheme is sanctioned 
by the High Court, intimated their intention of not becoming employees of the company, on its 
reconstruction, the payment to such employees and to other employees whose services have not been 
continued on the reco nstruction of the company, of compensation, if any, to which they are entitled 
under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), and such pension, gratuity, provident fund and 
other retirement benefits ordinarily admissible to them under the rules or a uthorisation of the 
company immediately before the date of its reconstruction;  
(n) any other terms and conditions for the reconstruction of the company;  
(o) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as are necessary to secure that the 
reconst ruction of the company shall be fully and effectively carried out.  
(3) (a) A copy of the scheme, as approved by the Central Government, shall be sent in draft to the 
company, to the registered trade unions, if any, of which the employees of the company are  members and 
to the creditors thereof for suggestions and objections, if any, within such period as the Central 
Government may specify for this purpose.  
(b) The Central Government may make such modifications, if any, in the draft scheme as it may 
consider necessary in the light of the suggestions and objections received from the company, from the 
registered trade unions of which the employees of the company are members and from any members or 
creditors of the company.  
(4) The scheme shall thereafter be plac ed before the High Court for its sanction and the High Court, if 
satisfied that the scheme is in the interests of the general public or in the interests of the shareholders or 
for securing the proper management of the company and that the scheme is designe d to be fair and 
reasonable to the members and creditors of the company, may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to 
the company and to its members and creditors of showing cause, sanction the scheme without any 
modification or with such modifications as  it may consider necessary.  
(5) The scheme, as so sanctioned by the High Court , shall come into force on such date as that Court 
may specify in this behalf:  
Provided that different dates may be specified for different provisions of the scheme.  
(6) The sanction accorded by the High Court under sub -section ( 4) shall be conclusive evidence that 
all the requirements of this section relating to the reconstruction of the company have been complied 
with, and a copy of the sanctioned scheme certified by the Hig h Court to be a true copy thereof, shall, in 
all legal proceedings (whether original or in appeal or otherwise), be admitted as evidence to the same 
extent as the original scheme.  
(7) On and from the date of the coming into operation of the scheme or any p rovision thereof, the 
scheme or such provision shall be binding on the company and also on all the members and other 
creditors and employees of the company and on any other person having any right or liability in relation 
to the company.  
(8) On the coming into operation of the scheme or any provision thereof, the authorised person shall 
cease to function, and the management of the re constructed  company shall be assumed by the Board of 
directors as provided in the scheme.  
(9) Copies of the scheme shall be la id before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after the 
scheme has been sanctioned by the Court.  
(10) The provisions of this section and of any scheme made thereunder shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in  sections  391 to 394 A (bo th inclusive) of the Companies                  
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  22 18FG.  Preparation of inventory of assets and liabilities and list of members and creditors of 
managed company .—For the purposes of this Act, the authorised person shall, as soon as may be,                
after taking over the management of the industrial undertaking of a company under section 18A or section 
18AA or section 18FA, — 
(a) prepare a complete inventory of — 
(i) all properties, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, works, workshops, 
stores, instruments, plant, machinery, automobiles and other vehicles, stocks of materials in the 
course of production, storage or transit, raw materials, cash balan ces, cash in hand, deposits in 
bank or with any other person or body or on loan, reserve funds, investments and book debts and 
all other rights and interests arising out of such property as were immediately before the date of 
taking over of the industrial undertaking in the ownership, possession, power or control of the 
company, whether within or without India; and all books of account, registers, maps, plans, 
sections, drawings, records, documents or titles of ownership of property , and all other documents  
of whatever nature relating thereto; and  
(ii) all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind of the company including 
liability on account of terminal benefits to its employees subsisting immediately before the said 
date;  
(b) prepare separat ely a list of members, and a list of creditors, of such company as on the date of 
taking over of the management of the industrial undertaking showing separately in the list of 
creditors, the secured creditors and the unsecured creditors :  
Provided that whe re the management of the industrial undertaking of a company has been taken over 
under the said section 18 A before the commencement of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 1971 (72 of 1971), the afores aid functions shall be performed by the authorised person 
within six months from such commencement.  
18FH.  Stay of suits and other proceedings .—In the case of a company in respect of which an order 
under section 18FD has been made, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted or continued 
against the company except with the previous permission of the Central Government or any officer or 
authority authorised by that Government in this behalf. ] 
CHAPTER III  B 
CONTROL OF SUPPLY, DISTRIBUTION, PRICE, ETC., OF CERTAIN ARTICLES  
18G.  Power to control supply, distribution, price, etc. , of certain articles .—(1) The Central 
Government, so far as it appears to it to be necessary or expedient for securing the equitable distribution 
and availability at fair prices of any article or class of  articles relatable to any scheduled industry, may, 
notwithstanding anything c ontained in any other provision  of this Act, by notified order, provide of 
regulating the supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.  
(2) Without prejudice to  the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), a notified ord er 
made thereunder may provide — 
(a) for controlling the prices at which any such article or class thereof may be bought or sold;  
(b) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the distribution, transport, disposal, 
acquisition, possession, use or consumption of any such article or class thereof;  
(c) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any such article or class thereof ordinarily kept 
for sale;  
(d) for requiring any pers on manufacturing, producing or holding in stock any such article or 
class thereof to sell the whole or part of the articles so manufactured or produced during a specified 
period or to sell the whole or a part of the articles so held in stock to such person  or class of persons 
and in such circumstances a s may be specified in the order ; 23 (e) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or financial transactions relating to such 
article or class thereof which in the opinion of the authority making the order are, or if unregulated 
are likely to be , detrimental to public interest;  
(f) for requiring persons engaged in the distribution and trade and commerce in any such article or 
class thereof to mark the articles exposed or intended for sale with the sale price or to exhibit at some 
easily accessible place on the premises the price -lists of articles held for sale and also to similarly 
exhibit on the first day of every month, or at such other time as may be prescribed, a statement of the 
total quantitie s of any such articles in stock;  
(g) for collecting any information or statistics with a view to regulating or prohibiti ng any of the 
aforesaid matters ; and  
(h) for any incidental or supplementary matters, including, in particular, the grant or issue of 
licences, permits or other documents and the charging of fees therefor.  
(3) Where, in pursuance of any order made with reference to  clause  (d) of sub -section ( 2), any person 
sells any article, there shall be p aid to him the price therefor — 
(a) where the pric e can consistently with the controlled price, if any, be fixed by agreement, the 
price so agreed upon;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the controlled 
price, i f any, fixed under this section ; 
(c) where neither clause  (a) nor clause  (b) applies, the price calculated at the market rate 
prevailing in the locality at the date of sale.  
(4) No order made in exercise of any power conferred by this section shall be called in question in 
any court. 
(5) Wh ere an order purports to have been made and signed by an authority in exercise of any power 
conferred by this section, a court shall, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
presume that such order was so made by that authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “article or class of articles ” relatable to any scheduled 
industry includes any article or class of articles imported into India which is of the same nature or 
description as the article or class of articles man ufactured or produced in the scheduled industry.]  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Powers of inspection .—(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position or working of any 
industrial undertaking or for any other purpose mentioned in this Act or the rules made thereunder, any 
person authorised by the Central Government in th is behalf shall have the right — 
(a) to enter and inspect any premises;  
(b) to order the production of any document, book, register or record in the possession or power 
of any person having th e control of, or employed in connection w ith, any industrial undertaking ; and  
(c) to examine any person having the control of, or employed in connection with, any industrial 
undertaking.  
(2) Any person authori sed by the Central Government under sub -section  (1) shall be deemed to be a 
public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
 20. General prohibition of taking over management or control of industrial                       
undertakings .—After the commencement of this Act, it shall not be competent for any State Government 
or a local authority to take over the management or control of any industrial undertaking under any law 
for the time being in force which authori ses any such Government or local authority so to d o. 
21. Certain administrative expenses of Development Councils to be paid from moneys provided 
by Parliament .—Such administrative expenses as relate to the emoluments of officers of a Development 
Council who are appointed by or with the approval of the Cen tral Government, shall be defrayed out of 
moneys provided by Parliament.  24 22. Power of the Central Government to issue Directions to Development Council .—In the 
exercise of its functions under this Act, every Development Council shall be guided by such instructions 
as may be given to it by the Central Government and such instructions may include directions relating to 
the manner in which, and the purpose fo r which, any proceeds of the cess levied under section 9 which 
may have been handed over to it, shall be expanded.  
1[23. Decision of Central Government final respecting certain matters .—If, for the purposes of 
this Act, any  question arises as to whether — 
(a) there has been a substantial expansion of an industrial undertaking, or  
(b) an industrial undertaking is producing or manufacturing any new article,  
the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.]  
24. Penalties .—2[(1) If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene  or abets the contravention 
of— 
(i) the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 3[or sub -section ( 4)] of section 10 or of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 11 or of section 11 A or of sub -section ( 1) of section 13  4[or of  5[sub-sections (2), (2A), (2D), 
(2F) and ( 2G) of section 29 B]], or  
(ii) any direction issued under section 16 or sub -section ( 3) of section 18B, or  
(iii) any order made under section 18 G, or  
(iv) any rule the contravention of which is made  punishable under this section,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and, in the case of a continuing contravention, with an 
additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees fo r every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.]  
(2) If the person contravening any of the said provisions is a company , every person who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and w as responsible to , the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained i n this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(3) Notwithst anding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any  director or manager, secretary  or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or ot her association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 14, for section 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. Ins. by Act 67 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1974).  
4. Ins. by Act 71 of 1956, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1984, s. 4, for “sub -section ( 2) of section 29B” (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).  25 1[24A. Penalty for false statements .—If any person, — 
(a) when required by this Act or by any order under this Act to make any statement or furnish any 
information, makes any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material 
particular and which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to b e false or does not believe to be 
true; or  
(b) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, account, record, declaration, return or 
other document which he is required by any order made under this Act to maintain or furnish ; 
he shall be punishable wi th imprisonment which may extend to three months , or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.]  
2[25. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that any 
power exercisable by it under this Act (other than the power given to it by section 16 3[,18A, 18 AA and 
18FA]) sha ll, in relation to such matters and subject  to such conditions, if any, as ma y be specified in the 
direction, be exercisable also by such officer or authority (including in the said expressions any 
Development Council, State Government or officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government) 
as may be specified in the directi on. 
(2) Any power exercisable by a State Government by virtue of a direction under sub -section ( 1) may, 
unless otherwise provided in such direction, be exercised also by such officer or authority subordinate to 
that State Government as it may, by notified order, specify in this behalf.  
 26. Power to issue directions .—The Central Government may give directions to any State 
Government as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any 
order or direction made thereunder.  
27. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a person who is a public 
servant as defined in section 21 of the In dian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
28. Burden of proof in certain cases .—Where any person is prosecuted for contravening any order 
made under section 18 G which prohibits him from doing an act or being in possession of a thing without 
lawful authority or without  a permit, licence or other document, the burden of proving that he has such 
authority, permit, licence or other document shall be on him.  
29. Jurisdiction of courts .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), no court inferior to that 
of a Presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
(2) Any magistrate or bench of magistrates empowered, for the time being, to try in a summary way 
the offence specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 260 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 
1898),  may, on application in this behalf being made by the prosecution, try in accordance with the 
provisions contained in sections 262 to 265 of the said Code any offence which consists of a 
contravention of an order made under section 8 G. 
29A. Special provision regarding fines .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), it shall be lawful for any magistrate of the first class and 
for any Presidency magistrate to pass a sentence of fine exceeding one thousand rupees on any person 
convicted of any offence under this Act.  
29B.  Power to exempt in special cases .—4[(1)] If the Central Government is of opi nion, having 
regard to the smallness of the number of workers employed or to the amount invested in any industrial 
undertaking or to the desirability of encouraging small undertakings generally or to the stage of 
development of any scheduled industry, that  it would not be in public interest to apply all or any of the 
provisions of this Act thereto, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, subject to such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Subs. b y s. 17, ibid., for sections 25 to 29 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
3. Subs. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 7, for “and 18A” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
4. Section 29B re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 71 of 1956, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  26 conditions as it may think fit to impose, any industrial undertaking or class of industr ial undertakings or 
any scheduled industry or class of scheduled industries as it may specify in the notification from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.  
1[(2) Where any notification under sub-section ( 1) granting any exemption is cancelled, no owner of 
any industrial undertaking to which the provisions of section 10, section 11, section 11 A or clause  (d) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13 would have applied, if the notification under sub-section ( 1) had not been 
issued, shall carry on the business of the undertaking after the expiry of such period as may be specified 
in the notification cancelling the exemption except under and in accordance with a licence issued in this 
behalf by the Central Government and , in the case of a State Government, except under and in accordance 
with the previous permission of the Central Government.  
2[2A) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
Central  Government may, if it is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to it by the 
Advisory Committee constituted under sub -section ( 2B), that it is necessary so to do for the development 
and expansion of ancillary, or small scale, industrial und ertakings, by notified order, direct that any article 
or class of articles specified in the First Schedule shall, on and from such date as may be specified in the 
notified order (hereafter in this section referred to as the “date of reservation ”), be reser ved for exclusive 
production by the ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertakings (hereafter in this section referred to as 
“reserved article ”). 
(2B) The Central Government shall, with a view to determining the nature of any article or class of 
articl es that may be reserved for production by the ancillary , or small scale, industrial undertaking s, 
constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of such persons as have , in the opinion of that Government, 
the necessary expertise to give advice on the matter.  
(2C) The Advisory Committee shall, after considering the following matters, communicate its 
recommendations to  the Central Government, namely :— 
(a) the nature of any article or class of articles which may be produced economically by the 
ancillary, or small  scale, industrial undertakings;  
(b) the level of employment likely to be generated by the production of such article or class of 
articles by the ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertakings;  
(c) the possibility of encouraging and diffusing entrepren eurship in industry;  
(d) the prevention of concentration of economic power to the common detriment; and  
(e) such other matters as the Advisory Committee may think fit.  
(2D) The production of any reserved article or class of reserved articles by any industr ial undertaking 
(not being an ancillary, or small scale, industrial undertaking) which, on the date of reservation, is 
engaged in, or has taken effective steps for , the pro duction of any reserved article  or class of reserved 
articles, shall, after the comm encement of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Amendment                
Act, 1984 (4 of 1984), or, as the case may be, the date of reservation, whichever is later, be subject to 
such conditions as the Central Government may, by notified order, spec ify. 
(2E) While specifying any condition under sub -section ( 2D), the Central Government may take into 
consideration the level of production of any reserved article or class of reserved articles achieved, 
immediately before the date of reservation, by the i ndustrial undertaking referred to in sub -section ( 2D), 
and such other factors as may be relevant.  
(2F) Every person or authority, not being the Central Government, who , or which, is registered under 
section 10 or to whom, or to which, a licence has been is sued or permission has been granted under 
section 11 for the production of any article or class of articles which has, or have, been subsequently 
reserved for the ancillary, or small scale , industrial undertakings, shall produce, such registration 
certific ate, licence or permission, as the case may be, within such period as the Central Government may,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 71 of 1956, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -1-1984).   27 by notified order, specify in this behalf, and the Central Government may enter therein all or any of the 
conditions specified by it under sub -section ( 2D), including the productive capacity of the industrial 
undertakings and other prescribed particulars.  
(2G) The owner of every industrial undertaking (not being an ancillary or small scale, industrial 
undertaking) which, immediately before the commencement of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 1984 (4 of 1984), or the date of re servation, whichever is later, — 
(a) was engaged in the production of any article or class of articles, which has, or have, been 
reserved for the ancillary, or sma ll scale, industrial undertakings, or  
(b) had before such commencement or before the date of such reservation, as the case may be, 
taken effective steps for commencing the production of such reserved article or class of reserved 
articles,  
without being reg istered under section 10 or in respect of which a licence or permission has not been 
issued under section 11, shall refrain from the production of such reserved article or class of reserved 
articles, on and from the date of expiry of three months from such  commencement or from the date of 
such reservation, whichever is later.  
(2H) Every notified order made under sub -section ( 2A) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session , for a total period of thirty days, which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y 
modification in the notified order or both Houses agree that the notified order should not be made, the 
notified order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification  or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notified order. ] 
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, in relation to the issue of a licence or 
permission to any industrial undertaking  referred to in sub -section ( 2) as they apply in relation to the issue 
of a licence or permission to a new industrial undertaking. ] 
29C.  Protection of action taken under the Act .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act 
or any rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or likely 
to be caused by anything whic h is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rule or order made thereunder. ] 
 1[29D. Debts incurred by the authori sed person to have priority .—Every debt arising out of any 
loan obtained by the authorised person for carrying on the management of, or exercising function of 
control in relation to, an industrial undertaking or part thereof, the management of which has been taken 
over under section 1 8A or section 18 AA or section 18 FA,— 
(a) shall have priority over all other debts, whether secured or unsecured, incurred before the 
management of such industrial undertaking was taken over ; 
(b) shall be a preferential debt within the meaning of section 530 of the Companies                           
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),  
and such debts shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full out of the assets of the industrial 
undertakings unless such assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall abate in equal 
proportions.]  
2[29E. Validation. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authority, any power exercised, or action taken or done or purported to have been 
taken or d one, by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, shall be deemed 
to be, and shall always deemed to have been, for all purposes, as validly taken or done or omitted to be 
done, as if the amendment made to the First Schedule by th e Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2016 had been in force at all material times and no suit or claim or other proceedings 
shall be instituted, maintained or continued in any court, tribunal or other authority as such. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  28 30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government  may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the constitution of the Advisory Council and Development Councils, the term of office and 
other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling casual 
vacanc ies among members of the Advisory Council or a Development Council;  
(b) the form of the statement of account to be furnished by a Development Council ; 
(c) the intervals at which, the time within which, and the manner in which the cess leviable under 
section 9 shall be payable and the rebate for the prompt payment of such cess ; 
(d) the expenses which a Development Council may meet from the proceeds of the cess levied 
under section 9 which may have been handed over to it ; 
(e) the appointment by or with t he approval of the Central Government of any officers of a 
Development Council;  
(f) the facilities to be provided by any industrial undertaking for the tra ining of technicians and 
labour ; 
(g) the collection of any information or statistics in re spect of an y scheduled industry ; 
(h) the manner in which industrial undertakings may be registered under section 10 and the levy 
of a fee th erefor ; 
(i) the procedure for the grant or issue of licences and permissions under  1[section 11,                     
section 11A 2[section 13 or section 29 B]], the time within which such licences or permissions shall be 
granted or issued including, in particular, the publication of notices calling for applications and the 
holding of such public inquiry in relation thereto as may be necessary in the circumstances ; 
(j) the fees to be levied in respect of licences and pe rmissions issued under this Act ; 
(k) the matters which may be taken into account in the granting or issuing of licences and 
permissions, including in particular, the previous consultation by the Central Government with the 
Advisory Council or any Development Council or both in regard to the grant or issue of a ny such 
licences or permission ; 
(l) the procedure to be followed in making any investigation under this Act;  
(m) the conditions which may be included in any licences and permissions;  
(n) the conditions on which licences and permissions may be var ied or amended under section 12 ; 
(o) the maintenance of books, accounts and records relating to an industrial undertaking ; 
(p) the submission of special or periodical returns relating to an industrial undertaking by persons 
having the control of, or employed in connection with, such undertaking, and the forms in which, and 
the authorities to which, such returns and reports s hall be submitted;  
3[(pp) any matter which is to be or may be prescribed for giving effect to the provisions o f   
Chapter III AA or Chapter III AC;]  
(q) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Any rule made under this section  may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
under section 24.  
4[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1953, s. 18, for “section 11 or section 13” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1953).  
2. Subs. by Act 71 of 1956, s. 6, for “or section 13” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Sch edule, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).   29 following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
 31. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in additio n to and 
not, save as otherwise  expres sly provided in this Act, in derogation of any other Central Act for the time 
being in force, relating to any of the scheduled industries.  
32. [Amendment of section  2, Act 14 of 1947 .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                                
Act 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 17-9-1957) . 30 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 and 3( i)] 
Any industry engaged in the manufacture or production of any of the articles mentioned under each of 
the following headings or sub -headings, namely: — 
1. M ETALLURGICAL  INDUSTRIES : 
A. Ferrous : 
(1) Iron and steel ( Metal).  
(2) Ferro -alloys.  
(3) Iron and Steel castings and forgings.  
(4) Iron and Steel structurals.  
(5) Iron and Steel pipes.  
(6) Special steels  
(7) Other products of iron and steel.  
B. Non -ferrous : 
2[(1) Precious metals, including gold and silver , and their alloys ; 
(1A) Other non -ferrous metals and their alloys.]  
(2) Semi -manufactures and manufactures.  
2. F UELS : 
(1) Coal, lignite, coke and their derivatives.  
(2) Mineral oil (crude oil), motor and aviation spirit, diesel oil, kerosene oil, fuel oil, diverse 
hydrocarbon oils and their blends including synthetic fuels, lubricating oils and the like.  
(3) Fuel gases —(coal gas, natural gas and the like) . 
3. B OILERS  AND STEAM GENERATING PLANTS : 
Boilers and steam generating plants.  
4. P RIME MOVERS (O THER THAN ELECTRICAL GENERATORS) : 
(1) Steam engines and turbines.  
(2) Internal combustion engines.  
5. E LECTRICAL EQUIPMENT : 
(1) Equipment for generation, transmission and distribution of electricity including 
transformers.  
(2) Electrical motors.  
(3) Electrical fans.  
(4) Electrical lamps.  
(5) Electrical furnaces.  
(6) Electrical cables and wires.  
(7) X -ray equipment.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1956, s. 7, for the First Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 1962, s. 2, for item (1) (w.e.f. 16 -9-1962).  31 (8) Electronic equipment.  
(9) Household appliances such as  electric irons, heaters and the like.  
(10) Storage batteries.  
(11) Dry cells.  
6. T ELECOMMUNICATIONS : 
(1) Telephones.  
(2) Telegraph equipment.  
(3) Wireless communication apparatus.  
(4) Radio receivers, including amplifying and public address equipment.  
(5) Television sets.  
(6) Teleprinters.  
7. T RANSPORTATION : 
(1) Aircraft.  
(2) Ships and other vessels drawn by power.  
(3) Railway locomotives.  
(4) Railway rolling stock.  
(5) Automobiles (motor cars, buses, trucks, motor cycles, scooters and the like).  
(6) Bicyc les. 
(7) Others, such as  fork lift trucks and the like.  
8. INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY : 
A. Major items of specialised equipment used in specific industries: — 
(1) Textile machinery (such as spinning frames, carding machines, powerlooms and the 
like) including textile accessories.  
(2) Jute machinery.  
(3) Rayon machinery.  
(4) Sugar machinery.  
(5) Tea machinery.  
(6) Mining machinery.  
(7) Metallurgical machinery.  
(8) Cement machinery.  
(9) Chemical machinery.  
(10) Pharmaceutical s machinery.  
(11) Paper machinery.  
B. General items of machinery used in several industries, such as the equipment required for 
various ‘unit processes ’: 
(1) Size reduction equipment —crushers, ball mills and the like.  
(2) Conveying equipment —bucket elevators, skip hoist, cranes, derrick s and t he like.  
(3) Size separation units —screens, classifiers and the like.  32 (4) Mixers and reactors —kneading mills, turbo mixers and the like.  
(5) Filtration equipment —filter presses, rotary filters and the like.  
(6) Centrifugal machine s. 
(7) Evaporators.  
(8) Distillation equipment.  
(9) Crystallisers.  
(10) Driers.  
(11) Power driven pumps —reciprocating, centrifugal and the like.  
(12) Air and gas compressors and vacuum pipes (excluding electrical furnaces).  
(13) Refrigeration plants for industrial use.  
(14) Fire -fighting equipment and appliances including fire engines.  
C. Other items of Industrial Machinery:  
(1) Ball, roller and tapered bearings.  
(2) Speed reduction units.  
(3) Grinding wheels and abrasives.  
9. M ACHINE TOOLS : 
Machine Tools.  
10. A GRICULTURAL MACHINERY : 
(1) Tractors, harvesters and the like.  
(2) Agricultural implements.  
11. E ARTH -MOVING MACHINERY : 
Bulldozers, dumpers, scrapers, loaders, shovels, drag lines, bucket wheel excavators, road 
rollers and the like.  
12. M ISCELLANEOUS MECHANICAL AND ENG INEERING INDUSTRIES:  
(1) Plastic moulded goods.  
(2) Hand tools, small tools and the like.  
(3) Razor blades.  
1[(4) Pressure Cookers.  
(5) Cutlery.  
(6) Steel furniture.]  
13. C OMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND HOUSEHOLD EQUIPMENT : 
(1) Typewriters.  
(2) Calculating machines . 
(3) Air conditioners and refrigerators.  
(4) Vacuum cleaners.  
(5) Sewing and knitting machines.  
(6) Hurricane lanterns.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1979, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1978).  33 14. M EDICAL AND SURGICAL APPLIANCES : 
Surgical instruments —sterilisers, incubators and the like.  
15. I NDUSTRIAL INSTRUMENTS : 
(1) Water meters, steam meters, electricity meters and the like.  
(2) Indicating, recording and regulating devices for pressure, temperature, rate of flow, 
weights, levels and the like.  
(3) Weighing machines.  
16. S CIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS : 
Scientific instruments.  
17. M ATHEMATICAL, SU RVEYING AND DRAWING INSTRUMENTS : 
Mathematical, surveying and drawing instruments.  
18. F ERTILISERS : 
(1) Inorganic fertilisers.  
(2) Organic fertilisers.  
(3) Mixed fertilisers.  
19. C HEMICALS (OTHER THAN FERTILISERS) : 
(1) Inorganic heavy chemicals.  
(2) Organic heavy chemicals.  
(3) Fine chemicals including photographic chemicals.  
(4) Synthetic resins and plastics.  
(5) Paints, varnishes and enamels.  
(6) Synthetic rubbers.  
(7) Man -made fibers including regenerated cellulose -rayon, nylon and t he like.  
(8) Coke oven by -products.  
(9) Coal tar distillation products like naphthalene, anthracene and the like.  
(10) Explosives including gunpowder and safety fuses.  
(11) Insecticides, fungicides, weedicides and the like.  
(12) Textile auxiliaries.  
(13) Sizing materials including starch.  
(14) Miscellaneous chemicals.  
20. PHOTOGRAPHIC RAW FILM AND PAPER : 
(1) Cinema film.  
(2) Photographic amateur film.  
(3) Photographic printing paper.  
21. D YE-STUFFS : 
Dye-stuffs.  
22. D RUGS AND PHARMACEUTICALS : 
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals.  34 23. T EXTILES (INCLUDING THOSE DYED, PRINTED OR OTHERWISE PROCESSED) : 
(1) Made wholly or in part of cotton, including cotton yarn, hosiery and rope , 
(2) Made wholly or in part of jute, including jute twine and rope.  
(3) Made wholly or in pa rt of wool, including wool tops, woollen yarn , hosiery, carpets and 
druggets ; 
(4) Made wholly or in part of silk, including silk yarn and hosiery;  
(5) Made wholly or in part of synthetic, artificial (man -made) fibers, including yarn and 
hosiery of such fib ers. 
24. P APER AND PULP INCLUDING PAPER PRODUCTS : 
(1) Paper—writing, printing and wrapping.  
(2) Newsprint.  
(3) Paper board and straw board.  
(4) Paper for packaging (corrugated paper, Kraft paper), bags, paper containers and the like.  
(5) Pulp—wood pulp, me chanical, chemical, including dissolving pulp.  
25. SUGAR : 
Sugar . 
1[26. F ERMENTATION  INDUSTRIES  (OTHER THAN POTABLE ALCOHOL) :] 
(1) Alcohol.  
(2) Other products of fermentation industries  
27. F OOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES : 
(1) Canned fruits and fruit products.  
(2) Milk foods.  
(3) Malted foods.  
(4) Flour.  
(5) Other processed foods.  
28. V EGETABLE OILS AND VANASPATI : 
(1) Vegetable oils, including solvent extracted oils.  
(2) Vanaspati.  
29. S OAPS, COSMETICS AND TOILET PREPARATIONS : 
(1) Soaps.  
(2) Glycerine.  
(3) Cosme tics. 
(4) Perfumery  
(5) Toilet preparations.  
30. R UBBER GOODS : 
(1) Tyres and tubes.  
(2) Surgical and medic inal products including prophylactics.  
(3) Footwear.  
(4) Other rubber goods.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2016, s. 3, for “ 26. FERMENTATION INDUSTRIES :” (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  35 31. L EATHER, LEATHER GOODS AND PICKERS : 
Leather, leather goods and pickers.  
32. G LUE AND GELATIN : 
Glue and gelatin.  
33. G LASS : 
(1) Hollow ware.  
(2) Sheet and plate glass.  
(3) Optical glass.  
(4) Glass wool.  
(5) Laboratory ware.  
(6) Miscellaneous ware.  
34. C ERAMICS : 
(1) Fire bricks.  
(2) Refractories.  
(3) Furnace lining bric ks—acidic, basic and neutral.  
(4) China  ware and pottery.  
(5) Sanitary ware.  
(6) Insulators.  
(7) Tiles.  
1[8) Graphite Crucibles.]  
35. C EMENT AND GYPSUM PRODUCTS : 
(1) Portland cement.  
(2) Asbestos cement.  
(3) Insulating boards.  
(4) Gypsum boards, wall boards and the like.  
36. T IMBER PRODUCTS : 
(1) Plywood.  
(2) Hardboard, including fiber -board, chip -board and the like.  
(3) Matches.  
(4) Miscellaneous (furniture components, bobbins, shutters and the like) . 
37. D EFENCE INDUSTRIES : 
Arms and ammunition.  
38. M ISCELLANEOUS INDUSTRIES : 
2[(1)] Cigarettes.  
3[(2) Linoleum, whether felt based or jute based. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1979, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1978).  
2. Item “Cigarettes” re -numbered as item ( 1) thereof by Act 67 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1974).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -2-1974).   36 1[(3) Zip fasteners (metallic and non -metallic).  
(4) Oil Stoves.  
(5) Printing, including litho printing industry.]  
Explanation  1.—The articles specified under each of the headings Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11 and 
13 shall include their component parts and accessories.  
Explanation  2.—The articles specified under each of the headings Nos. 18, 19, 21, and 22 shall 
include the intermediates required for their manuf acture.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1979, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1978).  37 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 6( 4)] 
Functions which may be assigned to Development Councils: — 
(1) Recommending targets for production, co -ordinating production programmes and reviewing 
progress from time to time.  
(2) Suggesting  norms of efficiency with a view to eliminating waste, obtaining maximum 
production, improving quality and reducing costs.  
(3) Recommending measures for securing the fuller utilisation of the installed capacity and for 
improving the working of the industry , particularly of the less efficient units.  
(4) Promoting arrangements for better marketing and helping in the devising of a system of 
distribution and sale of the produce of the industry which would be satisfactory to the consumer.  
(5) Promoting standardi sation of products.  
(6) Assisting in the distribution of controlled materials and promoting arrangements for obtaining 
materials for the industry.  
(7) Promoting or undertaking inquiry as to materials and equipment and as to methods of 
production, managemen t and labour utilisation, including the discovery and development of new 
materials, equipment and methods and of improvements in those already in use, the assessment of the 
advantages of different alternatives and the conduct of experimental establishments  and of tests on a 
commercial scale.  
(8) Promoting the training of persons engaged or proposing engagement in the industry and their 
education in technical or artistic subjects relevant thereto.  
(9) Promoting the retaining in alternative occupations of per sonnel engaged in or retrenched from 
the industry.  
(10) Promoting or undertaking scientific and industrial research, research into matters affecting 
industrial psychology and research into matters relating to production and to the consumption or use 
of goo ds and services supplied by the industry.  
(11) Promoting, improvements and standardisation of accounting and costing methods and 
practice.  
(12) Promoting or undertaking the collection and formation of statistics.  
(13) Investigating possibilities of decentr alising stages and processes of production with a view to 
encouraging the growth of allied small scale and cottage industries.  
(14) Promoting the adoption of measures for increasing the productivity of labour, including 
measures for securing safer and bett er working conditions and the provision and improvement of 
amenities and incentives for workers.  
(15) Advising on any matters relating to the industry (other than remuneration and conditions of 
employment) as to which the Central Government may request the  Development Council to advise 
and undertaking inquiries for the purpose of enabling the Development Council so to advise, and  
(16) Undertaking arrangements for making available to the industry information obtained and for 
advising on matters with which th e Development Councils are concerned in the exercise of any of 
their functions.  38 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 18 -FB) 
1. The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946).  
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
3. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948).]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 1971, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1971).  
--------------------------The Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951--------------------------
 
1 
 THE JALLIANWALA BAGH NATIONAL MEMORIAL ACT, 1951  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions . 
3. Objects of the Trust . 
4. Trustees of the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial . 
5. Term of office of nominated Trustees . 
6. Property vested in Trustees . 
7. Power of Trustees to appoint committee of management . 
7A. Power to approve audited accounts.  
8. Validity of acts of Trustees not to be questioned by reason of vacancy, etc.  
8A. Accounts and audit.  
9. Power to make rules.  
10. Power of Trustees to make regulations . 
10A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
   
2 
 THE JALLIANWALA BAGH NATIONAL MEMORIAL ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1951  
[1st May , 1951 .] 
An Act to provide for the erection and management of a National Memorial to perpetuate the 
memory of those killed or wounded on the 13th day of April, 1919, in Jallianwala  Bagh . 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Jallianwala  Bagh National Memorial Act, 1951.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Memorial ” means the Jallianwala  Bagh National Memorial to perpetuate the memory of those 
killed or wounded on  the 13th day of April, 1919, on the site known as the Jallianwala  Bagh, Amritsar;  
(b) “Trust” means the Trust for the erection and management of the Memorial.  
(c) “Trustees” means the Trustees of the Jallianwala  Bagh National Memorial.  
3. Objects of the Trust .—The objects of the Trust shall be — 
(a) to erect and maintain suitable buildings, structures and parks at or near the site of the 
Jallianwala  Bagh  in the city of Amritsar, to perpetuate the memory of those who were killed or 
wounded on the 13th day of April, 1919, on the said site;  
(b) to acquire lands, buildings and other properties for the purposes of the Trust; and  
(c) to raise and receive funds for the purposes of the Memorial.  
4. Trustees of the Jallianwala  Bagh National Memorial .—1[(1) The Trustees of the Jallianwala  
Bagh  National  Memorial shall be the following, namely: — 
(a) the Prime Minister —Chairperson,  
(b) the President of the Indian National Congress,  
(c) the Minister in -charge of Culture,  
(d) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok  Sabha,  
(e) the Governor of the State of Punjab,  
(f) the Chief Minister of the State of Punjab, and  
(g) three  eminent persons to be nominated by the Central Government.]  
(2) The Trustees shall be  a body corporate with perpetual succession by the name of the “Trustees o f the 
Jallianwala  Bagh National Memorial ” and a common seal, and in that name shall sue and be sued, and shall 
have power acquire and hold property, to enter into contracts and to do all acts necessary for, and consistent 
with, the purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 51 of 2006, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 21 -12-2006).   
3 
 1[5. Term of office of nominated Trustees.—The Trustees nominated under clause (g) of                           
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 shall be Trustees for a period of five years, and shall be eligible for 
renomination.]  
6. Property vested in Trustees .—All the property and funds set out in the Schedule to this Act and 
all other property, whether movable or immovable which may hereafter be given, bequeathed or 
otherwise transferred for the purposes of the Memorial or acquired for the said purposes shall vest  in the 
Trustees.  
7. Power of Trustees to appoint committee of management .—(1) For the purposes of managing 
the affairs of the Trust, the Trustees may, by resolution passed at a meeting, appoint a committee of 
management, and entrust to it such powers, duties and functions, under such directions and limitations, as 
may be defined by such resolution.  
(2) The Trustees may appoint any person as members of the committee  of management, whether such 
person are Trustees or not, and may, from time  to time, vary or rescind any resolution passed by it under 
this section.  
2[7A. Power to approve audited accounts .—The Trust shall meet at least once in a year to approve 
the audited accounts of the Trust and shall transact such other business as may be considered necess ary.] 
8. Validity of acts of Trustees not to be questioned by reason of vacancy , etc.—No act of the 
Trustees shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution 
of, the body of Trustees.  
3[8A. Accounts and audit.—(1) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Trust to the Comptroller and Au ditor -General.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Trust under this Act shall, have the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as th e Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the 
office of the Trust.  
(3) The accounts of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General or any other person 
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Trust and the Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as 
soon as may be, after it is received, before each House of Parliament.]  
9. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  to carry out the objects of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which funds belonging to the Memorial shall be kept deposited or invested;  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2006, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 21-12-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 4,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -12-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid.(w.e.f. 21 -12-2006).   
4 
 (b) the mode  of authentication of orders for payment of money by the Trustees;  
(c) the form in which accounts shall be kept by the Trustees and  the audit and publication of such 
accounts ; 
(d) the laying out, erection, improvement, maintenance and management of the Memorial and the 
care and custody of the properties thereof.  
(e) the conditions under which the public shall have access to the Memorial or particular parts 
thereof and the regulation of  the conduct  of persons entering the precincts of the Memorial;  
(f) the preservation of, and the prevention of injury to or interference with, any property vested in 
the Trustees and the prevention of person s from trespassing into any particular part of th e Memorial.  
1[(2A) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not b e made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. ] 
(3) A rule made under this section made provide that a breach of any rule made under clauses ( e) and 
(f) of sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable with  fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
10. Power of Trustees to make regulations .—The Trustees may make regulations consistent with 
this Act for all or any of the following purposes , namely:— 
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall be convened the quorum for the transaction 
of any business thereat and the procedure at such meetings;  
(b) the manner in which a majority decision of the Trustees shall be obtained by circulation to the 
Trustees of the matter requiring decision;  
(c) the term of office of members of the committee of management their powers and duties, and the 
circumstances in whi ch and the conditions subject to which such powers and duties may be exercised;  
(d) the appointment of such officers and servants as may be necessary for the purposes of the Trust, 
and their terms and conditions of service.  
2[10A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule or regulation made under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule o r regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previously done under 
that rule or regulation.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 2006, s. 6, for section 10 (w.e.f. 21 -12-2006).   
5 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 6)  
[Properties vested in T rustees at commencement of Act]  
PART 1—IMMOVABLE    PROPERTIES  
1.The piece of land known as the Jallianwala  Bagh, Amritsar, measuring 49 kanals 17 marlas, that is 
to say, 6  37/160  acres or thereabouts.  
2. Two pieces of land, one measuring 49  1/2  by 31 feet or thereabouts and the other 35 by 9  1/4 yards 
on the east and by 8 yards on the west or thereabouts, and conveyed to the then Trustees of the M emorial 
by a deed of sale, registered on the 20th September, 1920 as No . 5960, Bahi No.1, Volume No.1572, 
pages 19 to 46 of the office of the Registrar, Amritsar.  
3. All the buildings and other structures standing on the lands referred to in items1 and 2 a bove.  
PART II—MOVABLE    PROPERTIES  
Item 
No. Description of investments   Amou nt  
  Rs. A. P. 
1. Government  of Madras, 3% loan, 1952, No. D.H. 000034   .    .   . .  25,000  0 0 
2. Government  of Madras, 3% loan, 1952, No. D.H. 000035   .    .   . .  25,000  0 0 
3. Fixed Deposit in the Central  Bank of India Ltd. , Amritsar   .    .   . .  1,10,000  0 0 
4. Interest accrued on Item 3 u pto 14 th November, 1950   .    .   . .  2,750  0 0 
5. In current account in the Central Bank of India Ltd., Amritsar   .     6,586  1 1 
6. Government of Utter Pradesh loan, 1960, purchased through the 
Punjab National Bank, Amritsar     .    .   .   .  49,675  1 4 
7. Amount placed in sundries in the Punjab National Bank, Amritsar  4,700  12 8 
8. Fixed Deposit in the Bank of Nagpur Ltd., Wardah, under receipt 
No. 00518    .    .   .      .  1,13,270  5 6 
9. Interest Item 8  above    .    .   .      .  3,681  4 0 
10. Fixed Deposit in the Bank of Nagpur , Ltd., Wardah, under receipt 
No. 00519    .    .   .      .  40,336  13 0 
11. Interest on Item 10 above    .    .   .    .  1,310  14 0 
12. In current account with Messrs. Bachharaj and Co., Ltd., Bombay        9,573  6 0 
13. Cash in hand on 24 th November, 1950   .    .   .      .  1,872  9 9 
14. Moneys due from Government by way of refund of excess income -
tax   .    .   .      .  Amount not known.  
 
 
________  
--------------------------The Marking of Heavy Packages Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE MARKING OF HEAVY PACKAGES ACT, 1951  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Obligation to mark weight on heavy packages . 
4. Inspectors.  
5. Powers of inspectors . 
6. Penalties.  
7. Offences by companies . 
8. Cognizance of offences . 
9. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
10. Power to make rules . 
  2 
 THE MARKING OF HEAVY PACKAGES ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1951  
[25th June , 1951 .] 
An Act to give effect to the International Convention drawn up in Geneva on the 30th day of 
May, 1929, for the marking of weight on heavy packages transported by sea or inland water -
ways.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act  may be called the Marking of Heavy 
Packages Act, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such dat e1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “heavy   package”  means a   package   or  other   object weighing   not  less that one metric ton, 
which is   equal   to  one thousand   kilogrammes or   2204.6 standard pounds or   26.8  standard maunds;  
(b) “inland  water -way” means any canal,   river,   lake  or other navigable w ater in India.  
3. Obligation to mark weight on heavy packages .—Every person consigning a heavy package for 
transport by sea or inland water -way  from   any  place in India shall   have   marked   thereon plainly , 
durably   and  conspicuously   the  gross   weight   of   the packages:  
Provided that in cases or circumstances specified by  rules made  under   this  Act where it 
is  difficult   to  determine   the correct weight, only the approximate weight may  be so marked.  
2[4. Inspectors .—(1) The Central   Governmen t may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act and assign to each of them one or 
more areas to be specified in the notification, or to two or more of them the same area to  be so specified.  
(2) Every inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
5. Powers of inspectors .—Subject to any rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, an 
inspector a ppointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 may — 
(a) enter, with such assistants as he considers necessary, and inspect any place or vessel and 
examine any packages found therein;  
(b) if, on such examination, any heavy package is found not to have been marked in accordance 
with the provisions of section 3, direct that the package shall not be transported by sea or inland 
waterway until it has been marked in accordance with those provisions:  
                                                           
1. 1st November , 195 1, vide Notification No. S. R.O. 1461 , dated 15th September , 195 1, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1961 , s. 2, for section s 4 and 5.  
 3 
 Provided that, instead of issuing any direction as aforesaid, th e inspector may himself cause the 
package to be marked in accordance with the provisions of section 3; and in any such case, the expenses 
incurred by him for such marking shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue from the person 
consig ning the pack age for transport.  
6. Penalties .—(1) If any person contravenes — 
(a) the provisions of section 3, or  
(b) any direction given by an inspector under clause ( b) of section 5,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) If any person wilfully obstructs an inspector in the exercise of his powers under this Act, he shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
7. Offences by companies .—(1) Where the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punis hed accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of  such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section   (1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the  offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceed  against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
8. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate 
of the first class shall try any offence under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint in writing 
made  by an inspector within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed.  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good fa ith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
10. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules providing for — 
(a) the  conditions as to the manner of marking of heavy packages, the manner of their packing 
and the type of covering to be used;  
(b) the cases or circumstances in which the approximate weight of heavy packages instead of 
their correct weight may be marked;  4 
 (c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided for by rules.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may b e comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule shou ld not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
_________  
--------------------------The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
  
THE PART B STATES (LAWS) ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1951  
[22nd February, 1951 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain laws to Part B States.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called The Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force.   
3. Extension and amendment of certain Acts and Ordinances .—The Acts and Ordinances 
specified in the Schedule shall be amended in the manner and to the extent therein specified, and the 
territorial extent of each of the said Acts and Ordinances shall, as from  the appointed day and in so far as 
any of the said Acts or Ordinances or any of the provisions contained therein relates to matters with 
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws, be as stated in the extent clause thereof as so 
amended.  
4. Constr uction of references to laws not in force in Part B States .—Any reference in any Act or 
Ordinance specified in the Schedule to a law which is not in a Part B State shall, in relation to that State, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if a ny, in force in that State.  
5. Construction of references to authorities where new authorities have been constituted .—Any 
reference, by whatever form of words, in any law for the time being in force in a Part B State to any 
authority competent at the date of the passing of that law to exercise any powers or discharge any 
functions in that State shall, where a corresponding new authority has been constituted by or under any 
Act or Ordinance now extended to that State, have effect as if it were a reference to  that new authority.  
6. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the appointed day,  there is in force in any Part B 
State any law corresponding to any of the Acts or Ordinances now extended to that State, that law shall, 
save as otherwise expressly provi ded in  2[this Act], stand repealed:  
Provided that, the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder, or  
(b) any  right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repea led, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proce eding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anythin g done or any action taken (including 
any appointment or delegation made, notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation, 
form, bye -law or scheme framed, certificate obtained, patent, permit or licence granted or registration 
effect ed) under any such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1951, vide notification No. S. R.O. 3 12, dated 7th March , 195 1, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,        
Part II, sec. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “the Act” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1952).  2 
 provision of the Act or Ordinance as now extended to that State, and shall continue to be in force 
accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any ac tion taken under the said Act or 
Ordinance.  
7. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect in any Part B State to 
the provisions of any Act or Ordinance now extended to that State, the Central Government may, by order 
notifi ed in the Official Gazette , make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it to be 
necessary for the removal of the difficulty.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such notified 
order may — 
(a) specify the corresponding authorities within the meaning of section 5;  
(b) provide for the transfer of any matter pending before any Court, tribunal or other authority, 
immediately before the appointed day, to any corresponding Court, tribunal or other authority for 
disposal;  
(c) specify the areas or circumstances in which, or the extent to which or conditions subject to 
which, anything done or any action taken (including any of the matters specified in the second 
proviso to section ( 6) under any law rep ealed by that section shall be recognised or given effect to 
under the corresponding provision of the Act or Ordinance as now extended.  
 
  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
ACTS  
The Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850  
(21 of 1850)  
Long title and preamble. —For “the territories subject to the Government of the East India Company ” 
substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For “the territories subject to the Government of the East India Company ” substitute 
“India ” and for “in the Courts of the East India Company and in the Courts established by Royal Charter 
within the said territories ” substitute “in any Court ”. 
After section 1, add the following section, namely: — 
“2. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850.  
(2) It extends  to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
The Indian Fatal Accidents Act,  1855  
(13 of 1855)  
Renumber section 1 as section 1A and before section 1A, as so renumbered, insert the following, 
namely: — 
“1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
The Indian Penal Code  
(Act 45 of 1860)  
Throughout the Code, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Preamble. —For “the whole of India except Part B States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 17. —Omit “Part A ”. 
For section 18 , substitute: — 
„18. India. —“India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
Section 75. —Omit “or” at the end of clause (a) and omit clause (b).  
Section 124. —For “Governor ” wherever it occurs substitute “Governor or Rajpramukh ”. 
Section 131. —In the Explanation , for “the Indian Army Act, 1911 ” and “the Indian Air Force        
Act, 1932 ” substitute “the Army Act, 1950 ” and “the Air Force Act, 1950 ”, respectively.  
Section 139. —For “the Indian Army Act, 1911 ” and “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932 ” substitute “the 
Army Act, 1950 ” and “the Air Force Act, 1950 ”, respectively.  
Section 216. —Omit “or under the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881 ”. 
Section 294A .—For “a lottery organized by the Central Government or the Government of a Part A 
State or a Part B State ” substitute “a State lottery ”. 
Section 366B. —After “any country outside India ” insert “or from the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” 
and omit the words beginning with “and whoever with such intent or knowledge ” and ending with “or by 
another person ”. 
  4 
 The Press and Registra tion of Books Act,  1867  
(25 of 1867)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Long title and preamble. —For “the whole of India except Part B States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —(1) After  the definition of “editor ”, insert: — 
„ “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir ‟. 
(2) Omit the definition of “States ”. 
The Indian Divorce Act,  1869  
(4 of 1869)  
Long title. —Omit “in India ”. 
Section 2.  —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —(1) In item (a) of clause (1), for “Part A State ” substitue “Part A State or Part B State ”. 
(2) In item (b), for “Ajmer ” substitute “Ajmer and Vindhya Pradesh ”. 
(3) After item (f), in sert the following, namely: — 
“(ff) in relation to Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam ”. 
Section 17A .—For “The State Government of any State within which any High Court established by 
Letters Patent exercises jurisdiction ” substitute “The Government of the State within which any High 
Court exercises jurisdiction ” and omit the second paragraph.  
The Indian Evidence Act,  1872  
(1 of 1872)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —For the definitions of “State ” and “States ” substitute: — 
„ “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir ‟. 
Section 37 .—For “an Act of the Legislature of a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute “a            
State Act ”. 
Section 79. —For “in a Part B State ” substitute “in the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 86. —(1) In the first paragraph — 
(a) omit “a Part B State or of ”; 
(b) for “such Part B State or country ” substitute “such country ”; 
(c) for “that State or country ” substitute “that country.  
(2) In the second paragraph, omit “a Part B State or ” and for “in and for that Part B State or country ” 
substitute “in and for the country ”. 
The Special Marriage Act,  1872  
(3 of 1872)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Indian  Contract Act,  1872  
(9 of 1872)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and K ashmir ”. 5 
 Section 10. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Indi an Christian Marriage Act,  1872  
(15 of 1872)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section  (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the States of    
Travancore -Cochin, Manipur and  Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
1[After the definition of „church ‟, insert the following definition]: — 
„ “India ” means the territory comprised in the States to which this Act extends ‟. 
Section 5. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 27 .—For “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute “India ”. 
The Government Savings Banks Act,  1873  
(5 of 1873)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
After section 1, insert the following as section 2: — 
“2. Act not to apply to deposits in Anchal Savings Bank. —This Act shall not apply to any 
deposits made in the Anchal Savings Bank of the State of Travancore -Cochin, and, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, any law in force in the said State imme diately before the 
commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, relating to such deposits, shall continue to 
apply thereto as if that law had not been repealed. ” 
The Indian Oaths Act,  1873  
(10 of 1873)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the States of Manipur and Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 4. —In clause (2) of the proviso, omit “in Part A States and Part C States ”. 
The Foreign Recruiting Act,  1874  
(4 of 1874)  
Long title, preamble and section 3. —For “Part A  States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —Omit “except Part B States ”. 
The Indian Majority Act,  1875  
(9 of 1875)  
Preamble and section 3. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 4. —In Illustrations (a) and (b), for “a domicile in a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute 
“and Indian domicile ” and in all the Illustrations for “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitu te “India ”. 
The Indian Law Reports Act,  1875  
(18 of 1875)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —For “decided on or after the said day by any High Court for a Part A State ” substitute 
“decided by any High Court for a Part A State or a Part B State ”. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “For the definition of “India” substitu te” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1952).   6 
 The Specific Relief Act,  1877  
(1 of 1877)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Ind ian Arms Act,  1878  
(11 of 1878)  
Section 1. —Omit “except Pa rt B States ”. 
Section 4. —In the definition of “military stores ”, for “the States ” substitute “India ” and omit the 
definition of “States ”. 
Sections  6, 10, 27 and 29.  —for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 11. —For “the States ”, where they first occur, substitute “India ”, and omit “or between the 
States and any other part of India ”. 
Section 18. —For “States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Legal Practitioners Act,  1879  
(18 of 1879)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Sections 4 and 5. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which this Act 
extends ”. 
The Kazis Act, 1880  
(12 of 1880)  
Section 1 .—For “But the Government of any other Part A State or the Governmen t of a Part C State ” 
substitute “But the Government of any other State ”. 
The Negotiable Instruments Act,  1881  
(26 of 1881)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —For the definitions of “State ” and “States ” substitute — 
„ “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.‟  
Sections 20, 136 and 137. —For “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
1*                                   *                                 *                                  *                                 * 
Section  134 and 135. —In the Illustrations, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 137. —For “Part B State ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Trusts Act, 1882  
(2 of 1882)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 20. —(1) In clause (d), for “Act of the Legislature of a Part A State ” substitute “State Act ”. 
(2) In clause (e), for “a Part A  State or a Part C State ” substitute “any part of the territories to which 
this Act extends ”. 
 
 
                                                           
1. Direction relating to s. 75B omitted by Act 36 of 195 7, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 1 7-9-1957). 7 
  
The Transfe r of Property Act,  1882  
(4 of 1882)  
Section 1. —In the fourth paragraph, for “Bombay, Punjab or Delhi ” substitute “the said States ”.  
Section 3. —In the definition of “registered ”, for “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute “any 
State to which this Act extends ”. 
Section 52. —For “within the limits of Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “within the limits of 
India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
The Powers -of-Attorney Act,  1882  
(7 of 1882)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Explosives Act,  1884  
(4 of 1884)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
Sections 4 and 5. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Telegraph Act,  1885  
(13 of 1885)  
Section 1. —Omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
Section 3. —Omit clause (8).  
Omit section 35.  
The Police Act, 1888  
(3 of 1888)  
Sectio n 1.—For sub -section (2), substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and to the extent to 
which its provisions relate to the extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police 
force belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State, it extends also to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. ” 
Omit section 1A.  
The Indian Merchandise Marks Act,  1889  
(4 of 1889)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —For clause (6), substitute: — 
„(6) “India ” means the territory of India, excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
The Charitab le Endowments Act,  1890  
(6 of 1890)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 8 
 The Guardians and Wards Act,  1890  
(8 of 1890)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —For “Part A States and Part C States ”, where they first occ ur, substitute “any State to 
which this Act extends ” and omit “established in Part A States and Part C States ”. 
Section 4. —Omit claus e (7).  
Omit section 5.  
Section 6. —Omit “who is not an European British subject ”. 
Section 11. —For “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute “any State to which this Act extends ”. 
Section 15 .—Omit sub -sections (2) and (3).  
Section 17 .—Omit sub -section (4). 
Section 19. —In clause (b) omit “subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to European British 
subjects ”. 
The Indian Railways Act,  1890  
(9 of 1890)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
Section 47. —In sub-section (1), for “any State Government or the Government of any Part B State ” 
substitute “or a State Government ”. 
Section 59. —In sub -section (5), for “the Indian Territorial Force or of the Auxiliary Force, India ” 
substitute “the Territorial Army or o f the National Cadet Corps ”. 
Omit section 144.  
The Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891  
(18 of 1891)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Partition Act, 1893  
(4 of 1893)  
Section 1 —In sub-section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Livestock Importation Act,  1898  
(9 of 1898)  
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to all Part A States, Part C States and the States of Saurashtra and Travancore -
Cochin. ” 
The Indian Tolls (Army and A ir Force) Act,  1901  
(2 of 1901)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2) omit “except Part B States ”. 
  9 
 Section 2. —(1) For clause (d), substitute: — 
„(d) the expression “the regular forces ” means “the regular Army ” as defined in clause (xxi) of 
section 3 of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), and includes the “Air Force ” as defined in clause (iv) 
of section 4 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950); ‟. 
(2) In clause (f), for “the Auxiliary Force (India) or the Indian Territorial Force ” substitute “the 
Territorial Army or the National Cadet Corps ”. 
(3) In clause (g), for “Indian Regular Reserve of Officers ” substitute “Regular Reserve of Officers ”. 
Section 3 .—(1) In clause (b), for “the Auxiliary Force (India) or of the Indian Territorial Force ” 
substitute “the Territorial Army or of the National Cadet Corps ”. 
(2) For clause (d) (ii), substitute: — 
“(ii) the Territorial Army or the National Cadet Corps ” 
(3) For “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitut e “India ”. 
The Ancient Monuments Pre servation Act,  1904  
(7 of 1904)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 17. —For “the territories for the time being comprised within Part A States and Part C States ” 
substitute “the territories to which this Act extends ”. 
The Indian Coinag e Act,  1906  
(3 of 1906)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 23. —For “the St ates” substitute “the territories to which this Act extends ”. 
After section 23, insert the following, namely: — 
“24. Temporary provisions with respect to certain Part B States' coins. —Notwithstanding 
anything in section 6 of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 19 51, coins of such description as at the 
commencement of the said Act were in circulation as legal tender in any Part B State shall continue to 
be legal tender in that State to the like extent and subject to the same conditions as immediately 
before the com mencement of the said Act for such period, not exceeding two years from such 
commencement, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine. ” 
The Explosive S ubstances Act,  1908  
(6 of 1908)  
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), omit “except Part B States ” and for “wherever they may be ” substitute 
“outside India ”. 
Section 4. —For “a Part A or a Part C State ” and “any such State ” substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Limitation Act,  1908  
(9 of 1908)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(1) In clause (6), for “any Part B State ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
  10 
 (2) For clause (9A) substitute: — 
„(9A) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
After section 29, insert: — 
“30. Provision for States for which the period prescribed is s horter than that prescribed by any 
law previously in force in a Part B State. —Notwithstanding anything herein contained, any suit for 
which the period of limitation prescribed by this act is shorter than the period of limitation prescribed 
by any law corre sponding to this Act in force in a Part B State which is repealed by the Part B States 
(Laws) Act, 1951, may be instituted within the period of two years next after the coming into force of 
this Act in that Part B State or within the period prescribed for such suit by such corresponding law, 
whichever period expires first. ” 
The Indian Ports Act, 1908  
(15 of 1908)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the State s” substitute “India ”. 
Section 3. —Omit clause (10).  
The Indian Registration  Act, 1908  
(16 of 1908)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For sub -section (2), substitute the following, namely: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kas hmir:  
Provided that the State Government may exclude any districts or tracts of country from its 
operation. ” 
Section 2. —(1) After clause (6), insert: —„(6A) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
(2) Omit clause (11).  
Section 33. —(1) In clause (b) of sub -section (1), for “resides in any other part of the States ” substitute 
“resides in any part of India in which this Act is not in force ”. 
(2) After sub -section (1), insert the following Explanation, namely: — 
„Explanation. —In this sub -section, “India ” means India, as defined in clause (28) of section 3 of 
the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897).‟  
The Indian Electricity Act, 1910  
(9 of 1910)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 35. —For sub -section (1), substitute: —“(1) The Central Government may, for the whole or 
any part of the territories to which this Act extends, and each State Government may, for the whole or any 
part of the S tate, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Advisory Board. ” 
Section 36A. —In sub -section (2), — 
(i) for “thirteen ” substitute “twenty ”; 
(ii) for clause (b) substitute: —“(b) one member to be nominated by the Government of each of 
the States to which this Act extends ”. 11 
 Section 37. —For “the territories for the time being comprised within Part A States and Part C States 
or any part of such territories ” substitute “the whole or any part of the territories to which this Act 
extends ”. 
The Indian Pa tents an d Designs Act,  1911  
(2 of 1911)  
Section 2. —In clause (7)  — 
(i) in item (b), for “Ajmer ” substitute “Ajmer and Vindhya Pradesh ”; 
(ii) in item (c), omit “and Vindhya Pradesh ”. 
Omit section 2A.  
After section 79, insert the following as section 80, namely: — 
“80. Repeals and savings. — 
(1) If immediately before the 18th day of April, 1950, there was in force in any Part B State 
to which this Act extends any law corresponding to this Act, that corresponding law shall be 
deemed to have been repealed on t he date aforesaid:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder, or  
(b) any  right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repealed, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proce eding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and 
any such penalty, forfeitur e or punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not come into force  in 
the Part B State concerned:  
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken, 
including any patent, permit or licen ce granted or registration effected under any such corresponding 
law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act as now 
extended to that State and shall continue to be in force accordingly, unless and until supers eded by 
anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in section 6 of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, shall have effect in 
relation to this Act. ” 
The Indian Lunacy Act,  1912  
(4 of 1912)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise exp ressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —(1) After clause (4) insert (4A): — 
„(4A) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir ‟. 
(2) Omit clause (13).  
Section 91. —In clause (a) of sub -section (1), omit “for a Part A State ”. 12 
 The Official  Trustees Act,  1913  
(2 of 1913)  
Section 1 .—For “except Part B States ” substi tute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(i) In clause (1) for “Part A State ” substitute “Part A State or a Part B State ”. 
(2) In clause (2)  — 
(i) in item (a), for “Part A State ” substitute “Part A State or a Part B State ”; 
(ii) in  item (b), for “Ajmer ” substitute “Ajmer and Vindhya Pradesh ”; 
(iii) after item (g), insert: — 
“(h) in relation to Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam ”. 
The Administrator General’s Act,  1913  
(3 of 1913)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Pa rt B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(1) For clause (3), substitute: —„(3) “Government ” or “the Government ” means, in 
relation to any State, the State Government ‟. 
(2) In clause (12)  — 
(i) in item (a), for “Part A State ” substitute “Part A or a Part B State ”; 
(ii) in item (b), for “Ajmer ” substitute “Ajmer and Vindhya Pradesh ”; 
(iii) after item (g), insert: — 
“(h) in relation to Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam ”. 
Sections 15 and 16. —For “the Indian Army A ct, 1911 (8 of 1911), or the Indian Air Force              
Act, 1932 (14 of 1932) ”, substitute “the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property)                   
Act, 1950  (40 of 1950) ”.  
Section 17. —(a) For “the Indian Army Act, 1911 ” and “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932 ”, substitute 
“the Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950 (40 of 1950) ”. 
(b) for “an Indian commissioned officer ” and “Indian Air Force ”, substitute “a commissioned officer ” 
and “Air Force ”, respectively.  
Section 38. —For “a Part A or a Part C State ” substitute “any State to which this Act extends ”, and for 
“India or in a Part B State ” substitute “India or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 57. —For “the territories comprised within Part A States and Part C States ”, substitute “the 
territories to which this Act extends ”. 
Section 59A. —Omit sub -section (2).  
The Indian Companies Act, 1913  
(7 of 1913)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ”, substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (3), for “except Part B States ” Substitute “except the State of jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —(1) After clause (7), insert: — 
„(7A) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
(2) Omit clause (16A).  13 
 After section 2A, insert: — 
“2B. Provisions as to companies registered in Part B States before commencement of Part B 
States (Laws) Act , 1951. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force, a company registered und er any law corresponding to this Act in force in a Part B 
State immediately before the commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, shall be deemed 
for the purposes of this Act to be a company incorporated and registered under this Act:  
Provided tha t the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, except any such 
company 148 from any of the obligations imposed on companies by this Act for such period or periods 
not exceeding one year in the aggregate as it may think fit. ” 
Section  144.—After sub -section (1), insert: — 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) but subject to the provisions of rules made 
under sub -section (2A), the holder of a certificate granted under a law in force in the whole or any portion 
of a P art B State immediately before the commencement of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, entitling 
him to act as an auditor of companies in that State or any portion thereof shall be entitled to be appointed 
to act as an auditor of companies registered anywh ere in that State.  
(2A) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules providing for 
the grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of auditors' certificates to persons in Part B States for the 
purposes of sub -section (2), and prescribing conditions and restrictions for such grant, renewal, 
suspension or cancellation. ” 
Section 245. —After sub -section (1), insert: — 
„Explanation. —In this sub -section “India ” includes the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
The Destructive Insects and Pests Act,  1914  
(2 of 1914)  
Long title. —For “Part A States and Part C States ”, substitute “India ”. 
Preamble. —For “the territories comprised within Part A States and Part C States (hereinafter in this 
Act referred to as the said territories) ” substitute “India”. 
Section 1 .—Renumber section 1 as sub -section (1) of that section, and after sub -section (1) as so 
renumbered, insert: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ” 
Section 2. —For clause (d), substitute: — 
„(d) “India ” means the territory of India excluding t he State of Jammu and Kashmir.‟  
Section 3. —In sub -section (1), for “the said territories ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 4 .—(a) For “any Part B State ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
(b) For “the said terr itories ”, wherever they occur, substitute “India ”. 
(c) For “such Part B State ” substitute “the said State ”. 
Section 5A. —For “from the States to a Part B State ” substitute “from India to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Copyright Act,  1914  
(3 of 1914)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1 .—In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
  14 
  
Section 2. —(a) After clause (1), insert: — 
„(1A) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟ 
(b) Omit clause (3).  
The Cine matograph Act,  1918  
(2 of 1918)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “Hyderabad and ”. 
The Charitable and Religiou s Trusts Act,  1920  
(14 of 1920 ) 
Section 1 .—In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Red Cross Society Act,  1920  
(15 of 1920)  
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and to the extent to 
which its provisions relate to any matter in respect of which Parliament has power to make laws for 
that State, it extends also to that State. ” 
The Indian Pass port Act,  1920  
(34 of 1920)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “excluding the State of Hyderabad ”. 
Omit section 6.  
The Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921  
(18 of 1921)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Long title and preamble. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”; and omit “any 
Part B States or ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(a) after the definition of “dependents ” insert: — 
„ “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir; ‟; 
(b) omit the definition of “States ”. 
Section 3. —In sub -section (2), omit “or in respect of any Part B State ” and “or State ”. 
The Indian Mines Act,  1923  
(4 of 1923)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —In clause (i), for “an Act of the Legislature of a Part A State ” substitute “a State Act ”.  
  15 
 The India n Boilers Act, 1923  
(5 of 1923)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 27A. —In sub -section (2), — 
(a) for “twelve ” substitute “nineteen ” ; 
(b) in clause (b), for “of each Part A State ” substitute “of each Part A State or Part B State ”. 
The Workmen ’s Com pensation Act,  1923  
(8 of 1923)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —In clause (i) of sub -section (1), for “Part A State ” substitute “Part A State or Part B 
State ”. 
Section 15. —In sub -section (4), omit “in Part A States and Part C States ”. 
Section 35. —In sub -section (1), — 
(a) omit “to any Part B State or ”; 
(b) for “such State , part or country ” substitute “such part or country ”; 
(c) for “a Part A State or Part C State ” in both the places where they occur, substitute “any  
State ”; and  
(d) omit “in any Part B State ”. 
The Indian Cotton Cess Act,  1923  
(14 of 1923)  
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—In clause (e), for “the Indian Factories Act, 1911 ” substitute “the Factories Act, 1948 ”. 
Section 3. —In sub -sections (1) and (2), for “territories c omprised within Part A States and Part C 
States ” substitute “territories to which this Act extends ”. 
Section 4. —In clause (i), for “Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ” substitute “Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research ”. 
The In dian Official Secrets  Act, 1923  
(19 of 1923)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India and applies also to servants of the Government and to citizens of 
India outside India. ” 
Section 2. —Omit clause (9A).  
The Indian Soldiers (Li tigation) Act,  1925  
(4 of 1925)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 16 
 Section 2. —In clause (b), fo r “the Indian Army Act, 1911 (8 of 1911), or the Indian Air                
Force Act, 1932 (14 of 1932) ” substitute “the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Air Force                           
Act, 1950 (45 of 1950) ”. 
The Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories Act,  1925  
(12 of 1925)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 12. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which this Act 
extends ”. 
The Pro vident Funds Act, 1925  
(19 of 1925)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —In sub -clause (i) of clause (f), for “a Part A State or a Part C State ” substitute “any part of 
India ”. 
The Indian Succession Act,  1925  
(39 of 1925)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 2. —(a) After clause (c) insert: — 
„(cc) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir; ‟; 
(b) for clause (g) substitute: — 
„(g) “State ” includes any division of India having a Court of the last resort; ‟. 
Section 382. —For section 382 substitute: — 
“382. Effect of certificate granted or extended by Indian representative in foreign State and in 
certain other cases. —Where a certificate in the form, as nearly as 153 circumstances admit, of 
Schedule VIII has been granted to a resident within a foreign State by the Indian representative 
accredited to that State or before the commencement of the Part B St ates (Laws) Act, 1951, to a 
resident within a Part B State by a District Judge of that State or where a certificate so granted has 
been extended in such form by the Indian representative or before the commencement of the said Act 
by such Judge, the certifi cate shall, when stamped in accordance with the provisions of the Court -fees 
Act, 1870, with respect to certificates under this Part have the same effect in India as a certificate 
granted or extended under this Part. ” 
The Indian Trad e Unions Act,  1926  
(16 of 1926)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”.  
The Legal Practitioner s (Fees) Act, 1926  
(21 of 1926)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the S tate of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926  
(38 of 1926)  
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and shall apply to 
the High Court of every Part A State and of every Part B State other than the State of Jammu and 17 
 Kashmir and also to such Judicial Commissioners' Courts in Part C States as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be High Courts to which this Act applies. ” 
Section 8. —In the proviso to sub -section (4), omit “and King's Counsel shall have pre -audience over 
all Advocates except the Advocate -General ”. 
The Child Marriage Restraint Act,  1929  
(19 of 1929)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Sale of Goods Act,  1930  
(3 of 1930)  
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Lac Cess Act,  1930  
(24 of 1930)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —Omit “in a Part A State or a Part C State ”. 
The Indian Partnership Act,  1932  
(9 of 1932)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 69. —In clause (a) of sub -section (4), for “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the 
territories to which this Act extends ”; and for “such States ” substitute “the said territories ”. 
The Tea Districts Emigran t Labour Act,  1932  
(22 of 1932)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —(a) For clause (c) substitute: — 
„(c) “recruiting State ” means any State other than Assam ; ‟; 
(b) in clause (f), omit “or in any Part B State ”; and for “any part of any Part A State or  Part C State ” 
substitute “any part of the territories to which this Act extends ”. 
The Children (Pledging o f Labour) Act,  1933  
(2 of 1933)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act,  1933  
(17 of 1933)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
  18 
 The Indian Dock L abourers Act,  1934  
(19 of 1934)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
The Indian Carriage by Air  Act, 1934  
(20 of 1934)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
Sections 2 and 3. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
Second Schedule. —In paragraphs 2 and 4, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Aircraft  Act, 1934  
(22 of 1934)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
The P etroleum Act,  1934  
(30 of 1934)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —(a) For clause (d) substitute: — 
„(d) “to transport petroleum ” means to move petroleum from one place to another in the 
territories to which this Act extends, and includes moving from one place to another in the said 
territories by sea or across territory in India to which this Act does not extend; ‟; 
(b) in clause (e ), for “the States ” substitute “the territories to which this Act extends ”; 
(c) omit clause (i).  
The Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,  1934  
(34 of 1934)  
Section 67. —For “any Part A State or Part C State ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 70. —For “a Part A State ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 80. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936  
(3 of 1936)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “It extends to the whole of India except Part B States and, in 
respect of Parsi  citizens of India, to the whole of India ” substitute “It extends to the whole of India except 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 29. —In sub -sections (2) and (3), for “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the 
territories to which this Act ext ends”. 
The Payment of Wages Act,  1936  
(4 of 1936)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
  19 
 The Agricultural Produce (Grading and  Marking) Act,  1937  
(1 of 1937)  
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act,  1937  
(6 of 1937)  
Throughout the Act unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
Section 2. —Omit „(1) “States ” means the territories for the time being comprised within Part A States 
and Part C State s; and (2) ‟. 
The Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act,  1938  
(5 of  1938)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
The Criminal Law Amendment Act,  1938  
(20 of 1938)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”.  
The Employers ’ Liability Act,  1938  
(24 of 1938)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2),  for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Employment of Children Act,  1938  
(26 of 1938)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Motor Vehicles Act,  1939  
(4 of 1939)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —(a) In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir ”; 
(b) for  sub-section (3), substitute: — 
“(3) Chapter VIII shall not have effect in any Part B State to which this Act extends until the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, so directs, and notwithstanding the repeal 
by section 6 of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, of any law in force in that State corresponding to 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, the corresponding law, in so far as it requires or relates to the 
insurance of motor vehicles against third party risks, shall, until Chapter VIII t akes effect in that 
State, have effect as if enacted in this Act. ” 
Section 2. —(a) After clause 9, insert: — 
„(9A) “India ” means the territories to which this Act extends. ‟; 
(b) omit clause (29A).  
Section 9 .—(a) In sub -section (2), for “in any Part B State ”, substitute “in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”; 
(b) in sub -section (4), — 
(i) for “any Part B State or ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir or any ” and 
(ii) for “in any State ” and “in any such State ” substitute “in the State ”. 
Section 28 .—(a) In sub -section (2), for “any Part B State ” substitute “the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”; 20 
 (b) in sub -section (5), — 
(i) for “any Part B State or ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir or any ”; 
(ii) for “registration in such State ” and “registration in any State ” substitute “registration in the 
State ”; and  
(iii) for “issued in any such State ” substitute “issued in the State ”.  
Section 42. —In sub -section (3), — 
(i) in clause (a), for “the Government of a Part A State ” substitute “a State Government ”; 
(ii) in clause (h), for “any Part B State or ” substitute “the State of Jammu and Kashmir or any ”.  
Section 133. —For “the Legislature of a Part A State ” substitute “the State Legislature ”. 
The Sixth Schedule. —For the table, substitute the following: — 
 
“Assam  AS 
Bihar  BR 
Bombay  BM, BY  
Madhya Pradesh  CP, MP 
Madras  MD, MS  
Orissa  OR 
Punjab  PN 
Uttar Pradesh  UP, US  
West Bengal  WB, WG  
Hyderabad  HT, HY  
Madhya Bharat  MB 
Mysore  MY 
Patiala and East Punjab States Union  PU 
Rajasthan  RJ 
Saurashtra  SS 
Travancore -Cochin  TC 
Ajmer  AJ 
Bhopal  BS 
Bilaspur  BL 
Coorg  CG 
Delhi  DL 
Himachal Pradesh  HI 
Kutch  KH 
Manipur  MN 
Tripura  TR 
Vindhya Pradesh  VP 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands  AN”  21 
 The Indian Naval Reserve Forces (Discipline) Act,  1939  
(Governor -General ‟s Act)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
The Standards of Weight Act, 1939  
(9 of 1939)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 4. —In sub-section (3), omit “Part B State or ”. 
The Registration of Foreigners Act,  1939  
(16 of 1939)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
Section 2. —Omit clause (aa).  
Omit section 9.  
 
The Coal Mines Safety ( Stowing) Act , 1939  
(19 of 1939)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States and the States of ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, ”. 
Section 3. —In sub -section (3), for “in the territories for the time being comprised in Part A States and 
Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which this Act extends ”. 
Section 6. —For “imported into the said territories from any foreign country or brought into the said 
territories from a Part B State ” substitute “imported into the said territories from any place outside the 
said terr itories ”. 
The Trade Marks Act,  1940  
(5 of 1940)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(a) For  clause (d) substitute: — 
„(d) “High Court ” means — 
(i) in relation to a Part A State or a Part B State, the High Court for that State;  
(ii) in relation to Ajmer and Vindhya Prades h, the High Court at Allahabad;  
(iii) in  relation to Bhopal, the High Court at Nagpur;  
(iv) in relation to Bilaspur, Delhi and Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab;  
(v) in relation to Coorg, the High Court at Madras;  
(vi) in relation to Kutch, the High Court at Bombay;  
(vii) in relation to  Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam; and  
(viii) in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Court at Calcutta;  
(dd) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and K ashmir; ‟; 
(b) omit clause (kk).  22 
 Section 10. —For “and either already on the register or already registered in any Part B State to which 
section 82A for the time being applies ” substitute “and already on the register ”. 
Section 19. —Omit “under this Act or from the register of trade marks in any Part B State to which 
section 82A for the time being applies ”. 
Section 21. —Omit sub -section (2).  
Section 22. —In sub -section (3), omit “or in any Part B State to which section 82A for the time being 
applies ”. 
Section 23. —Omit “or in any Part B State to which secti on 82A for the time being  applies ”. 
Section 46. —Omit the Exp lanation after sub -section (2).  
Section 57. —Omit sub -section (2).  
Section 58. —In sub -section (3), omit “or in any Part B State to which section 82A for the time being 
applies ”. 
Section 68. —(a) In clauses (a) and (c) of sub -section (3), omit “a Part B State or of ”; 
(b) in sub -section (4), omi t clause (b).  
Omit section 82A.  
Section 84. —In clause (11) of sub -section (2), omit “entered into with a Part B State ”. 
The Arbitration Act, 1940  
(10 of 1940 ) 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Drugs Act,  1940  
(23 of 1940)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —(1) After clause (b), insert: — 
(bb) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and  Kashmir‟.  
(2) Omit clause (f).  
The Agricul tural Produce Cess Act,  1940  
(27 of 1940)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —In sub -section (1), for “the territories for the time being comprised within Part A States 
and Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which this Act extends ”. 
The Mines Maternity Benefit Act,  1941  
(19 of 1941)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Railways (Local Authorities ’ Taxation) Act,  1941  
(25 of 1941)  
Long title and preamble. —For “Part A State ” substitute “State ”. 23 
 Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Coffee Market Expansion Act,  1942  
(7 of 1942)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —(a) After  clause (f), insert: — 
(ff) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and K ashmir; ‟; 
(b) omit clause (11).  
Section 20. —For “to a Part B State ” substitute “to the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942  
(18 of 1942)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Industrial Statistics Act,  1942  
(19 of 1942)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Reciprocity Act,  1943  
(9 of 1943)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Long title and preamble .—Omit “certain parts of ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
Section 2. —Omit clause (c).  
The Indian Coconut C ommittee Act,  1944  
(10 of 1944)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —For “the States ” where that expression first occurs, substitute “the territories to which this 
Act extends ”; and for that expression where it next occurs, substitute “the said territories ”. 
The Indian Oilseeds Committee Act,  1946  
(9 of 1946)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2),  for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
1*                                 *                                *                                        *                                  * 
  
                                                           
1. Entries relating to Act 17 of 1946 omitted  by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second  Schedule (w.e.f. 17-9-1957). 24 
 The Industrial Employm ent (Standing Orders) Act,  1946  
(20 of 1946)  
Section 1. —For “except Part B States ”, substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Mica Mines Labour Welfare Fund  Act, 1946  
(22 of 1946)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —In sub -section (1), for “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which 
this Act extends ”. 
Section 4. —In sub -section (1), for “two Advisory Committees, one for the State  of Madras and one 
for the State of Bihar ” substitute “as many Advisory Committees as it thinks fit but not exceeding one for 
each State ”. 
The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,  1946  
(25 of 1946)  
Long title and preamble .—Omit “in the States ”. 
Section 1.—In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 5. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 6. —(a) For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
(b) Insert the following Explanation at the end: — 
„Explanation. —In sections 5 and 6 the word “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. ‟  
The Foreigners Act,  1946  
(31 of 1946)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State o f Hyderabad ”. 
Section 2. —Omit clause (aa).  
The Prevention of Corruption Act,  1947  
(2 of 1947)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 6. —For “a Part A State ” substitute “a State ”. 
The Armed Forces (Emergency Duties) Act,  1947  
(15 of 1947)  
Section 2. —(a) In sub -section (1), for “in a Part A State or a Part C State or, if so requested by the 
Government of a Part B State, any specified service in that State ” substitute “in a State ”; 
(b) in sub -section (2), for “the Indian Army Act, 1911, or the Indian Air Force Act, 1932 ” substitute 
“the Army Act, 1950, or the Air Force Act, 1950 ”. 
The Trading with the Enemy (Continuance of Emergency Provisions) Act,  1947  
(16 of 1947)  
Section 1. —In sub-section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 25 
 The Rubber (Production and Marketing) Act, 1947  
(24 of 1947)  
Throughout the Act, unless otherwise expressly provided, for “the States ” substitute “India ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B Stat es” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —(a) After clause (d) insert: — 
„(dd) “India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir, ‟ 
(b) omit clause (k).  
The Antiquities (Export Control) Act,  1947  
(31 of 1947)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —In clause (b), for “the territories comprised in Part A States and Part C States ” substitute 
“the territories to which this Act e xtends ”. 
The Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act,  1947  
(32 of 1947)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 3. —In sub -section (1), for “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “the territories to which 
this Act extends ”. 
The Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act,  1948  
(9 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Minimum Wages Act,  1948  
(11 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948  
(15 of 1948)  
Section 1. —For “except the States of Hydrabad , Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and                
Travancore -Chocin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Atomic Energy Act,  1948  
(29 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu a nd 
Kashmir ”. 
The National Cadet Corps Act,  1948  
(31 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
  26 
 The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act,  1948  
(53 of 1948)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Electricity (Supply) Act,  1948  
(54 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State  of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Territorial Army Act,  1948  
(56 of 1948)  
Throughout the Act, for “the Indian Army Act, 1911 (8 of 1911) ” substitute “the Army                   
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950) ”. 
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
The Exchange of Prisoners Act, 1948  
(58 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
The Central Silk Board Act, 1948  
(61 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Ka shmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Factories Act,  1948  
(63 of 1948)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Central Tea Board Act,  1949  
(13 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Hindu Marriages Validity Act,  1949  
(21 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
1*                                 *                                    *                                    *                                 * 
The Chartered Accountants Act,  1949  
(38 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir, Mysore and 
Travancore -Cochin ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Banking Companies (Legal Practitioners ’ Clients ’ Accounts) Act,  1949  
(46 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except the States of Hyderabad, and Jammu and Kashmir ” 
substitu te “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
  
                                                           
1. Entries relating to Act 25 of 1949 rep. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f.  22-4-1949).  27 
 The Industrial Disputes (Banking and Insurance Companies) Act,  1949  
(54 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
The Explosives (Temporary Provisions) Act,  1949  
(55 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
The Central  Reserve Police Force Act,  1949  
(66 of 1949)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except the State of Hyderabad ”. 
ORDINANCES  
The Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance,  1944  
(38 of 1944)  
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to 
citizens of India outside India ”. 
The Currency Ordinance,  1940  
(4 of 1940)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), for “except Part B States ” substitute “except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir ”. 
Section 2. —For “the territories for the time being comprised within Part A States and Part C States ” 
substitute “the territories to which this Ordinance extends ”. 
After section 2, insert the following, namely: — 
“2A. Temporary provisions with respect to Hyderabad one rupee notes. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 6 of the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, notes of the denomina tional 
value of one rupee which at the commencement of the said Act were in circulation as legal tender in 
the State of Hyderabad shall continue to be legal tender in that State to the like extent and subject to 
the same conditions, as immediately before t he commencement of the said Act and for such period, 
not exceeding two years, from such commencement, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, determine. ” 
The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Ordinance,  1942  
(41 of 1942)  
Section  1.—In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
The International Monetary Fund and Bank Ordinance,  1945  
(47 of 1945)  
Section 1. —In sub -section (2), omit “except Part B States ”. 
Section 5. —For “Part A States and Part C States ” substitute “India ”. 
The Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance,  1946  
(6 of 1946)  
Section 1. —For sub -section (2) substitute: — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to 
citizens of India outside India. ”. 
--------------------------The Part C States (Miscellaneous Laws) Repealing Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE PART C STATES (MISCELLANEOUS LAWS) REPEALING ACT,  1951  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of certain laws of Part C States . 
3. Savings.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE PART C STATES (MISCELLANEOUS LAWS) REPEALING ACT,  1951  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1951  
[31st October , 1951]  
An Act to repeal certain laws in force in certain Part C States.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Part C States (Miscellaneous Laws) Repealing         
Act, 1951.  
2. Repeal of certain laws of Part C States .—The laws described in column 2 of the Schedule 
whether by their titles or as laws corresponding to certain specified enactments shall, in relation to the 
State specified in the corresponding entry in column 1, be repealed or be deemed to have been 
repealed with effect from the date specified in the corresponding entry in column 3.  
3. Savings .—The repeal by this Act of any law shall not affect any other enactment in which the 
repealed law has been applied, incorporated or re ferred to;  
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already 
done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any 
remedy or proceeding in respect there of, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, 
obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or 
thing;  
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law or established jurisdictio n, form or course of 
pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office, or 
appointment notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed, or 
recognised, or deriv ed by, in or from any law hereby repealed;  
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any law revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, 
liability right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice procedure or other matter or thing 
not now existing or in force.  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
REPEALS  
(See section 2)  
Name of State  Description of law  Date of repeal  
1 2          3 
Bhopal  The Bhopal State Land Improvement and 
Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1337 Muhamadi.  20th June, 1951 . 
 The Bhopal Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) 
Act, 1929 (Bhopal Act 3 of 1929) . 6th September, 1950 . 
 The Notified Areas Act, 1946 (Bhopal Act 22 of 
1946) . From the date of commencement 
of this Act . 
 The Tahsil Judicial Committee Ordinance, 1948, 
and His Highness the Nawab of Bhopal's Firman, 
published under Notification No. 2, dated 30th 
May, 1946, entitled Village Panchayat.  From the date of commencement 
of this Act.  
Bilaspur  The Bilaspur (Kehloor) State Halqa and Pargana 
Councils (Powers and Au thorised Functions) Act, 
2005 (5 of 2005 BK).  29th August, 1950 . 
Kutch  Any law corresponding to the Bombay Land 
Revenue Code, 1879 (Bombay Act 5 of 1879).  10th May, 1950 . 
 Any law corresponding to the Bombay Landing 
and Wharefage Fees Act, 1882 (Bombay Act 7 of 
1882).  3rd June, 1950 . 
 Any law corresponding to the Bombay Weights 
and Measures Act, 1932 (Bom bay Act 15 of 1932).  7th November , 1950 . 
 Any law corresponding to the Bombay Agricultural 
Debtors Relief Act, 1947 (Bombay Act 28 of 1947) . 24th May, 1950 . 
 The Kutch Nagarsabha Constitution, 1942, 
promulgated by Order No. 5516 of 1942 . 13th September, 1950 . 
 The Kutch Rent Restriction Rules, 1945 . From the date of commencement 
of this Act.  
Vindhya   
Pradesh  The Rewa State Rent Control Ordinance, 1946 .  6th December, 1950 .  
 The Vindhya Pradesh Sales Tax Ordinance, 1949 
(2 of 1949) . 29th December, 195 0. 
 
_______  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Plantations Labour Act, 1951--------------------------
1 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951  
—————  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
—————  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Reference to time of day . 
CHAPTER IA  
REGISTRATION OF PLANTATIONS  
3A. Appointment of  registering officers.  
3B.  Registration of plantations . 
3C. Appeals against orders of registering officer . 
3D. Power to make rules . 
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTING STAFF  
4. Chief inspector and inspectors . 
5. Powers and functions of inspectors . 
6. Facilities to be a fforded to inspectors . 
7. Certifying surgeons . 
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH  
8. Drinking water . 
9. Conservancy . 
10. Medical facilities . 
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE  
11. Canteens . 
12. Creches . 
13. Recreational facilities . 2 SECTIONS  
14. Educational facilities . 
15. Housing facilities . 
16. Power to make rules relating to housing . 
16A. Liability of employer in respect of accidents resulting from collapse of houses provided by him.  
16B. Appointment of Commissioners . 
16C. Application for compensation . 
16D. Procedure an d powers of Commissioner . 
16E. Liability to pay compensation, etc., to be decided by Commissioner . 
16F. Saving as to certain rights . 
16G. Power to make rules . 
17. Other facilities . 
18. Welfare officers . 
CHAPTER IV A 
PROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY  
18A. Safety.  
18B.  Power of State Government to make rules . 
CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
19. Weekly hours . 
20. Weekly holidays . 
21. Daily intervals for rest . 
22. Spreadover . 
23. Notice of period of work . 
24. Prohibition of employment of children . 
25. Night w ork for women  and children .  
26. Non -adult workers to carry tokens . 
27. Certificate of fitness . 
28. Power to require medical examination.  
CHAPTER VI  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
29. Application of Chapter . 
30. Annual leave with wages . 
31. Wages during leave period . 3 SECTIONS  
32. Sickness and maternity benefits . 
CHAPTER VIA  
ACCIDENTS  
32A. Notice of accident . 
32B. Register of accidents . 
32C. Compensation . 
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
33. Obstruction . 
34. Use of false certificate of fitness . 
35. Contravention of pro visions regarding employment of   labour . 
36. Other offences . 
37. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction . 
37A. Power of court to make orders.  
38. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases . 
39. Cognizance of offences . 
39A. Protection of actio n taken in good faith . 
40. Limitation of prosecutions . 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to give directions . 
42. Power to exempt . 
43. General power to make rules .4 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 69 OF 19511 
[2nd November , 1951.]  
An Act to provi de for the welfare of labour, and to regulate the conditions of work, in 
plantations.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Plantations 
Labour Act , 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint  
 3[(4) It applies to the following plantations, t hat is to say, — 
(a) to any land used or intended to be used fo r growing tea, coffee, rubber 4[, cinchona or 
cardamom] which admeasures 5[5 hectares] or more and in which 6[fifteen] or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the preceding t welve months;  
(b) to any land used or intended to be used for growing any other plant, which admeasures 5[5 
hectares] or more and in which 6[fifteen] or more persons are employed or were employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months, if, after obtaini ng the approval of the Central Government, the State 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, so directs.  
7[Explanation .—Where any piece of land used for growing any plant referred to in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) of this sub -section admeasures l ess than 5 hectares and is contiguous to any other piece of land 
not being so used, but capable of being so used, and both such pieces of land are under the management 
of the same employer, then, for the purposes of this sub -section, the piece of land firs t mentioned shall be 
deemed to be a plantation, if the total area of both such pieces of land admeasures 5 hectares or more.]  
(5) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the 
provisions of this Act shall  apply also to any land used or intended to be used for growing any plant 
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4), notwithstanding that — 
                                                      
1. The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I. The Act has been amended in Kerala 
by Kerala Act 25 of 1969.  
2. 1st April, 1954 : see S.R.O. 880 dated 6th March, 1954, Gazette of India, 1954, Pt. II, Sec. 3, p. 530  
3. Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 2, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 21 -11- 1960).  
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 2, for "or cinchona" (w.e.f. 26 -1- 1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "10.117 hectares" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "thirty" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  5 (a) it admeasures less than 1[5 hectares], or  
(b) the number of persons employed therein is less tha n 2[fifteen]:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of such la nd which admeasured less than 
1[5 he ctares] or in which less than 2[fifteen] persons were employed, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act.]  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “adolescent ” means a  person who has completed his 3[fourteenth] year but has no t completed 
his eighteenth year ; 
(b) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
(c) “child ” means a person who has not  completed his 3[fourteenth] year;  
(d) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at midnight;  
(e) “employer ” when used in relation to a plantation, means the person who has the ultimate 
control over the affairs of the plantation, and w here the affairs of any plantation are entrusted to any 
other person (whether called a managing agent, manager, superintendent or by any other name) such 
other person shall be deemed to be the employer in relation to that plantation;  
4[Explanation .—For the  purposes of this clause, "the person who has the ultimate control over the 
the affairs of the plantation" means in the case of a plantation owned or controlled by — 
(i) a company, firm or other association of individuals, whether incorporated or not, every 
director, partner or individual;  
(ii) the Central Government or State Government or any local authority, the person or persons 
appointed to manage the affairs of the plantation; and  
(iii) a lessee, the lessee;]  
5[(ee) “family ”, when used in relation to a work er, means — 
(i) his or her spouse, and  
(ii) the legitimate and adopted children of the worker dependent upon him or her, who have 
not completed their eighteenth year,  
6[and includes  parents and widow sister, dependent upon him or her ;] 
7[(eee) “inspector ” means an inspector of plantations appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 
and includes an additional inspector of plantations appointed under sub -section ( 1A) of that section;]  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 2, for "10.117 hectares" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "thirty" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).   
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1 986, s. 24, for “fifteenth” (w.e.f. 23 -12-1986).  
4. Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
5. Ins. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
6. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 , for certain words  (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
7. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 3  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  6 1[(f) “plantation ” means any plantation to which this Act, whether wholl y or in part, applies and 
includes offices, hospitals, dispensaries, schools, and any other premises used for any purpose 
connected with such plantation, but does not include any factory on the premises to which the 
provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (6 3 of 1948) apply;]  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
2[(h) “qualified medical practitioner ” means a person holding a qualification granted by an 
authority specified or notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act , 1916 (7 of 1916), 
or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), and includes any 
person having a certificate granted under any Provincial or State Medical Council Act;]  
(i) “wages ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948 (11 of 1948);  
(j) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at mid -night on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be fixed by the State Government in relation to plantations in any area after s uch 
consultation as may be prescribed with reference to the plantations concerned in that area;  
3[(k) “worker ” means a person employed in a plantation for hire or reward, whether directly or 
through any agency, to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual or  clerical  4[and includes a person 
employed on contract for more than sixty days in a year] , but does not include — 
 (i) a medical officer employed in the plantation;  
(ii) any person employed in the plantation (including any member of the medical staff) who se 
monthly wages exceed 5[rupees ten thousand] ; 
(iii) any person employed in the plantation primarily in a 6[managerial  or administrative  
capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed ten thousand] ; or 
(iv) any person temporarily employed in the plantation in any work relating to the 
construction, development or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, drains or canals;]  
(l) “young person ” means a person who is either a child or an adolescent.  
3. Reference to time of day .—In this Act, refe rences to time of day are references to Indian Standard 
Time being five and a half hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time:  
Provided that for any area in which the Indian Standard Time is not ordinarily observed, the State 
Government may make rules — 
(a) specify ing the area;  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 3, for cl. ( f) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for cl. ( h) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
3.  Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for cl. (k) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
4. Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2, for “rupees seven hundred and fifty” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
6. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2, for “managerial capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed rupees seven 
hundred and fifty”  (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
 7 (b) defining the local mean time ordinarily observed therein; and  
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the plantations situated in that area.  
1[CHAPTER IA  
REGISTRATION OF PLANTATIONS  
3A. Appointment of registering officers .—The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit, to be registering 
officers for the purposes of this Chapter, and  
(b) define the limits within which a r egistering officer shall exercise the powers and discharge the 
functions conferred or imposed on him by or under this Chapter.  
3B. Registration of plantations .—(1) Every employer of a plantation, existing at the commencement 
of the Plantation Labour (Amend ment) Act, 1981 (58 of 19 81) shall, within a period of sixty days of such 
commencement, and every employer of any other plantation coming into existence  after such 
commencement shall, within a period of sixty days of the coming into existence of such plant ation, make 
an application to the registering officer for the registration of such plantation:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid if he is satisfied that the applicant was preve nted by sufficient cause from making the 
application within such period.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such 
particulars and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) After the rec eipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the registering officer shall register the 
plantation.  
(4) Where a plantation is registered under this section, the registering officer shall issue a certificate 
of registration to the employer thereof in such form as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where, after the registration of a plantation under this section, any change occurs in the ownership 
or management or in the extent of the area or other prescribed particulars in respect of such plantation, the 
particulars re garding such change shall be intimated by the employer to the registering officer within 
thirty days of such change in such form as may be prescribed.  
(6) Where as a result of any  intimation received under sub -section ( 5), the registering officer is 
satisf ied that the plantation is no longer required to be registered under this section, he shall, by order in 
writing, cancel the registration thereof and shall, as soon as practicable, cause such order to be published 
in any one newspaper in the language of, a nd having circulation in, the area where the plantation is 
situated.  
3C. Appeals against orders of registering officer .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of a 
registering officer under sub -section ( 6) of section 3B may, within thirty days of the public ation of such 
order in the newspaper under that sub -section, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be prescribed:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  8 Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal under this sub -section after the expiry of 
the aforesaid period if it is sat isfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal within such period.  
(2) After the receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority may, after giving the 
appellant , the employer referred to in  sub-section ( 5) of section 3B and the registering officer an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
3D. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of application for the registration of a pla ntation, the particulars to be contained in 
such application and the fees to be accompanied along with such application;  
(b) the form of the certificate of registration;  
(c) the particulars regarding any change in respect of which intimation shall be given  by the 
employer to the registering officer under sub -section ( 5) of section 3B and the form in which such 
change shall be intimated;  
(d) the authority to which an appeal may be preferred under section 3C and the fees payable in 
respect of such a ppeal ; 
(e) the registers to be kept and maintained by a registering officer.]  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTING STAFF  
4. Chief inspector and inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a duly qualified person to be th e chief inspector of plantations and so many 
duly qualified persons to be inspectors of plantations subordinate to the chief inspector as it thinks fit.  
1[(1A) The State Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such officers 
of the State Government or of any local authority under its control, as it thinks fit, to be additional 
inspectors of plantations for all or any of the purposes of this Act.]  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government, t he chief inspector 
may declare the local area or areas within which, or the plantations with respect to which, inspectors shall 
exercise their powers under this Act, and may himself exercise the powers of an inspector within such 
limits as may be assigned to him by the State Government.  
(3) The chief inspector and all inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  9 5. Powers and functions of inspectors .—Subject to any rules made by the State Govern ment in this 
behalf, an inspector may within the local limits for which he is appointed — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder are being observed in the case of any 
plantation;  
(b) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and examine any plantation or part 
thereof at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act;  
(c) examine the crops grown in any pla ntation or any worker employed therein or require the 
production of any register or other document maintained in pursuance of this Act, and take on the 
spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may consider necessary for carrying out the 
purposes  of this Act;  
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this section to answer any question or make any 
statement tending to incriminate himself.  
6. Facilities to be afforded to inspectors .— Every  employer shall afford the inspector all reasonable 
facilities for making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry under this Act.  
7. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The State Government may appoint qualified medical practitioners to 
be certifying surgeons f or the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such plantation or class 
of plantations as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection with — 
(a) the examination a nd certification of workers;  
(b) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed where adole scents 1[are] , 
employed in any work in any plantation which is likely to cause injury to their health.  
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH  
8. Drinking  water .—In every plantation effective arrangements shall be made by the employer to 
provide and maintain at convenient places in the plantation a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking 
water for all workers.  
9. Conservancy .—(1) There shall be provided sep arately for males and females in every plantation a 
sufficient number of latrines and urinals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient and accessible 
to workers employed therein.  
(2) All latrines and urinals provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary 
condition.  
10. Medical facilities .—(1) In every plantation there shall be provided and maintained so as to be 
readily available such medic al facilities for the workers 2[and their families] as may be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 3, for “and children are, or are to be” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  10 (2) If in any plantation medical facilities are not provided and maintained as required by sub -section 
(1) the 1[State Government upon a request by the chief inspector ] may cause to be provided and 
maintained therein such medical faciliti es, and recover the cost thereof from the defaulting employer.  
(3) For the purposes of such recovery the chief inspector may certify the costs to be recovered to the 
collector, who may recover the amount as an arrear of land -revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE  
11. Canteens .—(1) The State Government may make rules requiring that in every plantation wherein 
one hundred and fifty workers are ordinarily employed, one or more canteens shall be provided and 
maintained by the employer for the use of the workers.  
(2) Witho ut prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the date by which the canteen shall be provided;  
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided and the standards in respect of construction, 
accommodation, furniture  and other equipment of the canteens;  
(c) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the charges which may be made therefor;  
(d) the constitution of a managing committee for the canteen and the representation of the 
workers in the management of the can teen;  
(e) the delegation to the chief inspector, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, of the 
power to make rules under clause ( c). 
12. Creches .—2[(1) In every plantation wherein fifty or more women workers (including women 
workers employed by a ny contractor) are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, or where the number of children of women workers (including women workers employed by any 
contractor) is twenty or more, there shall be provided and maintained by the e mployer suitable rooms for 
the use of children of such women workers.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section and sub -section ( 1A), “children ” means persons 
who are below the age of six years.]  
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if, in respect of any plantation wherein 
less than fifty women workers (including women workers employed by any contractor) are employed or 
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve month s, or where the number of children of such 
women wor kers is less than twenty, the State Government, having regard to the number of children of 
such women workers deems it necessary that suitable rooms for the use of such children should be 
provided and maintained by the employer, it may, by order, direct th e employer to provide and maintain 
such rooms and thereupon the employer shall be bound to comply with such direction.]  
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 17 of 2010, s. 4, for “chief inspector” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).     
2. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -1- 1982).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  11 (2) 1[The rooms referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A)] shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation;  
(b) be adequately lighted  and ventil ated; 
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; and  
(d) be under the charge of a woman trained in the care of children and infants.  
(3) The State Government may make rules prescribing the location and the standards of 1[the rooms 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A)] in respect of their construction and accommodation and 
the equipment and amenities to be provided therein.  
13. Recreational facilities .—The State Government may make rules requiring every employer to 
make pr ovision in his plantation for such recreational facilities for the workers and children employed 
therein as may be prescribed.  
14. Educational facilities .—Where the children between the ages of six and twelve of workers 
employed i n any plantation exceed tw enty-five in number, the State Government may make rules 
requiring every employer to provide educational facilities for the children in such manner and of such 
standard as may be prescribed.  
2[15. Housing facilities .—It shall be the duty of every employer to provide and maintain necessary 
housing accommodation — 
(a) for every worker (including his family) residing in the plantation;  
(b) for every worker (including his family) residing outside the plantation, who has put in six 
months of continuous service in  such plantation and who has expressed a desire in writing to reside in 
the plantation:  
Provided that the requirement of continuous service of six months under this clause shall not apply to 
a worker who is a member of the family of a deceased worker who, immediately before his death, was 
residing in the plantation.]  
16. Power to make rules relating to housing .—The State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of section 15 and, in particular providing for — 
(a) the stand ard and specification of the accommodation to be provided;  
(b) the selection and preparation of sites for the construction of houses and the size of such plot;  
(c) the constitution of advisory boards consisting of representatives of the State Government, t he 
employer and the workers for consultation in regard to matters connected with housing and the 
exercise by them of such powers, functions and duties in relation thereto as may be specified;  
(d) the fixing of rent, if any, for the housing accommodation pr ovided for workers;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 6, for "such rooms" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
 12 (e) the allotment to workers and their families of housing accommodation and of suitable strips of 
vacant land adjoining such accommodation for the purpose of mai ntaining kitchen gardens, 1*** and 
for the eviction of workers and their f amilies from such accommodation;  
(f) access to the public to those parts of the plantation wherein the workers are housed.  
2[16A. Liability of employer in respect of accidents resulting from collapse of houses provided 
by him .—(1) If death or injury is ca used to any worker or a member of his family as a result of the 
collapse of a house provided under section 15, and the collapse is not solely and directly attributable to a 
fault on the part of any occupant of the house or to a natural calamity, the employ er shall be liable to pay 
compensation.  
(2) The provisions of section 4 of, and Schedule IV to, the Workmen's Compensation                               
Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), as in force for the time being, regarding the amount of compensation payable to a 
workman under that Act shall, so far as may be, apply for the determination of the amount of 
compensation payable under sub -section ( 1). 
16B. Appointment of Commissioners .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as many  persons, possessing the prescribed qualifications as it thinks fit, to be 
Commissioners to determine the amount of compensation payable under section 16A and may define the 
limits within which each such Commissioner shall exercise the powers and discharge  the functions 
conferred or imposed on him by or under this Act.  
16C. Application for compensation .—(1) An application for payment of compensation under 
section 16A may be made to the Commissioner — 
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or  
(b) by any agent duly authorised by the person who has sustained the injury; or  
(c) where the person who has sustained the injury is a minor, by his guardian; or  
(d) where death has resulted out of the collapse of the house, by any dependant of the deceased or 
by any agent duly authorised by such dependant or, if such dependant is a minor, by his guardian.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) No application for compensation u nder this section shall be entertained unless it is made within 
six months of the collapse of the house : 
Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making the application within the afor esaid period of six months, entertain such application 
within a further period of six months.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “dependant ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) 
of section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1 923).  
16D. Procedure and powers of Commissioner .—(1) On receipt of an application under section 
16C, the Commissioner may make an inquiry into the matter covered by the application.  
                                                      
1. Certain words and figures omitted by Act 34 of 1960, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21 -11- 1960).  
2. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 8 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  13 (2) In determining the amount of compensation payable under section 16A, t he Commissioner may, 
subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary procedure as he thinks fit.  
(3) The Commissioner shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 190 8) in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any pu blic record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the commissioner may, for t he purpose of 
determining any claim or compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge of any 
matter relevant to the inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry.  
16E. Liability to pay compensation, etc., to be decided by Commissioner .—(1) Any question as to 
the liability of an employer to pay compensation under section 16A, or as to the amount thereof, or as to 
the person to whom such compensation is payable, shall be decided by the Commissioner.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by a decision  of the Commissioner refusing to grant compensation, or as to 
the amount of compensation granted to him, or to the apportionment thereof, may prefer an appeal to the 
High Court having jurisdiction over the place where the collapse of the house has occurred , within ninety 
days of the communication of the order of the Commissioner to such person:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain any such appeal after the expiry of the period aforesaid if 
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient  cause from preferring the appeal within such 
period:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to authorise the High Court to grant 
compensation in excess of the amount of compensation payable under section 16A.  
(3) Subject to the decision of the High Court in cases in which an appeal is preferred under                     
sub-section ( 2), the decision of the Commissioner under sub -section ( 1) shall be final and shall not be 
called in question in any court.  
16F. Saving as to certain rights .—The right of any person to claim compensation under section 16A 
shall be without prejudice to the right of such person to recover compensation payable under any other 
law for the time being in force; but no person shall be entitled to claim compens ation more than once in 
respect of the same collapse of the house.  
16G. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for giving effect to the provisions of sections 16A to 16F (both inclusive).  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(i) the qualifications and conditions of service of Commissioners;  14 (ii) the manner in which claims for compensation may be inquired into and determin ed by the 
Commissioner;  
(iii) the matters in respect of which any person may be chosen to assist the Commissioner under 
section 16D and the functions that m ay be performed by such person;  
(iv) generally for the effective exercise of any powers conferred on  the Commissioner.]  
17. Other facilities .—The State Government may make rules requiring that in every plantation the 
employer shall provide the workers with such number and type of umbrellas, blankets, rain coats or other 
like amenities for the protection of workers from rain or cold as may be prescribed.  
18. Welfare officers .—(1) In every plantation wherein three hundred or more workers are ordinarily 
employed the employer shall employ such number of welfare officers as may be prescribed.  
(2) The State Gov ernment may prescribe the duties, qualifications and conditions of service of 
officers employed under sub -section ( 1). 
1[CHAPTER IV A 
PROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY  
18A. Safety. —(1) In every plantation, effective arrangements shall be made by the employer to 
provi de for the safety of workers in connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of 
insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
(2) The State Government may make rules for prohibiting or, restricting employment of women or 
adolescents in using or  handling hazardous chemicals.  
(3) The employer shall appoint persons possessing the prescribed qualifications to supervise the use, 
handling, storage and transportation of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances in his plantation.  
(4) Every employer shall ensure that every worker in plantation employed for handling, mixing, 
blending and applying insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances, is trained about the hazards involved 
in different operations in which he is engaged, the various safety measure s and safe work practices to be 
adopted in emergencies arising from spillage of such insecticides chemicals and toxic substances and such 
other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(5) Every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals  and toxic substances shall be medically 
examined periodically, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the State Government.  
(6) Every employer shall maintain health record of every worker who is exposed to insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances whi ch are used, handled, stored or transported in a plantation, and every 
such worker shall have access to such record.  
(7) Every employer shall provide — 
(a) washing, bathing and clock room facilities; and  
(b) protective clothing and equipment,  
to every worke r engaged in handling insecticides, chemicals or toxic substances in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f.  7-6-2010).  15 (8) Every employer shall display in the plantation a list of permissible concentrations of insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic subs tances in the breathing zone of the workers engaged in the handling and 
application of such insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
(9) Every employer shall exhibit such precautionary notices as may be prescribed by the State 
Government indicating th e hazards of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
18B. Power of State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and wit hout prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: -- 
(a) the restriction on employment of women and adolescents for handling hazardous chemicals 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 18A;  
(b) the qualifications of supervisor appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 18A;  
(c) the matters for training of workers under sub -section ( 4) of section 18A;  
(d) the medical examination of workers under sub -section ( 5) of section 18A;  
(e) the fac ilities and equipment to be provided to the workers engaged in handling insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances under sub -section ( 7) of section 18A;  
(f) the precautionary notices to be exhibited under sub -section ( 9) of section 18A .] 
CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
19. Weekly hours .—1[(1)] Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no adult worker shall be 
required or allowed to work o n any plantation in excess of 2[forty -eight hours] a week and no adol escent 
3*** for more than 4[twenty -seven hours] a week.  
 5[(2) Where an adult worker works in any plantation on any day in excess of the number of hours 
constituting a normal working day or for more than forty -eight hours in any week, he shall, in respect of 
such overtime work, be ent itled to twice the rates of ordinar y wages:  
Provided that no such worker shall be allowed to work for more than nine hours on any day and more 
than fifty -four hours in any week.  
(3) For any work done on any closed holiday in the plantation or on any day of  rest, a worker shall be 
entitled to twice the rates of ordinary wages as in the case of overtime work.]  
20. Weekly holidays .— (1) The State Government may by rules made in this behalf — 
(a) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shal l be allowed to all workers;  
                                                      
1. Sec tion 19 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 58 of 1981, s. 9 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid, for "fifty -four hours" (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
3. The words “or child’ omitted by Act 17 of 2010, s. 6 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. Subs. by  Act 58 of 19 81, s. 9, for “forty hours ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -1-1982).  16 1[(b) provide for the conditions subject to which, and the circumstances in which, an adult worker 
may be required or allowed to work overtime.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub - section ( 1) where a  worker is willing 
to work on any day of rest which is not a closed holiday in the plantation, nothing contained in this 
section shall prevent him from doing so:  
Provided that in so doing a worker does not work for more than ten days consecutively without a 
holiday for a whole day intervening.  
Explanation 1 .—Where on any day a worker has been prevented from working in any plantation 
by reason of tempest, fire, rain or other natural causes, that day, may, if he so desires, be treated as his 
day of rest for the relevant period of seven days within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
Explanation 2 .—Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any worker whose total period of 
employment including any day spent on leave is less than six days . 
21. Daily intervals  for rest .—The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall 
exceed five hours and that no worker shall work for more than five hours before he has had an interval for 
rest for at least half an hour.  
22. Spreadover .—The period of work o f an adult worker in a plantation shall be so arranged that 
inclusive of his in terval for rest under section 2[21] it shall not spread over more than twelve hours 
including the time spent in waiting for work on any day.  
23. Notice of period of work .—(1) The re shall be displayed and correctly maintained in every 
plantation a notice of periods of work in such form and manner as may be prescribed showing clearly for 
every day the periods during which the workers may be required to work.  
(2) Subject to the other  provisions contained in this Act, no worker shall be required or allowed to 
work in any plantation otherwise than in accordance with the notice of periods of work displayed in the 
plantation.  
(3) An employer may refuse to employ a worker for any day if on  that day he turns up for work more 
than half an hour after the time fixed for the commencement of the day's work.  
3[24. Prohibition of employment of children .—No child shall be employed to work in any 
plantation.]   
25. Night work for women 4***.—Except with the permission of the State Government, no woman  
5*** worker shall be employed in any plantation otherwise than between the hours of 6 A.M. and 7 P.M.:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to midwives and nurses employed as 
such in any plantation.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 10, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule , for “19”. 
3. Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s . 7 (we.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. The words “and children” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (we.f. 7 -6-2010).   
5. The words “or child” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (we.f. 7 -6-2010).  17 26. Non -adult workers to carry tokens .— No 1*** adolescent shall be required or allowed to work 
in any plantation unless — 
(a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to him under section 27 is in the custody of the 
employer; and 
(b) such 2*** adolescent carries with him while he is at work a token giving a references to such 
certificate.  
27. Certificate of fitness .—(1) A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any young person or 
his parent or guardian accompanied by a  document signed by the employer or any other person on his 
behalf that such person will be employed in the plantation if certified to be fit for work, or on the 
application of the employer or any other person on his behalf with reference to any young pers on 
intending to work, examine such person and ascertain his fitness for work 3*** as an adolescent.  
(2) A certificate of fitness granted under this section shall be valid for a period of twelve months from 
the date thereof, but may be renewed.  
(3) Any fee payable for a certificate under this section shall be paid by the employer and shall not be 
recoverable from the young person, his parents or guardian.  
28. Power to require medical examination .—An inspector may, if he thinks necessary so to do, 
cause any y oung person employed in a plantation to be examined by a certifying surgeon.  
CHAPTER VI  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
29. Application of Chapter .— (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice of 
any rights to which a worker may be entitled unde r any other law or under the terms of any award, 
agreement, or contract of service:  
Provided that where such award, agreement or contract of service provides for a longer leave with 
wages than provided in this Chapter the worker shall be entitled only to s uch longer leave.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this Chapter leave shall not, except as provided in section 30, 
include weekly holidays or holidays for festivals or other similar occasions.  
30. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Every worker shall be allowed l eave with wages for a number of 
days calculated at the rate of — 
(a) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work performed by him, and  
(b) if a young person, one day for every fifteen days of work performed by him.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
                                                      
1.  The words “child and no” omitted by Act 17 of 2010, s. 9 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
2. The words “child  or” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
3. The words “ either as a child or” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).   
4. The proviso omitted by Act 58 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
 18 1[2[Explanation  1].—For the purposes of calculating leave under this sub -section, — 
(a) any day on which no work or less than half a day's work is performed shall not be counted; 
and 
(b) any day on which half or more than half a day's work is performe d shall be counted as  one 
day.]  
3[Explanation 2 .—The leave admissible under this sub -section shall be exclusive of all holidays, 
whether occurring during, or at either and of the period of leave.]  
(2) If a worker does not in any one period of twelve months take the whole of th e leave allowed to 
him under sub -section ( 1), any leave not taken by him shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him 
under that sub -section in the succeeding period of twelve months.  
(3) A worker shall cease to earn any leave under this section when t he earned leave due to him 
amounts to thirty days.  
2[(4) If the employment of a worker who is entitled to leave under this section is terminated by the 
employer before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled, the employer shall pay him the 
amount payable under section 31 in respect of the leave not taken, and such payment shall be made before 
the expiry of the second working day after such termination.]  
31. Wages during leave period .— 4[(1) For the leave allowed to a worker under section 30, h e shall 
be paid, — 
(a) if employed wholly on a time -rate basis, at a rate equal to the daily wage payable to him 
immediately before the commencement of such leave under any law or under the terms of any award, 
agreement or contract of service, and  
(b) in ot her cases, including cases where he is, during the preceding twelve calendar months, paid 
partly on a time -rate basis and partly on a piece -rate basis, at the rate of the average daily wage 
calculated over the preceding twelve calendar months.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the average daily wage shall be 
computed on the basis of his total full -time earnings during the preceding twelve calendar months, 
exclusive of any overtime earnings or bonus, if any, but inclusive of de arness allowance . 
 (1A) In addition to the wages for the leave period at the rates specified in sub -section ( 1), a worker 
shall also be paid the cash value of food and other concessions, if any, allowed to him by the employer in 
addition to his daily wages  unless these concessions are continued during the leave period.]  
(2) A worker who has been a llowed leave for 5[any period not less than] four days in the case of an 
adult and five days in the case of a young person under section 30 shall, before his leave  begins, be paid 
his wages for the period of the leave allowed.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 6 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
2. The existing  Explanation  numbered as Explanation  1 thereof by Act 58 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
3. Ins. by s. 11. ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
4. Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 21 -11- 1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and  the Third Schedule , for "any period less than".  19 32. Sickness and maternity benefits .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
every worker shall be entitled to obtain from his employer — 
(a) in the case of sickness certified  by a qualified medical practitioner, sickness allowance, and  
(b) if a woman, in the case of confinement or expected confinement, maternity allowance, at such 
rate, for such period and at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
(2) The State Government may ma ke rules regulating the payment of sickness or maternity allowance 
and any such rules may specify the circumstances in which such allowance shall not be payable or shall 
cease to be payable, and in framing any rules under this section the State Government shall have due 
regard to the medical facilities that may be provided by the employer in any plantation.  
1[CHAPTER VIA  
ACCIDENTS  
32A. Notice of accident .—Where in any plantation, an accident occurs which causes death or which 
causes any bodily injury to a w orker by reason of which the worker injured is prevented from working for 
a period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following the accident, or which is of such a nature as 
may be prescribed in this behalf, the employer thereof shall send notice the reof to such authorities, in 
such form, and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
32B. Register of accidents .—The employer shall maintain a register of all accidents which occur in 
the plantation in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
2[32C. Compensation. —The employer shall give compensation to a worker in plantation in case of 
accident and the memorandum relating to such compensation shall be got registered by the employer            
with the Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of the Workmen ’s Compensation                          
Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) .] 
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
33. Obstruction .—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act or 
refuses or wilfully neglects to afford t he inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination or inquiry authori sed by or under this Act in relation to any plantation, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 3[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both].  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 12 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2.  Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 11 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
3. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid.,  for “three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or  with both”   (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
 20 (2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act, or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to bel ieve is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspector 
acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. ] 
34. Use of false certificate of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of 
fitness granted to himself under section 27 a certificate granted to another person under that section, or 
having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself, knowingly allows it to be used, or allows an 
attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to 2[two months, or with fine which may extend to one thou sand rupees,  or with both ]. 
35. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour .—Whoever, except as otherwise 
permitted by or under this Act, contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
prohibiting, restricting or regu lating the employment of persons in a plantation, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both].  
36. Other offences .—Whoever contravenes any of the pro visions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupee s, or with both].  
37. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—If any person who has been convicted of any 
offence punishable under this Act is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the same 
provision, he shall be punishable on a subse quent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to 
3[one year,  or with fine which shall not be less than ten  thousand rupees  but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both ]: 
Provided that for the purposes of this section no cognizance shall be t aken of any conviction made 
more than two years before the commission of the offence which is being punished.  
4[37A. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence 
punishable under section 36, the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by order in writing, 
require him within such period as may be specified in the order (which the court may, if it thinks fit and 
on an application made in this behalf by the employer, from time to time, extend) to take such measures  
as may be so specified for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was committed.  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the employer shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuation of the offence during the peri od or extended period, as the case may be, 
specified by the court, but if, on the expiry of such period or extended period, the order of the court has 
not been fully complied with, the employer shall be deemed to have committed a further offence and he 
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees for every day after such expiry.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 12, for “three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both” (w.e.f . 7-6-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).   
3.  Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 13  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  21 38. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases .—Where an employ er charged with an 
offence under this Act alleges that another person is the actual offender, he shall be entitled upon 
complaint made by him in this behalf to have, on giving to the prosecutor in this behalf three clear days, 
notice in writing of his inte ntion so to do, that other person brought before the Court on the day appointed 
for the hearing of the case and if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer 
proves to the satisfaction of the Court that — 
(a) he has used due diligenc e to enforce the execution of the relevant provisions of this Act; and  
(b) that the other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent or 
connivance;  
the said other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to  the like punishment as if he 
were the employer and the employer shall be acquitted:  
Provided that — 
(a) the employer may be examined on oath and his evidence and that of any witness whom he 
calls in his support shall be subject to cross -examination on beh alf of the person he charges to be the 
actual offender and by the prosecutor, and  
(b) if, in spite of due diligence, the person alleged as the actual offender cannot be brought before 
the Court on the day appointed for the hearing of the case, the Court sh all adjourn the hearing thereof 
from time to time so, however, that the total period of such adjournment does not exceed three 
months, and if, by the end of the said period, the person alleged as the actual offender cannot still be 
brought before the Court , the Court shall proceed to hear the case against the employer.  
1[39. Cognizance of offences .— No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by  any worker or an office bearer of a trade union of which such worker is a 
member or an inspector and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class  shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
39A. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other  legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.]  
40. Limitation of prosecutions .— No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this Act unless the complaint the reof has been made or is made within three months from the date on 
which the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint the reof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying int o execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s . 12, for section 39 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  22 42. Power to exempt .—The State Government may, by order in writing, exempt, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as it may think fit to impose, any employer or class of employers from  all or 
any of the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that no such exemption 1[other than an exemption from section 19] shall be granted except 
with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
43. General power to make rules .—(1) The State Government ma y, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that the date to be specified under clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), shall not be less than six weeks fro m the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was 
published.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the qualifications required in respect of the chief inspector and insp ector;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised by inspectors and the areas in which and the manner in 
which such powers may be exercised;  
(c) the medical supervision which may be exercised by certifying surgeons;  
(d) the examination by inspectors or other pe rsons of the supply and distribution of drinking 
water in plantations;  
(e) appeals from any order of the chief inspector or inspector and the form in which, the time 
within which and the authorities to which, such appeals may be preferred;  
(f) the time wit hin which housing, recreational, educational or other facilities required by this Act 
to be provided and maintained may be so provided;  
(g) the types of latrines and urinals that should be maintained in plantations;  
(h) the medical, recreational and educat ional facilities that should be provided in plantations;  
(i) the form and manner in which notices of periods of work shall be displayed and maintained;  
(j) the registers which should be maintained by employers and the returns, whether occasional or 
periodi cal, as in the opinion of the State Government may be required  for the purposes of this Act; 
2***  
(k) the hours of work for a normal working day for the purpose of wages and overtime;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
2. The word "and" omitted by Act 58 of 1981, s. 14 (w.e. f. 26-1- 1982).  
 23 1[(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. ]  
2[(3) Every rule  made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before the State Legislature.]   
3[(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is mad e, before the State Legislature.]  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 58 of 1981, s. 14 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 16, f or sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
3. Added by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f.11 -1-2005).  
--------------------------The Presidents Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE PRESIDENT ’S EMOLUMENTS AND PENSION ACT, 1951  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
1A. Emoluments of the President.  
2. Pension to retiring Presidents . 
2A. Family pension to spouse of President.  
3. Free medical attendance and treatment to spouse of President dying in office . 
3A. Free Accommodation to spouse of President.  
4. Sums to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.  
5. Power to make rules . 
6. Power to remove difficulties . 
 
  2 
 THE PRESIDENT ’S EMOLUMENTS AND PENSION ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1951  
[13th May, 1951 .] 
An act to provide  1[for the emoluments of the President and for] pensions to retiring Presidents.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the President ’s 2[Emoluments and Pension] Act, 1951.  
3[1A. Emoluments of the President. —There shall be paid to the President by way of 
emoluments     4[ 5[five lakh rupees] ] per mensem.  
2. Pension to retiring Presidents .—6[(1)] There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold 
office as President, either by the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, a pension 
of  7[at the rate of fifty  per cent. of the emoluments of the President per month]  for the remainder of his 
life: 
8*                                        *                               *                                    *                                          * 
9[Provided that if any person before assuming the office of President, has held the office of the              
Vice -President, such person s hall not be entitled to any pension and other benefits under the provisions of 
the Vice -President ’s Pension Act, 1997  (30 of 1997) .] 
10[(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, every such person shall, for the remainder 
of his life , be entitled — 
11[ 12[(a) to the use of a furnished residence (including its maintenance), without payment of rent, 
two telephones (one for internet and broadband connectivity), one mobile phone with national 
roaming facility and a motor -car, free of charge or to such car allowance as may be specified in the 
rules;  
(b) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, one Additional Private Secretary, one 
Personal Assistant, two Peons and office expenses up to 13[one lakh rupees]  per annum ;] 
(c) to medic al attendance and treatment free of charge;  
14[(d) to travel anywhere in India, accompanied by one person, by the highest class by air, rail or 
steamer.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section , “residence ” shall have the meaning assigned to it 
in the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 195 2 (58 of 1952) .] 
15[(2A) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of every such person shall, for 
the remainder of life, be entitled to medical attendance and treatment, free of charge.]  
16[(3) Where any such person is re -elected to the office of President, such person or the spouse of 
such person shall not be entitled to any benefit under this section for the period during which such person 
again holds that office.] ] 
                                                           
  1. Subs. by Act 77 of 1985, s. 2, for “the payment of ” (w.e.f . 16-12-1985).   
  2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Pension”  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1985).  
  3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-1985).  
  4. Subs. by Act 2 8 of 2008 , s. 2, for “ fifty thousand rupees ” (w.e.f. 30-12-2008 ). 
  5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 137, for “ one lakh fifty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2016) . 
  6. Section 2 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 24 of 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -6-1962).  
  7. Subs. by Act 28 of 2008 s. 3, for “ of three lakh rupees  per annum ” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
  8. The proviso omitted by Act 24 of 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -6-1962).  
  9. Ins. by Act 25 of 1998, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-8-1998). 
10. Ins. by Act 24 of 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -6-1962).  
11. Subs. by Act  16 of 1990, s. 2, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -6-1990).  
12. Subs . by Act 28 of 2008 , s. 3, for clause s (a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 30-12-2008 ). 
 13. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 138, for “ sixty thousand rupees ”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
14. Ins. by Act 71 of 1993, s. 2  (w.e.f. 26-12-1993). 
15. Ins. by Act 79 of 1976, s. 2  (w.e.f. 25 -8-1976).  
16. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 25 -8-1976).  3 
 1[2A. Family pension to spouse of President. —The spouse of a person who dies — 
(a) while holding the office of President, or  
(b) after  ceasing to hold office as President either by the expiration of his term of office or by 
resignation of his office, shall be paid a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent . of pension as is 
admissible to a retiring President, for the remainder of her  life.]  
2[3. Free medical attendance and treatment to spouse of President dying in office .—Subject to 
any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies while holding the office of 
President shall, for the remainder of life, be enti tled to medical attendance and treatment, free of charge.]  
3[3A. Free Accommodation to spouse of President. —Subject to any rules that may be made in this 
behalf, the spouse of a person who dies — 
(a) while holding the office of President, or  
4[(b) after ceasing to hold office as President, either on the expiration of his term of office or by 
resignation of his office, shall be entitled ,— 
(i) to the use of furnished residence (including its maintenance) without payment of licence fee;  
(ii) to secretarial staff consisting of  a Private Secretary and a Peon and office expenses as per 
actuals,  the total expenditure on which shall not exceed 5[twenty thousand rupees]  per annum;  
(iii) to a telephone and a motor -car, free of charge or such car allowance for the remainder  of his 
life, as may be specified in the rules;  
(iv) to travel anywhere in India, in a calendar year to twelve single journeys, by the highest 
class , by air, rail or steamer, accompanied by a companion or a relative ].]  
4. Sums  to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India .—Any 6[sum] payable under this Act 
shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.  
7[5. Power to make rules .—8[(1)] The Central Government may , by notification in the Official 
Gazette , make rules for carrying out the purposes of th is Act.] 
9[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or b oth Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of a nything previously done 
under that rule.]  
10[6. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of 
this Act, as amended by the President ’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008  (28 of 2008) , 
the Central G overnment may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose 
of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date on which 
this Act comes into force.  
(2) Every  order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000 ).  
2. Subs. by Act 79 of 1976, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 24 -5-2000) .  
3. Ins. by Act 14 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000).  
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2008, s. 4, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 30 -12-2008)  
5.  Subs. by Act 13 of 2018,  s. 139, for “ twelve thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
6. Subs. by Act 24 of 1962, s. 3, for “pension” (w.e.f. 28 -6-1962).  
7. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-6-1962).  
8. Section 5 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by  Act 79 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -8-1976) . 
9. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -8-1976).  
10. Ins. by Act 28 of 2008, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -12-2008).  
--------------------------The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951--------------------------
 
1 
 THE RAILWAY COMPANIES (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) ACT , 1951  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
SECTIONS             
1. Short title, extent and application.  
2. Definitions.   
3. Power of Central Government to apply Act to any railway company and to appoint directors 
thereof.   
4. Effect of notified order appointing directors or managing agents.   
5. Powers and duties of directors .  
6. Statement of affairs to be made to directors .  
7. Statements by b eneficial owners of shares of railway company .  
8. Power of directors to institute proceedings against past directors , etc., for damages . 
9. Penalties.  
10. Filling up of vacancies among directors .  
11. No right to compensation for termination of contract of managing agent or any other         
contract .  
12. Cancellation of appointment of directors . 
13. Application of the Companies Act . 
14. Effect of Act on other laws . 
15. Directors to be public serva nts. 
16. Delegation of powers .  
17. Protection of action taken under Act . 
18. Power of Central Government to acquire railway of railway  company .  
19. Power to make rules .  
20. Repeal of Ordinance 2 of 1951 .  
 
  
  
2 
  
THE RAILWAY COMPANIES (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) ACT, 1951 
ACT NO. 51 OF 1951  
 [14th September , 1951 .] 
An Act to make provision for the proper management and administration of railway companies in 
certain special cases.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Railway Companies 
(Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It applies to every railway company in respect of which a notif ied order has been issued under 
section 3.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Companies Act ” means the Indian Companies Act, 1913 ( 7 of 1913);  
(b) “directors” means the directors appointed under section 3;  
(c) “notified  order” means an order notif ied in the Official Gazette;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “railway company ” means any company registered under the Companies Act  or any law 
repealed thereby for the purpose of making and working or making or working a railway, whether 
alone or in conjunction with other purposes.  
3. Power of Central Government to apply Act to any railway company and to appoint directors 
thereof .—(1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that a situation has arisen in the affairs of a 
railway company which — 
(a) has prejudicially affected the convenience of persons using the railway administered by the 
railway   company, or  
(b) has caused serious d islocation in any trade or industry using the railway, or  
(c) has caused serious unemployment amo ngst a section of the community,  
or when, in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary the national interest  the Central 
Government may, by notif ied order, apply  the provision s of this Act to the railway company and appoint 
as many persons as thinks fit to be directors of the railway company for the purpose of taking over its 
management and administration.  
(2) The power to appoint directors under t his section includes th e power to appoint any individual, 
firm or company to be the manag ing agent  of the railway company on such terms and conditions as to the 
Central Government may seem fit.  
                                                           
 The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch edule  I.  
3 
 4. Effect of notif ied order appointing directors or managing agents .—On the issue of a notified  
order under section 3 ,— 
(a) all persons holding office as directors of the railway company immediately before the issue of 
the notif ied order shall be deemed to have vacated their o ffices as such;  
(b) any contract of management between the railway company and any managing agent there of 
holding office as such immediate ly before the issue of the notif ied order shall be deemed to has 
terminated;  
(c) the managing agent, if any , appointe d under this Act shall be deemed to have been duly 
appoi nted in pursuance of the Companies  Act and the memorandum and articles of association of the 
railway company, and the provisions of the Companies Act and of the memorandum and articles shall, 
subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, apply accordingly , but no such managing agent 
shall be removed from office except with the previous co nsent of the Central Government;  
(d) the directors shall take such steps as may be necessary to take into their custody or under their 
control all the property, effect and actionable claims to which the railway company is, or appears to 
be, entitled, and all the property and effects of the railway company shall be deemed to be in the 
custody of the director s as from the date of the notified  order;  
(e) the directors shall be for all purposes the directors of the railway company duly constituted 
under the Companies Act , and shall alone been titled to exercise all the powers of the directors of the 
railway company , whether such powers are derived from the Companies Act or from the memorandum 
or articles of association of the railway company or from any other source.  
5. Powers and duties of directors .—(1) Subject to the control of the Central Government, the 
directo rs shall take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently  managing the business of 
the railway company and, in particular, the directors shall have power, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Companies Act  or in the memorandum or art icles of association of the railway 
company ,— 
(a) to chose one of their number to be  the chairman , and to delegate to him or to any one or more of 
the directors all or any of their powers;  
(b) with the previous approval of the Central Government and subject to such conditions as that 
Government may think fit to impose, to raise funds in such manner and offer such security there for as 
they think fit;  
(c) to carry out such repairs as may be necessary in respect of any machinery, rolling s tock, 
building s, works or other property in their custody;  
(d) to do all acts necessary for making, maintaining, altering or repairing and using the railway of 
the railway company;  
(e) to employ such persons as may be necessary for enabling them to efficiently discharge  their 
duties, and define the conditions of service of such employees.  
(2) The directors may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, cancel or vary, either 
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as they think fit to impose, any contra ct or agreement 
entered into between the railway company and any other person at any time before the issue of the 
notif ied order under section 3, if such contract or agreement had been entered into in bad faith and is 
detrimental to the interests of the ra ilway company.   
4 
 6. Statement of affairs to be made to directors .—(1) On the issue of a notif ied order under section 
3, there shall  be made out and submitted to the directors a statement as to the affairs of the railway 
company, verified by affidavit and containing the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the assets of the railway company, stating separately the cash balance in hand and a t the bank, if 
any; 
(b) the debts and liabilities;  
(c) the names, residences and occupations of the creditors, stating separately the amount of secured 
debts and unsecured debts and, in the case of secured debts, the particulars of the securities, their va lue 
and the dates when they were given;  
(d) the debts due to the railway company and the names residences and occupations of the persons 
from whom they are due and the amount likely to be realised there from;  
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed . 
(2) The statement shall be submitted by one or more of the persons who was or were holding office as 
a director or as directors of the railway company immediately before the issue of the notif ied order under 
section 3 or by the secretary, manager or othe r chief officer of the railway company who was holding 
office as suc h before the issue of the notified  order as the directors may require in each case, and the 
statement shall be submitted within such time as may be so required.  
(3) If any person, without any reasonable excuse, knowingly and wilfully makes default in complying 
with the requirements of this section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
7. Statements by beneficial owners of shares  of railway company .—Any person who has any 
interest in any share of the railway company which stands in the name of another person in the register of 
share holders of the railway company shall, with in such period as may be specified by the Central 
Government by notified  order, make a declaration in such form as may be prescribed (which shall be 
countersigned by the person in whose name  in the share is registered) to the railway company declaring 
his interest in the share, and notwithstanding anything contained in any other la w or in any contract to the 
contrary, a person who fails to make a declaration as aforesaid in respect of any share shall be deemed to 
have no right or title whatsoever in or to that share : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the right of an y person who has an interest in any 
such share to establish in a court his right thereto if the person in whose name the share is registered 
refuses to sign that declaration as required by this section.  
8. Power of directors to institute proceedings agains t past directors , etc., for damages .—(1) The 
directors may, if they are satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of the railway company or in the 
public interest so to do, institute in the name of the railway company such proceedings as they think f it 
for the recovery of damages for any fraud , misfeasance or other misconduct in connection with the 
management of the affairs of the railway company committed by any person before the issue of the 
notif ied order under section 3 or for the recovery of any property of the railway company which has been 
misapplied or wrongfully retained by any person.  
(2) No director shall be personally liable for any costs or expenses incurred in connection with any 
proceedings instituted by virtue of this section.  
9. Penalt ies.—If any person wilfully destroys or fails to deliver to the directors when required any 
books of account, registers or any other documents in his custody relating to the business of the        
5 
 railway company or retains any property of the railway company, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which  may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
10. Filling up of vacancies among directors .—(1) Casual vacancies occurring in the body of 
directors, whet her caused by death, resignation or otherwise, shall be fill ed by nomination by the Central 
Government.  
(2) No act of the directors shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy among the directors or any defect in the ap pointment of any of them.  
11. No right to compensation for termination of contract of managing agent or any other 
contract .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, no managing agent shall  be entitled to any compensation for the premature termination 
under this Act of any contract of management entered into by him with the railway company, and no 
person shall be entitled to compensation in respect of the cancellation or variation under this  Act of any 
other contract or agreement.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any such managing agent or person to 
recover from the railway company moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of such compensation.  
12. Cancellation of appointment of directors .—(1) If at any time it appears to the Central 
Government that the purpose of the notif ied order appointing the directors has been fulfilled or that for 
any other reason it is unnecessary that the notified order shou ld remain in force, the Central Government 
may, by notif ied order, cancel the appointment of director s made under this Act.  
(2) On the cancellation of any such appointment as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central 
Government may — 
(a) direct that all the property, effects and actionable claims of the railway company shall reve st in 
the persons in whom they were vested before the issued of the notif ied order under section 3; or  
(b) reconstitute by fresh appointment a new body of persons to take charge of the management and 
administration of the whole affairs of the railway company, whether as directors or ma nagers or in any 
other capacity:  
Provided that no such direction or fresh appointment shall be made except in pursuance of a           
resolut ion passed by the shareholders of the railway company at a meeting called for the purpose by the 
directors appointed under section 3.  
(3) The Central Government may, at any time before the issue of the notif ied order under sub -section 
(1), take such action  as may be necessary under clause ( b) of sub -section  (2) for the purpose of making 
any fresh appointments.  
13. Application of the Companies Act .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies 
Act or in the memorandum or articles of association of the railway company, but subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of the railway company or any other person to 
nominate or appoint any person to be a director of the railway company;  
(b) no re solution passed at any meeting  of the shareholders of the railway company shall be given 
effect to unless approved by the Central Government ;  
6 
 (c) no proceeding for the winding -up of the railway company or for the appointment of a receiver in 
respect there of scallion any court, unless by or with the sanction of   the Central  Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and to the other provisions contained in this 
Act and subject to such exceptions, restrictions and limitations as t he Central Government may by 
notif ied order specify, the Companies Act shall continue to apply to the railway company in the same 
manner as  it applied there to before the issue of the notif ied order under section 3.  
14. Effect of Act on other laws .—The provisions of this Act and of any notified order made there 
under shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time 
being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association of the railway company or in an y other 
instrument  having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, but save as aforesaid the provisions of 
this Act shall be in addition to, and not  in derogation of, any other law for the time being applicable to the 
railway company.  
15. Directors  to be public servants .—Every director appointed under section 3 shall be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).  
16. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that all or any of 
the power s exercisable by it under this Act, except the powers given to it under section 3 to apply the 
provisions of this Act to any railway company or the powers given to it under section 12 or section 18, 
may be exercised by any State  Government, and where any powers are so delegated, they shall be 
exercised subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue from time to time.  
17. Protection of action taken under Act .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall  
lie against any director in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any State 
Government or any director for any dam age caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or untended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
18. Power of Central Government to acquire railway of railway company .—(1) Where under any 
instrument, having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or by virtue of an agreement arrived at 
between the parties, provision is made for the purchase by a person or local authority or the State 
Government of a railway which i s the property of a railway company on payment of the value thereof 
calculated in the manner and subject to the conditions specified in the instrument, the Central 
Government shall also have the same right to purchase the railway on the same terms and subj ect to the 
same conditions as the person, local authority or the State Government has under the instrument.  
(2) If in respect of any railway the Central Government exercise its right of purchase under this 
section, any person, local authority or State Gove rnment , in whom or in which a similar right is vested 
under the instrument, shall be deemed to have become disentitled to exercise the same.  
19. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may by notif ied order, make rules to carry  
out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any rules made under 
sub-section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the manner in which or the conditions subject s to which the direct or so managing agents of a 
railway company may exercise their powers under this Act;   
7 
 (b) the additional particulars which a statement under section 6 should contain;  
(c) the form in which a declaration under section 7 may  be made;  
(d) the appointment of a R ailway Local Advisory Committee;  
(e) the manner in which books of account shall be maintained by the directors and audited;  
(f) the submission of specified or periodical returns and reports by the directors to any specified 
authority in connection with the affairs of the railway company;  
(g) the conduct of business of the directors appointed by notified order and for the recruitment and 
employment of officers and staff.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
20. Repeal of Ordinance 2 of 1951 .—The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance, 
1951 ( 2 of 1951) is hereby repealed:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Ordinance, or  
(b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the 
said Ordinance, or  
 (c) any inv estigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment, and any such investigation , legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or 
enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture, or punishment may be imposed  as if this Act had not been 
passed:  
Provided  further  that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken (including 
any notified order issued, appointment made or direction given under the said Ordinance) shall be deemed 
to have been  done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue in force 
accordingly , unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -05-1986.)  
--------------------------The Rajghat Samadhi Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE RAJGHAT SAMADHI ACT, 1951  
______ ___ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. The Rajghat Samadhi Committee . 
4. Composition of the Committee . 
5. Powers and duties of the Committee . 
6. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
7. Power of Committee to make bye -laws.  
7A. Rules and bye -laws to be laid before Parliament . 
8. Validity of acts of Committee not to be questioned by reason of vacancy, etc . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE RAJGHAT SAMADHI ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1951  
[29th June,  1951 .] 
An Act to provide for the administration and control of the Rajghat Samadhi in Delhi.  
BE it enact ed by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Rajghat Samadhi Act, 1951.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “Committee ” means the Rajghat Samadhi Committee constituted under this Act;  
(b) “Samadhi” means the structure built in token of reverence for Mahatama Gandhi at Rajghat 
on the Western bank of the Jamuna in Delhi, and includes the premises described in the Schedule 
with all buildings contained therein, together with all additions thereto or alt erations thereof which 
may be made after the commencement  of this Act.  
3. The Rajghat Samadhi Committee .—(1) The administration and control of the Samadhi shall be 
vested in a Committee constituted in the manner hereinafter provided.  
(2) The Committee shal l by the name of “The Rajghat Samadhi Committee ”, be a body corporate and 
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued through its 
Chairman.  
4. Composition of the Committee .—(1) The Committee shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 
2[(a) the Mayor of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, ex officio ;] 
(b) three officials nominated by the Central Government;  
3[(c) four non -officials nominated by the Central Government;  
(d) three members of Parliament of whom shall be elected from among themselves by members 
of the House of the People and one from among themselves by members of the Council of   States.] 
(2) The Central Government may appoint any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or any other 
person to b e the Chairman of the Committee, and if any other person is so appointed, he shall be deemed 
to be a member of the Committee within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) All persons nominated by the Central Government to be members of the Committee shall hol d 
office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
4[(4) The term of office of a member elected under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall come to an end 
as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House from which he was elected.]  
5[(5) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Committee shall not disqualify its holder 
for being chosen as, or for being , a member of either House of Parliament.]  
5. Powers and duties of the Committee .—Subject to such rules as may  be made under this Act, the 
powers and duties of the Committee shall be — 
(a) to administer the affairs of the Samadhi and to keep the Samadhi in proper order and in a state 
of good repair;  
(b) to organise and regulate periodical functions at the Samadhi;  
                                                           
1. 7th June, 1952, vide notification No. S.R.O. 1018, dated 7th June, 1952, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3.  
2. Subs.  by Act 37 of 1958, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 9 -3-1959.)  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clauses ( c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 9 -3-1959).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid.  (w.e.f. 9-3-1959).  
5. Ins. by Act 30 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1988).  3 
 (c) to do such other things as may be incidental or conducive  to the efficient administration of the 
affairs of the Samadhi.  
6. Power of Central Government to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notifica tion in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the objects of this Act, and to regulate access to the Samadhi 
or to any portion th ereof. 
7. Power of Committee to make bye -laws .—(1) The Committee may  1[by notification in the 
Official Gazette] make bye -laws consistent with this Act and the rules made  thereunder for all or any of 
the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Committee shall be convened, the quorum for the 
transac tion of any business thereat and the procedure at such meetings;  
(b) the appointment of such pers ons as may be necessary to assist the Committee in the efficient 
performance of its duties and the terms and conditions of service of such employees;  
(c) the duties and powers of the employees of the Committee;  
(d) the submission of accounts, returns and reports to the Committee by any of its employees.  
(2) All bye -laws made under this section shall be subject to the condition of previous publication and 
shall not have effect until they are approved by the Central Gover nment . 
2[7A. Rule s and bye -laws to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every bye -law made under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days whi ch may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or bye -law o r 
both Houses agree that the rule or bye -law should not be made, the rule or bye -law shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without preju dice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or bye -law.]  
8. Validity of acts of Committee not to be questioned by reason of vacancy, etc. —No act or 
proceeding of the Committee shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any vacan cy in, or any 
defect in the constitution of, the Committee.  
 
______  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( b)] 
The Samadhi premises, admeasuring 44.35 acres, bounded  
on the north by a vacant piece of land belonging to the Delhi Improvement Trust  
on the south by Power  House; and  
on the east by the Power House; and  
on the west by Bela Road.  
________  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f 18 -5-1988). 
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-1988).  
 
--------------------------The Representation of the People Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951  
_______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.   
2. Interpretation.  
PART II  
QUALIFICATIONS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS  
CHAPTER  I.—Qualifications for Membership of Parliament  
3. Qualification for membership of the Council of States.  
4. Qualifications for membership of the House of the People.  
CHAPTER  II.—Qualifications for Membership of State Legislatures  
5. Qualifications for membership of a Legislative Assembly.  
5A. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly of Sikkim.  
6. Qualifications for membership of a Legislative Council.  
CHAPTER   III.—Disqualifications for Membership of  Parliament  and  State Legislatures  
7. Definitions.  
8. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences.  
8A. Disqualification on ground of corrupt practices.  
9. Disqualification for dismissal for corruption or disloyalty.  
9A. Disqualification for Government contracts, etc.  
10. Disqualification for office under Government compa ny. 
10A. Disqualification for failure to lodge account of election expenses.  
11. Removal or reduction of period of disqualification.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Disqualifications for voting  
11A. Disqualification arising out of conviction and corrupt practices.  
11B. Remova l of disqualifications.  
PART III  
NOTIFICATION OF GENERAL ELECTIONS  
12. Notification for biennial election to the Council of States.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
12A. Notification for election to fill the  seat allotted to the State of Sikkim in the Council of          
States.  
13. [Omitted. ] 
14. Notification for general elect ion to the House of the People.  
14A. Notification for electing the representative of the State of Sikkim to the existing House of 
the people.  
15. Notification for general election to a State Legislat ive Assembly.  
15A. Notification for certain elections to Legislative Councils.  
16. Notification for biennial elections to a State Legislative Council.  
PART IV  
ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY FOR THE CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS  
19. Definition.  
19A. Delegation of functions of Election Commission.  
20. General duties of chief electoral officers.  
20A. General duties of district election officer.  
20B. Observers.  
21. Returning officers.  
22. Assistant returning officers.  
23. Returning officer to include assistant returning officers performing the functions of the 
returning officer.  
24. General duty of the returning officer.  
25. Provision of polling stations for constituencies.  
26. Appointment of presiding officers for polling stations.  
27. General duty of the presiding officer.  
28. Duties of a polling officer.  
28A. Returning officer, presiding officer, etc., deemed to be on deputation to Election 
Commission.  
29. Special provisions in the case of certain elections.  
PART IVA  
REGISTRATION OF POLITICAL PARTIES  
29A.  Registration with the Election Commiss ion of associations and bodies as political parties.  
29B. Political parties entitled to accept contribution.  
29C. Declaration of donation received by the political parties.  
PART V  
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS  
CHAPTER  I.—Nomination of Candidates  
30.   Appointment of dates for nominations, etc.  
31.   Public notice of election.  3 
 SECTIONS  
32. Nomination of candidates for election.  
33. Presentation  of  nomination paper and requirement for  a  valid nomination.  
33A.  Right to information.  
33B.  Candidate to furnish information only under the Act and the rules.  
34. Deposits.  
35. Notice of nominations and the time and place for their scrutiny.  
36. Scrutiny of nominations.  
37. Withdrawal of candidatu re. 
38. Publication of list of contesting candidates.  
 39. Nomination of candidates at other elections.  
 39A. Allocation of equitable sharing of time.  
CHAPTER  II.—Candidates and their Agent  
40. Election agents.  
41. Disqualification for being an election agent.  
42. Revocation of the appointment, or death, of an election agent.  
43. [Omitted. ] 
44. [Omitted. ] 
45. Functions of election agents.  
46. Appointment of polling agents.  
47. Appointment of counting agents.  
48. Revocation  of the appointment  or death of a  polling agent or counting agent.  
49. Functions of polling agents and counting agents.  
50. Attendance of a conte sting candidate or his election agent at polling stations , and performance 
by him of the functions of a polling agent or counting agent.  
51. Non-attendance of polling or counting agents.  
CHAPTER  III.—General Procedure at Elections  
52.  Death of candidate of recognised Political Party before Poll.  
53.  Procedure in contested and uncontested elections.  
54.  [Omitted. ] 
55.  Eligibility of members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes to hold seats not reserved 
for  those castes or tribes.  
55A. [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER  IV.—The Poll  
56. Fixing time for poll.  
57. Adjournment of poll in emergencies.  
  4 
 SECTIONS  
58. Fresh poll in the case of destruction, etc., of ballot boxes.  
58A. Adjournment of poll or countermanding of election on the ground of booth capturing.  
59. Manner of voting at elections.  
60. Special procedure for voting by certain classes of persons.  
61. Special procedure for preventing personation of  electors.  
61A. Voting machines at elections.  
62. Right to vote.  
63. [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER  V.—Counting of Votes  
64. Counting of votes.  
64A. Destruction, loss, etc.,  of ballot paper s at the time of counting.  
65. Equality of votes.  
66. Declaration of results.  
67. Report of the result.  
67A. Date of election of candidate.  
CHAPTER  VI.—Multiple Elections  
68. Vacation of seats when elected to both Houses of Parliament.  
69. Vacation of  seats by persons already members of one House on electio n to other House of 
Parlia ment.  
70. Election to more than one seat in either House  of Parliament or in t he House or either House 
of the  Legislature of a State.  
CHAPTER  VII.—Publication of Election Results and Nominations  
71. Publication of results of elections to the Council of States and of names of persons nominated 
by the President.  
72. [Omitted. ] 
73. Publication of results of gen eral elections to the House of the People and the State Legislative 
Assemblies.  
73A. Special provisions as to certain elections.  
74. Publication of r esults of elections to the State Legislative Councils and of names of  persons 
nominated to such  Councils.  
CHAPTER  VIIA. —Declaration of Assets and Liabilities  
75A. Declaration of assets and liabilities.  
CHAPTER VIII. —Election Expenses  
76. Application of Cha pter. 
77. Account of election expenses and maximum thereof.  
78. Lodging of account with the district election officer.  
  5 
 PART VA  
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL TO CANDIDATES OF  
RECOGNISED POLITICAL PARTIES  
SECTIONS  
78A. Free supply of copies of electoral rolls.  
78B. Supply of certain items to candidates, etc.  
PART VI  
DISPUTES REGARDING ELECTIONS  
CHAPTER  I.—Interpretation  
79. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II.—Presentation of Election Petitions to  Election Commission  
80. Election petitions.  
80A. High Court to try election petitions.  
81. Presentation of petitions.  
82. Parties to the petition.  
83. Contents of petition.  
84. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.  
85. [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER  III.—Trial of Election Petitions  
86. Trial of election petitions.  
87. Procedu re before the High Court.  
93. Documentary evidence.  
94. Secrecy of voting not to be infringed.  
95. Answering of criminating questions and certificate of indemnity.  
96. Expenses of witnesses.  
97. Recrimination when seat claimed.  
98. Decision of the High Court.  
99. Other orders to be made by the High Court.  
100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.  
101. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may be declared to have 
been elected.  
102. Procedure in case of an equality of votes.  
103. Communication of orders of the High Court.  
104. [Omitted. ] 
105. [Omitted. ] 
106. Transmission of order to the appropriate authority, etc., and its publication.  
  6 
 SECTIONS  
107. Effect of orders of the High Court.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Withdrawal and Abatement of  Election Petitions  
108. [Omitted. ] 
109. Withdrawal of election petitions.  
110. Procedure for withdrawal of election petitions.  
111. Report  of  withdrawal  by  the  High  Court  to  the  Election Commission.  
112. Abatement of election petitions.  
116. Abatement or substitution on death of respondent.  
CHAPTER  IVA.—Appeals  
116A. Appeals to Supreme Court.  
116B. Stay of operation of order of High Court.  
116C. Procedure in appeal.  
CHAPTER V.—Costs and Security for Costs  
117. Security for costs.  
118. Security  for costs from a respondent.  
119. Costs.  
121. Payment of costs out of security deposits and return of such deposits.  
122. Execution of orders as to costs.  
PART VII  
CORRUPT PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES  
CHAPTER I.—Corrupt Practices  
123. Corrupt practice s. 
CHAPTER  III.—Electoral Offences  
125. Promoting enmity between classes in connection with election . 
125A . Penalty for filing false affidavit, etc.  
126. Prohibition of public meetings during period of forty -eight hours ending with hour fixed for 
conclusion of poll.  
126A. Restriction on publication and dissemination of result of exit polls, etc.  
 126B. Offences by companies.  
127. Disturbances at election meetings.  
127A. Restrictions on the printing of pamphlets, posters, etc.  
128. Maintenance of Secrecy of voting.  
129. Officers, etc., at elections not to act for candidates or to influence voting.  
130. Prohibition of canvassing in or near polling stations.  
131. Penalty for disorderly conduct in or near polling stations.  
132. Penalty for misconduct at  the polling station.  
  7 
 SECTIONS  
132A. Penalty for failure to observe procedure for voting.  
133. Penalty for illegal hiring or procuring of conveyance at elections.  
134. Breaches of official duty in connection with elections.  
134A. Penalty for Government servants for acting as election agent, polling agent or counting 
agent.  
134B. Prohibition of going armed to or near a polling station.  
135. Removal of ballot papers from polling station to be an offence.  
135A. Offence of booth capturing.  
135B. Grant of pai d holiday to employees on the day of poll.  
135C. Liquor not to be sold, given or distributed on polling day.  
136. Other offences and penalties therefor.  
137. [Omitted. ] 
138. [Repealed .] 
 
PART VIII  
DISQUALIFICATIONS  
 [CHAPTER  I.—139—140A .] [Omitted. ] 
[CHAPTER  II.—141—144.] [Omitted. ] 
[CHAPTER  III.—145.] [Omitted. ] 
CHAPTER   IV.—Powers  of  Election   Commission   in connection   with inquiries  
as to disqualifications of Members  
146. Powers of Election Commission.  
146A. Statements made by persons to the Election Commission.  
146B. Procedure to be followed by the Election Commission.  
146C. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
PART IX  
BYE-ELECTIONS  
147. Casual vacancies in the Council of States.  
148. [Omitted. ] 
149. Casual vacancies in the House of the People.  
150. Casual vacancies in the State Legislative Assemblies.  
151. Casual vacancies in the State Legislative Councils.  
151A. Time limit for filling va cancies referred to in sections  147, 149, 150 and 151.  
PART X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
152.   List  of  members  of  the  State  Legislative  Assemblies  and electoral  colleges  to  be  
maintained   by  the  returning  officers concerned.  
153. Extension of time for completion of election.  8 
 SECTIONS  
154. Term of office of members of the Council of States.  
155. Commencement of the term of office of members of the Council of States.  
156. Term of office of members of State Legislative Councils.  
157. Commencement of the term of office of members of the Legislative Councils.  
158. Return o r forfeiture of candidate ’s deposit.  
159. Staff o r certain authorities to be made available for election work.  
160. Requisitioning of premises, vehicles, etc., for election purposes.  
161. Payment of compensation.  
162. Power to obtain information.  
163. Powers of entry into and inspect ion of premises, etc.  
164. Eviction from requisitioned premises.  
165. Release of premises from requisition.  
166. Delegation of functions of th e State Government with regard to requisitioning.  
167. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitio ning.  
168. [Omitted. ] 
PART XI  
GENERAL  
169. Power to make rules.  
170. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
171. [ Repealed .] 
 
  9 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1951  
 [17th July, 1951 .] 
An Act to provide for the conduct of elections to the Houses of Parliament and to the House or 
Houses of the Legislature of each State, the qualifications and disqualifications for 
membership of those Houses, the corrupt  1*** practices and other offences at or in 
connection with such elections and the decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in 
connection with such elections.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Representation of the People Act, 1951.  
2. Interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) each of the expressions defined in section 2 or sub -section ( 1) of section 27 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), but not defined in this Act, shall have the same 
meaning as in t hat Act; 
(b) “appropriate authority ” means, in relation to an election to the House of the People or the 
Council of S tates 2***, the Central Government, and in relation to an election to the Legislative 
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State, the S tate Government;  
3[(bb) “chief electoral officer ” means the officer appointed under section 13A of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);]  
(c) “corrupt practice ” means any of the practices specified in section 123  4***; 
5[(cc) “district election officer ” means the officer designated or nominated under section 13AA of 
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);]  
(d) “election ” means an election to fill a seat or seats in either House of Parliament or in the 
House or either Hou se of the Legislature of a State other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir  6***; 
7[(e) “elector ” in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered in the electoral 
roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not subjec t to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);]  
8[(f) “political party ” means an association or a body of individual citizens of India registered 
with the Election Commission as a polit ical party under section 29A;]  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
5[(h) “public holiday ” means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of section 25 of 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881);]  
9[(i)] “sign”, in relation to a person who is unable to write his name , means authenticate in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
10*                                 *                                *                                 *                                * 
      11*                                 *                                *                                 *                                * 
                                                             
1. The words “and illegal ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2. Certain words omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. The words and figures “or section 124 ” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
5. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 15 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. Certain words omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 14 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
8. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1989).  
9. Clause ( k) re-lettered as clause ( i) of that section by Act 27 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
10. Clause ( j) omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) order, 1956.  
11. Clause ( k) omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s. 15 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  10 
 (2) For the purposes of this Act,  1*** a Parliamentary constituency, an Assembly constituency, a 
Council constituency, a local authorities ’ constituency, a graduates ’ constituency and a teachers ’ 
constituency shall each be treated as a constituency of a different class.  
(3) Any requirement under this Act that a notification, order, rule, declaration, notice or list issued or 
made by any authority shall be published in the Official Gazette, shall, unless otherwise expressly 
provided in this Act, be construed as a requirement that the notification, order, rule, declaration, notice or 
list shall — 
(a) where it is  issued or made by the Central Government, be published in the Gazette of India;  
(b) where it is issued or made by a State Government, be published in the Official Gazette of the 
State; and  
(c) where it is issued or made by any other authority, be publishe d in the Gazette of India if it 
relates to an election to, or membership of, either House of Parliament  2*** and in the Official 
Gazette of the State if it relates to an election to, or membership of, the House or either House of the 
Legislature of a State . 
(4) Where, under any of the provisions of this Act, anything is to be prescribed, different provisions 
may be made for different cases or classes of cases.  
3*                                    *                                     *                                   *                                * 
4[(5) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in th at 
State.]  
5*                                    *                                     *                                   *                                * 
PART II  
6[QUALIFICATIONS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS ] 
CHAPTER I.—Qualifications for Membership of Parliament.  
7[3. Qualification for membership of the Council of States .—A person shall not be qualified to be 
chosen as a representative of any State  8*** or Union territory in the Council of States unless he is an 
elector for a Parliamentary constituency  9[in India] ]. 
4. Qualifications for membership of the House of the People .—A person shall not be qualified to 
be chosen to fill a seat in the House of the People  10*** 11***, unless — 
(a) in the case of a seal reserved for the Scheduled Castes in any State, he is a member of any of 
the Scheduled Castes, whether of that State or of any other State, and is an elector for any 
Parliamentary constituency;  
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in any State (other than those in 
the autonomous d istricts of Assam), he is a member of any of the Scheduled Tribes, whether of the 
State or of any other State (excluding the tribal areas of Assam), and is an elector for any 
Parliamentary constituency;  
                                                             
1. The words “an electoral college constituency ” omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s. 66 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
2. The words “or the electoral co llege of union territory ” omitted by s. 66, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957). 
3. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 15, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966). Which was renumbered as sub -section ( 5) by                   
Act 27 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
5.  Sub-section ( 7) omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6.  Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 16, for the heading “QUALIFICATIONS AND DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP ”                      
(w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
8. The brackets and  words omitted by  Act 47 of 1966, s. 17 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 2003, s. 2, for “in that State or territory ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-2003).  
10. Certain words omitted by Act 49 of 1965, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -12-1965).  
11. Certain words omitted by Act 29 of 1975, s. 12 ( w.e.f. 15 -8-1975).  11 
 (c) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam, 
he is a member of any of those Scheduled Tribes and is an elector for the Parliamentary constituency 
in which such seat is reserved or for any other Parliamentary constituency comprising any such 
autonomous dist rict; 1*** 
2[(cc) in the case of the seat reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory of  the 
3[Lakshadweep ], he is a member of any of those Scheduled Tribes and is an elector for the 
Parliamentary constituency of that Union territory;  4***] 
5[(ccc) in the case of the seat allotted to the State of Sikkim, he is an elector for the Parliamentary 
constituency for Sikkim ;] 
(d) in the case of any other seat, he is an elector for any Parliamentary constituency.  
CHAPTER  II.—Qualifications for Membersh ip of State Legislatures  
5. Qualifications for membership of a Legislative Assembly .—A person shall not be qualified to 
be chosen to fill a seat in the Legisla tive Assembly of a State unless — 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes of that 
State, he is a member of any of those castes or of those tribes, as the case may be, and is an elector for 
any Assembly constituency in that State;  
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for an autonomous district of Assam,  6*** he is a member of a  
7[Scheduled Tribe of any autonomous district] and is an elector for the Assembly constituency in 
which such seat or any other seat is reserved for that district; and  
(c) in the case of any other seat, he is an elector for any Assembly  constituency in that State:  
8[Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371 A, a person shall not be qualified 
to be chosen to fill any seat allocated to the Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland 
unless he is a m ember of the regional council referred to in that article.]  
9[5A. Qualifications for membership of Legislative Assembly of Sikkim. —10[(1)] Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 5, a person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the  Legislative 
Assembly of Sikkim (deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted under the 
Constitution) unless — 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia -Lepcha origin, he is a person either of 
Bhutia or Lepcha origin  and is an elector for any Assembly constituency in the State other than the 
constituency reserved for the Sanghas;  
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepal  origin, he is a person of Nepali origin 
and is an elector for any Assembly constit uency in the State;  
(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes, he is a member of any of the castes 
specified in the Representation of Sikkim Subjects Act, 1974 and is an elector for any Assembly 
constituency in the State; and  
(d) in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas, he is an elector of the Sangha constituency.]  
                                                             
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s. 18 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws order, 1974 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  
5. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  
6. Certain words omitted by the North -Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974 
(w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).  
7. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 19, for “Scheduled Tribe of that district ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
8. Ins. by Act 27 of 1962, s. 11 (w.e.f. 4 -9-1962).  
9. Ins. by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  
10. Section 5 A re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 8 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1979).  12 
 1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5, a person shall not be qualified to be chosen to 
fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim, to be constituted at any time after the 
commencement of the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1980 (8 of 1980), unless — 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia -Lepcha origin, he is a person either of 
Bhutia or Lepcha origin and is an elector for  any Assembly constituency in the State other than the 
constituency reserved for the Sanghas;  
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes, he is a member of any of those castes in 
the Sta te of Sikkim and is an elector for any Asse mbly constituency in the State;  
(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas, he is an elector of the Sangha constituency; and  
(d) in the case of any other seat, he is an elector for any Assembly constituency in the State.  
Explanation. —In this sub -sectio n “Bhutia ” includes Chumbipa, Dopthapa, Dukpa, Kagatey, Sherpa, 
Tibetan, Tromopa and Yolmo.]  
6. Qualifications for membership of a Legislative Council .—(1) A person shall not be qualifled to 
be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Council of a State to  be filled by election unless he is an elector 
for any Assembly constituency in that State.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative Council of a State to be 
filled by nomination by the Governor  2*** unless he is ordinarily resident in the State.  
3[CHAPTER  III.—DISQUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT AND STATE LEGISLATURES  
7. Definitions .—In this Chapter, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means in relation to any disqualification for being chosen as or for 
being a member of either House of Parliament, the Central Government, and in relation to any 
disqualification for being chosen as or for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or Leg islative 
Council of a State, the State Government;  
(b) “disqualified ” means disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either 
House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State  4[under the 
provisions of this Chapter, and on no other ground].  
8. Disqualification on conviction for certain offences .—5[(1) A person convicted of an offence 
punishable under — 
(a) section 153A (offence of promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, 
race, plac e of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony) 
or section 171E (offence of bribery) or section 171F (offence of undue influence or personation at an 
election) or sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 37 6 or section 376A or section 376B or 
section 376C or section 376D (offences relating to rape) or section 498A (offence of cruelty towards 
a woman by husband or relative of a husband) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 505 
(offence of making s tatement creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill -will between classes or 
offence relating to such statement in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the 
performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies) o f the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) ; or 
(b) the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955), which provides for punishment for the 
preaching and practice of “untouchability ”, and for the enforcement of any disability arising 
therefrom; or  
(c) section  11 (offence of importing or exporting prohibited goods) o f the Customs                   
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); or  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1979).  
2. The words “or the Rajpramukh, as the case may be ” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
3. Subs.  by Act 47 of 1966, s. 20, for C HAPTER  III (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -7-2013).  
5. Subs. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 4, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 15-3-1989).  13 
 (d) sections 10 to 12 (offence of being a member of an association declared unlawful,          
offence relating to dealing with funds of an  unlawful association or offence relating to contravention 
of an order made in respect of a notified place) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)                            
Act, 1967 (37 of 1967); or  
(e) the Foreign Exchange (Regulation) Act, 1973 (46 of  1973); or  
(f) the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or  
(g) section 3 (offence of committing terrorist acts) or section 4 (offence of committing disruptive 
activities) of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)  Act, 1987 (28 of 1987); or  
(h) section 7 (offence of contravention of the provisions of section 3 to 6) of the Religious 
Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (41 of 1988); or  
(i) section 125 (offence of promoting enmity between classes in connect ion with the election) or 
section 135 (offence of removal of ballot papers from polling stations) or section 135A (offence of 
booth capturing) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 136 (offence of fraudulently defacing or 
fraudulently destroying any nomination paper) of this Act;  1[or] 
1[(j) section 6 (offence of conversion of a place or worship) of the Places of Worship (Special 
Provisions) Act 1991],  2[or] 
3[(k) section 2 (offence of insulting the Indian National Flag or the Constitution of India) or 
section 3  (offence of preventing singing of National Anthem) of the Prevention of Insults to National 
Honour Act, 1971 (69 of 1971)  4[or];]  
4[(l) the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (3 of 1988); or  
(m) the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (4 9 of 1988); or  
(n) the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (15 of 2002),]  
5[shall be disqualified, where the convicted person is sentenced to — 
(i) only fine, for a period of six years from the date of such conviction;  
(ii) imprisonment, from the date of such  conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a 
further period of six years since his release .] 
(2) A person convicted for the contravention of — 
(a) any law providing for the prevention of hoarding or profiteering; or  
(b) any law relating to the ad ulteration of food or drugs; or  
(c) any provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act,  6[1961 (28 of 1961);] , 
7*                              *                                     *                                   *                               * 
and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months, shall be disqualified from the date of such 
conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years since his release.  
(3) A person convicted of any offence and sentenced to  imprisonment for not less than two years 
[other than any offence referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)] shall be disqualified from the date 
of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further period of six years since his re lease.]  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1991, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 8-9-1991).  
2. Add ed by Act 21 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 7 -1-2003).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “1961 (28 of 1961) ; or” (w.e.f. 7 -1-2003).  
7. Clause ( d) omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -1-2003).  14 
 1[(4)] Notwithstanding anything  2[in sub -section ( 1), sub -section (2) and sub -section ( 3)] a 
disqualification under either sub -section shall not, in the case of a person who on the date of the 
conviction is a member of Parliament or the Legislatu re of a State, take effect until three months have 
elapsed from that date or, if within that period an appeal or application for revision is brought in respect 
of the conviction or the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed of by the court.  
Explanation. —In this section — 
(a) “law providing for the prevention of hoarding or profiteering ” means any law, or any order, 
rule or notification having the force of law, providing for — 
(i) the regulation of production or manufacture of any essential commodity;  
(ii) the control of price at which any essential commodity may be brought or sold;  
(iii) the regulation of acquisition, possession, storage, transport, distribution, disposal, use or 
consumption of any essential commodity;  
(iv) the prohibition o f the withholding from sale of any essential commodity ordinarily kept 
for sale;  
(b) “drug” has the meaning assigned to it in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940);  
(c) “essential commodity ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Essential Commodit ies              
Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
(d) “food” has the meaning assigned to it in the Prevention of Food Adulteration                       
Act, 1954 (37 of 1954).  
3[8A. Disqualification on ground of corrupt practices. —(1) The case of every person found guilty 
of a corrupt practice by an order under section 99 shall be submitted,  4[as soon as may be within a period 
of three months from the date such order takes effect], by such authority as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf, to the P resident for determination of the question as to whether such person shall be 
disqualified and if so, for what period:  
Provided that the period for which any person may be disqualified under this sub -section shall in no 
case exceed six years from the date on which the order made in relation to him under section 99 takes 
effect.  
(2) Any person who stands disqualified under section 8A of this Act as it stood immediately before 
the commencement of the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (40 of 1975), may, if t he period of such 
disqualification has not expired, submit a petition to the President for the removal of such disqualification 
for the unexpired portion of the said period.  
(3) Before giving his decision on any question mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or on any petition 
submitted under sub -section ( 2), the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission on 
such question or petition and shall  act according to such opinion.]  
9. Disqualification for dismissal for corruption or disloyalty .—(1) A person who having held an 
office under the Government of India or under the Government of any State has been dismissed for 
corruption or for disloyalty to the State shall be disqualified for a period of five years from the date of 
such dismissal.  
(2) For t he purposes of sub -section ( 1), a certificate issued by the Election Commission to the effect 
that a person having held office under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, has or 
has not been dismissed for corruption or for disloyalty to the State shall be conclusive proof of that fact : 
 
                                                             
1. Sub -section ( 3) re-numbered as sub -section ( 4) of that section by Act 1 of 1989, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-9-1979).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “sub-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 15-9-1979).  
3. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 2, for section 8A (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2009, s. 4 , for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  15 
 Provided that no certificate to the effect that a person has been dismissed for corruption or for 
disloyalty to the State shall be issued unless an opportunity of being heard has been given to the said 
person.  
9A. Disqualif ication for Government contract s, etc. —A person shall be disqualified if, and for  so 
long as, there subsists a contract entered into by him in the course of his  trade or business with the 
appropriate Government for the supply of goods to, or  for the execution of any works undertaken by, that 
Government.  
Explanation. —For the  purposes of this section, where a contract has been fully performed by the  
person by whom it has been entered into with the appropriate Government, the  contract shall be deemed 
not to subsist by reason only of the fact that the  Government has not performed its part of the contract 
either wholly or in part.  
10. Disqualification for office under Government company .—A person shall be disqualified if, 
and for so long as, he is a managing agent, manager or secretary of any company or corporation (other 
than a co -operative society) in the capital of which the appropriate Government has not less than         
twenty -five per cent . share.  
10A. Disqualification for failure t o lodge account of election expenses .—If the Election 
Commission is satisfied that a person — 
(a) has failed to lodge an account of election expenses, within the time and in the manner required 
by or under this Act ; and 
(b) has no good reason or justificati on for the failure,  
the Election Commission shall, by order published in the Official Gazette, declare him to be disqualified 
and any such person shall be disqualified for a period of three years from the date of the order . 
11. Removal or reduction of period of disqualification .—The Election Commission may, for 
reasons to be recorded, remove any disqualification under this Chapter  1[(except under section 8A)] or 
reduce the period of any such disqualification.  
CHAPTER  IV.—Disqual ifications for voting  
11A. Disqualification arising out of conviction and corrupt practices .—2[(1)] If any person, after 
the commencement of this Act, — 
3*** is convicted of an offence punishable under section 171E or section 171F of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or under section 125 or section 135 or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 136 
of this Act,  4*** 
5*                                  *                               *                                     *                                * 
he shall, for a period of six years from the date of the conviction or from the date on which the order takes 
effect, be disqualified for voting at any election.  
6[(2) Any person disqualified by a decision of the President under sub -section ( 1) of section  8A for 
any period shall be disqualified for the same period for voting at any election.  
(3) The decision of the President on a petition submitted by any person under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8A in respect of any disqualification for being chosen as, and  for being, a member of either House 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
2. Section 11 A re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 6-8-1975). 
3. The brackets and letter “(a)” omitted by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule ( w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
4. The word “or” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
5. Omitte d by Act 40 of 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
6. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  16 
 of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a S tate shall, so f ar as may be, 
apply in respect of the disqualification for voting at any election incurred by him under clause ( b) of     
sub-section ( 1) of section 11A of this Act as it stood immediately before the commencement of the 
Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (40 of 1975), as if such decision were a decision in respect of the 
said disqualification for voting also.]  
11B. Removal of disqu alifications .—The Election Commission may, for reasons to be recorded, 
remove  1[any disqualification under sub -section ( 1) of section 11A].]  
2[PART III  
NOTIFICATION OF GENERAL ELECTIONS  
12. Notification for biennial election to the Council of States .—For the purpose of filling the seats 
of members of the Council of States retiring on the expiration of their ter m of office the President shall , 
by one or more notifications published in the Gazette of India on such date or dates as may be 
recommended by the E lection Commission, call upon the elected members of the Legislative Assembly or 
as the case may be, the members of the electoral college, of each State concerned to elect members in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders ma de thereunder:  
Provided that no notification under this section shall be issued more than three months prior to the 
date on which the term of office of the retiring members is due to expire.  
3[12A. Notification for election to fill the seat allotted to the  State of Sikkim in the Council of 
States. —For the purpose of filling for the first time the seat allotted to the State of Sikkim by the 
Constitution (Thirty -sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 in the Council of States, the President shall, by a 
notification publis hed in the Gazette of India, on such date as may be recommended by Election 
Commission, call upon the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim to elect a 
member in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and or ders made thereunder and the 
election so held shall for all purposes and intent be deemed to have been held under section 12.]  
13. [Notification for reconstitution of electoral colleges of certain Union territories. ] Omitted by the 
Territorial Councils Act , 1956 (103 of 1956), s. 66 (w.e.f. 1-1-1957) . 
14. Notification for general election to the House of the People .—(1) A general election shall be 
held for the purpose of constituting a new House of the People on the expiration of the duration of the 
existing House or on its dissolution.  
(2) For the said purpose the President shall, by one or more notifications published in the Gazette of 
India on such date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission , call upon all 
Parliamentary constitue ncies to elect members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the 
rules and orders made thereunder:  
Provided that where a general election is held otherwise than on the dissolution of the existing House 
of the People, no such notification sha ll be issued at any time earlier than six months prior to the date on 
which the duration of that House would expire under the provisions of clause (2) of article 83.  
3[14A. Notification for electing the representative of the State of Sikkim to the existing  House of 
the People. —For the purpose of electing a representative of the State of Sikkim to the House of the 
People, specified in clause (e) of article 371F of the Constitution, the Election Commission shall call 
upon the members of the Legislative Assemb ly of the Sta te of Sikkim to elect the representative in 
accordance with such of the provisions of this Act, and the rules and orders ma de thereunder, as are 
applicable to the election of the members of the Council of States.  
15. Notification for general e lection to a State Legislative Assembly .—(1) A general election shall 
be held for the purpose of constituting a new Legislative Assembly on the expiration of the duration of the 
existing Assembly or on its dissolution.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 5, for “any disqualification under this Chapter ” (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 7, for “PART III ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  17 
 (2) For the said purpose,  1[the Gover nor or Administrator, as the case may be],  2*** shall by one or 
more notifications published in the Official Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be 
recommended by the Election Commission, call upon all Assembly constituencies in the State to elect 
members in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and order s made thereunder:  
Provided that where a general election is held otherwise than on the dissolution of the existing 
Legislative Assembly, no such notification shall be is sued at any time earlier than six months prior to the 
date on which the duration of that Assembly would expire under the provisions of clause (1) of          
article 172  2*** 3[or under the provisions of section 5 of the Government of Union Territories                
Act, 1963 ( 20 of 1963), as the case may be ]. 
4[15A. Notification for certain el ections to Legislative Councils. —For the purpose of        
constituting the Legislative Council of the State of  Madhya Pradesh under the States Reorganisation       
Act, 1956 (37 of 1956) and constituting the Legislative Council of the State of Andhra Pradesh  5[under 
the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005  (1 of  2006) ], 6[and constituting the Legislative Council 
of the State of Tamil Nadu under the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010 (16 of 2010)] the 
Governor of each of the aforesaid States shall, by one or more notifications published in the Official 
Gazette of the State on such date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission, call upon 
the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State and all the Council constituencies to elect members 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder.]  
16. Notification for biennial election to a State Legislativ e Council .—For the purpose of filling the 
seats of members of the Legislative Council of a State retiring on the expiration of their term of office, the 
Governor  7*** shall, by one or more notifications published in the Official Gazette of the Sta te on suc h 
date or dates as may be recommended by the Election Commission call upon the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State and all the Council constituencies concerned to elect members in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the rules and  orders made thereunder:  
Provided that no notification under this section shall be issued more than three months prior to the 
date on which the term of office of the retiring members is due to expire.]  
PART IV  
ADMINISTRATIVE MACHINERY FOR THE CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS  
19. Definition .—In this Part and in Part V, unless the context otherwise requires, “constituency ” 
means  8*** Parliamentary constituency or an Assembly constituency or a Council constituency.  
9[19A. Delegation of functions of Election Commission. —The functions of the Election 
Commission under the Constitution, the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and this Act 
or under the rules made thereunder may, subject to such general or special directions, if any, as may be 
given by the Elec tion Commission in this behalf, be performed also by a Deputy Election Commissioner 
or by the Secretary to the Election Commission.]  
10[20. General duties of chief electoral officers .—Subject to the superintendence, direction and 
control of the Election Com mission, the chief electoral officer of each State shall supervise the conduct of 
all elections in the State under this Act.  
11[20A. General duties of district election officer. —(1) Subject to the superintendence, direction 
and control of the chief electoral officer, the district election officer shall co -ordinate and supervise all 
work in the district or in the area within his jurisdiction in connection with the conduct of all elections to 
Parliament and the Legislature of the State.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and the Second Schedule for “the Governor ” (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
2. The words “Rajpramukh, Lieutenant -Governor or Chief Commissioner, as the case may be, ” omitted by the Adaptation of 
Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
3. Added by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
4. Ins. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 13 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 1 of 2006, s. 5, for “under the Legislative Councils Act , 1957 ” (w.e.f. 11 -1-2006).  
6. Ins. by Act 16 of 201 0, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25 -3-2016).  
7. The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may be, ” omitted  by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
8. The words “an electoral college constituency or ” omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s.  66 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
9. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 21 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
10. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 9, for sections 20 and 21 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
11. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 22 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  18 
 (2) The distric t election officer shall also perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by 
the Election Commission and the chief electoral officer.]  
1[20B. Observers .—(1) The Election Commission may nominate an Observer who shall be an officer 
of Government to watch the conduct of election or elections in a constituency or a group of constituencies 
and to perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by the Election Commission.  
(2) The Observer nominated under sub -section ( 1) shall have the power to  direct the returning officer 
for the constituency or for any of the constituencies for which he has been nominated, to stop the counting 
of votes at any time before the declaration of the result or not to declare the result if in the opinion of the 
Observ er booth capturing has taken place at a large number of polling stations or at places fixed for the 
poll or counting of votes or any ballot papers used at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll are 
unlawfully taken out of the custody of the ret urning officer or are accidentally or intentionally destroyed 
or lost or are damaged or tampered with to such an extent that the result of the poll at that polling station 
or place cannot be ascertained.  
(3) Where an Observer has directed the returning off icer under this section to stop counting of votes 
or not to declare the result, the Observer shall forthwith report the matter to the Election Commission and 
thereupon the Election Commission shall, after taking all material circumstances into account, iss ue 
appropriate directions under section 58A or section 64A or section 66.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 3), “Observer ” shall include a 
Regional Commissioner or any such officer of the Election Commission as has been assi gned under this 
section the duty of watching the conduct of election or elections in a constituency or group of 
constituencies by the Commission.]  
21. Returning officers .—For every constituency, for every election to fill a seat or seats in the 
Council of States and for every election by the members of the Legislative Assembly of a S tate to fill a 
seat or seats in the Legislative Council of the S tate, the Election Commission shall, in consultation with 
the Government of the State, designate or nominate a re turning officer who shall be  2[an officer of 
Government or of a local authority: ] 
Provided that nothing in this section shall prevent the Election Commission from designating or 
nominating the same person to be the returning officer for more than one const ituency.  
22. Assistant returning officers .—(1) The Election Commission may appoint one or more persons 
to assist any returning officer in the performance of his functions:  
Provided that every such person shall be  2[an officer of Government or of a local authority].  
(2) Every assistant returning officer shall, subject to the control of the returning officer, be competent 
to perform all or any of the functions of the returning officer:  
Provided that no assistant returning officer shall perform any of the fu nctions of the returning officer 
which relate  3*** to the scrutiny of nominations  4*** unless the returning officer is unavoidably 
prevented from performing the said function.  
23. Returning officer to include assistant returning officers performing the fun ctions of the 
returning officer .—References in this Act to the returning officer shall, unless the context otherwise 
requires, be deemed to include an assistant returning officer performing any function which he is 
authori sed to perform under sub -section ( 2) of section 22.  
24. General duty of the returning officer .—It shall be general duty of the returning officer at any 
election to do all such acts and things as may be necessary for effectually conducting the election in the 
manner provided by this Act and  rules or orders made thereunder.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 4 (w. e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 23, for “an officer of Government ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 10 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. The words “or to the counting of votes ” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-8-1956).  
 19 
 1[25. Provision of polling stations for constituencies. —The district election officer shall, with the 
previous approval of the Election Commission, provide a sufficient number of polling stations for every 
constituency the  whole or greater part of which lies within his jurisdiction, and shall publish, in such 
manner as the Election Commission may direct, a list showing the polling stations so provided and the 
polling areas or groups of voters for which they have respectivel y been provided.]  
26. Appointment of presiding officers for polling stations .—(1) The  2[district election officer] shall 
appoint a presiding officer for each polling station and such polling officer or officers as he thinks 
necessary, but he shall not appo int any person who has been employed by or on behalf of, or has been 
otherwise working for, a candidate in or about the election:  
Provided that if a polling officer is absent from the polling station, the presiding officer may appoint 
any person who is pre sent at the polling station other than a person who has been employed by or on 
behalf of, or has been otherwise working for, a candidate in or about the election, to be the polling officer 
during the absence of the former officer, and inform the  2[district  election officer] accordingly:  
3[Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent that  2[district election officer] from 
appointing the same person to be the presiding officer for more than one polling station in the same 
premises.]  
(2) A p olling officer shall, if so directed by the presiding officer, perform all or any of the functions 
of a presiding officer under this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder.  
(3) If the presiding officer, owing to illness or other unavoidable cause, is obliged to absent himself 
from the polling station, his functions shall be performed by such polling officer as has been previously 
authorised by the  2[district election officer] to perform such functions during any such absence.  
(4) References in this Act  to the presiding officer shall, unless the conte xt otherwise requires, be 
deemed to include any person performing any function which he is authorised to perform under              
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be.  
4*                                *                                  *                                 *                                    * 
27. General duty of the presiding officer .—It shall be the general duty of the presiding officer at a 
polling station to keep order thereat and to see that the poll is fairly taken.  
28. Duties of a polling officer .—It shall be the duty of the polling officers at a polling station to 
assist the presiding officer for such station in the performance of his functions.  
5[28A. Returning  officer, presiding officer, etc., deemed to be on deputation to Election  
Commission. —The returning  officer, assistant returning officer, presiding officer, polling officer and any  
other officer appointed under this Part, and any police officer designated for  the time being by the State 
Government, for the conduct of any election shall be  deemed to be on deputation to the Election 
Commission for the period commencing  on and from the date of the notification calling for such election 
and ending  with the date of d eclaration of the results of such election and accordingly,  such officers shall, 
during that period, be subject to the control,  superintendence and discipline of the Election Commission.]  
29. Special provisions in the case of certain elections .—(1) The ret urning officer for an         
election  6*** to fill a seat or seats in the Council of States or for an election by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of a State to fill a seat or seats in the Legislative Council of the State shall , with the 
previous app roval of the Election Commission, fix the place at which the poll will be taken for such 
election and shall notify the place so fixed in such manner as the Election Commission may direct.  
(2) The returning officer shall preside over s uch election at the place so fixed and shall appoint such 
polling officer or officers to assist him as he thinks necessary but he shall not appoint any person who has 
been employed by or on behalf of, or has been otherwise working for, a candidate in or ab out the election.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 25, for section 25 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “returning officer ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 12 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Sub-section ( 5) omitted by Act 2 of 2004, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-10-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
6. The  brackets  and words  “(other than a primary election) ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  20 
 1[PART IVA  
REGISTRATION OF  POLITICAL PARTIES  
29A. Registration with the  Election  Commission of associations and bodies as political 
parties .—(1) Any association or body of individual citizens of India calling itself a political party and 
intending to avail itself of the provisions of this Part shall make an application to the Election 
Commission for its registration as a political party for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every such application shall be made, — 
(a) if the association or body is in existence at the commencement of the Representation of the 
People (Amendment) Act, 1988 (1 of 1989), within sixty days next following such commencement;  
(b) if the association or body is formed after such commencement, within thirty days next 
following the date of its formation.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be signed by the chief executive officer of the 
association or body (whether such chief executive officer is known as Secretary or by any other 
designation) and presente d to the Secretary to the Commission or sent to such Secretary by registered 
post.  
(4) Every such application shall contain the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the name of the association or body;  
(b) the State in which its head office is situate;  
(c) the address to which letters and other communications meant for it should be sent;  
(d) the names of its president, secretary, treasurer and other office -bearers;  
(e) the numerical strength of its members, and if there are categories of its members, the 
numerical strength in each category;  
(f) whether it has any local units; if so, at what levels;  
(g) whether it is represented by any member or members in either House of Parliament or of any 
State Legislature; if so, the number of such member or members.  
(5) The application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum or 
rules and regulations of the association or body, by whatever name called, and such memorandum or rules 
and regulations shall contain a specific provision that the as sociation or body shall bear true faith and 
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, and to the principles of socialism, secularism 
and democracy, and would uphold the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.  
(6) The Commission may call for such other particulars as it may deem fit from the association or 
body.  
(7) After considering all the particulars as aforesaid in its possession and any other necessary and 
relevant factors and after giving the representatives of the association o r body reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, the Commission shall decide either to register the association or body as a political party for 
the purposes of this Part, or not so to register it; and the Commission shall communicate its decision to 
the asso ciation or body:  
Provided that no association or body shall be registered as a political party under this sub -section 
unless the memorandum or rules and regulations of such association or body conform to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 5). 
(8) The decision of the Commission shall be final.  
(9) After an association or body has been registered as a political party as aforesaid, any change in its 
name, head office, office -bearers, address or in any other material matters shall be communicated to the 
Commission without delay. ] 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1989).  21 
 1[29B. Political parties entitled to accept contribution .—Subject to the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), every political party may accept any amount of contribution 
voluntarily offered to it by any person or company other  than a Government company:  
Provided that no political party shall be eligible to accept any contribution from any foreign source 
defined under clause ( e) of section 2 of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976  (49 of 1976).  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 29C, — 
(a) “company ” means a company as defined in section 3;  
(b) “Government company ” means a company within the meaning of sec tion 617; and  
(c) “contribution ” has the meaning assigned to it under section 293A,  of the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) and includes any donation or subscription offered by any person to a political party; and  
(d) “person ” has the meaning assigned to it under clause ( 31) of section 2 of the Income -tax             
Act, 1961  (43 of 1961), but does not include Government company, local authority and every 
artificial juridical person wholly or part ially funded by the Government.  
29C. Declaration of donation received by the political parties .—(1) The treasurer of a political 
party or any other per son authorised by the political party in this behalf shall, in each financial year, 
prepare a rep ort in respect of the following s namely: — 
(a) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such political party from any 
person in that fin ancial year;  
(b) the contribution in excess of twenty thousand rupees received by such political party from 
companies other than Government companies in that financial year.  
2[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the contributions received by 
way of an electoral bond.  
 Explanation .––For the purposes of this sub -section, “electoral bond ” means a bond referred to in 
the Explanation  to sub -section ( 3) of section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) .] 
(2) The report under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.  
(3) The report for a financial year under sub -section ( 1) shall be submitted by the treasurer of a 
political party or any other person authorised by the political party in this be half before the due date        
for furnishing a return of its income of that financial year under section 139 of the Income -tax                 
Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) to the Election Commission.  
(4) Where the treasurer of any political party or any other person authorised by the political party in 
this behalf fails to submit a report under sub -section ( 3), then, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961), such political party shall not be entitled to any tax relief under th at 
Act.]  
PART V  
CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS  
CHAPTER I. —Nomination of Candidates  
3[30. Appointment of dates for nominations, etc. —As soon as the notification calling upon a 
constituency to elect a member or members is issued, the Election Commission shall, by noti fication in 
the Official Gazette, appoint — 
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be the  4[seventh day] after the date of 
publication of the first mentioned notification or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding 
day which is not a public holiday;  
(b) the date for the scrutiny of nominations, which shall be  5[the day immediately following] the 
last date for making nominations or, if that day is  a public holiday, the next succeeding day which is 
not a public holiday;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -9-2003).  
2. Ins.  by Act 7 of 2017, s. 137 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 14, for section 30 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 7, for “tenth day ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
5. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 27, for “the second day after ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  22 
 (c) the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures, which shall be  1[the second day] after the date 
for the scrutiny of nominations or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding day which is not 
a public holiday;  
(d) the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be taken which or the first of which shall 
be a date not earlier than the  2[fourteenth day] after the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures; 
and 
(e) the date before which the election shall be completed.  
3*                              *                                   *                                        *                                  * 
31. Public notice of election .—On the issue of a notification under section 30, the returning         
officer  4*** shall give public n otice of the intended election in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, inviting nominations of candidates for such election and specifying the place at which the 
nomination papers are to be delivered.  
32. Nomination of candidates for election .—Any person may be nominated as a candidate for 
election to fill a seat  5*** if he is qualified to be chosen to fill that seat under the provisions of  the 
Constitution and this Act  6*** 7[or under the  provisions of the Government of Union Territories             
Act, 1963 (20 of 1963), as the  case may be].  
8[33. Presentation of nomination paper and requirements for a valid nomination. —(1) On or 
before the date appointed under clause ( a) of section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or by his 
proposer, between the hours of eleven O ’clock in the forenoon and three O ’clock in the afternoon deliver 
to the returning officer at the place specified in this behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a 
nomination paper completed in the prescribed form and sign ed by the candidate and by an elector of the 
constituency as proposer:  
9[Provided that a candidate not set up by a recognised political party, shall not be deemed to b e duly 
nominated for election f orm a constituency unless the nomination paper is subscrib ed by ten proposers 
being electors of the constituency:  
Provided further that no nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day which is 
a public holiday:  
Provided also that in the case  of a local authorities ’ constituency, graduates ’ constituency or teachers ’ 
constituency, the reference to “an elector of the constituency as proposer ” shall be construed as a 
reference to ten per cent . of the electors of the constituency or ten such electors, whichever is less, as 
proposers.]  
10[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for election to the Legislative 
Assembly of Sikkim (deemed to be the Legi slative Assembly of that State du ly constituted under the 
Constitution), the nomination paper to be delivered to the returning o fficer shall be in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the said nomination paper shall be subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the 
nomination, and — 
(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia -Lepcha origin, also b y at least twenty 
electors of the constituency as proposers and twenty electors of the constituency as seconders;  
(b) in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas, also by at least twenty electors of the constituency 
as proposers and at least twenty electors  of the constituency as seconders;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 27, for “the thir d day” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 5, for “twentieth day ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
3. The Explanation  omitte d by Act 47 of 1966, s. 27 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. The words “for the constituency ” omitted by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
5. The words “in any constituency ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 15 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6. Certain words and figures omitted by  the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
8. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 16, for section 33 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
9. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 6, for “the proviso s” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1975).  
10. Ins. by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  23 
 (c) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, by an elector of the constituency 
as proposer:  
Provided further that no nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day which is 
a public holiday.]  
(2) In a constituency where any seat is reserved, a candidate shall not be deemed to be qualified to be 
chosen to fill that seat unless his nomination paper contains a declaration by him specifying the particular 
caste or tribe of which he is a member and the area in relation to which that caste or tribe is a Scheduled 
Caste or, as the case may be, a Scheduled Tribe of the State.  
(3) Where the candidate is a person who, having held any office referred to in  1[section 9] has been 
dismissed an d a period of five years has not elapsed since the dismissal, such person shall not be deemed 
to be duly nominated as a candidate unless his nomination paper is accompanied by a certificate issued in 
the prescribed manner by the Election Commission to the effect that he has not been dismissed for 
corruption or disloyalty to the State.  
(4) On the presentation of a nomination paper, the returning officer shall satisfy himself that the 
names and electoral roll numbers of the candidate and his proposer as enter ed in the nomination paper are 
the same as those entered in the electoral rolls:  
2[Provided that no misnomer or inaccurate description or clerical, technical or printing error in regard 
to the name of the candidate or his proposer or any other person, or in regard to any place, mentioned in 
the electoral roll or the nomination paper and no clerical, technical or printing error in regard to the 
electoral roll numbers of any such person in the electoral roll or the nomination paper, shall affect the full 
operation of the electoral roll or the nomination paper with respect to such person or place in any case 
where the description in regard to the name of the person or place is such as to be commonly understood; 
and the returning officer shall permit any such m isnomer or inaccurate description or clerical, technical or 
printing error to be corrected and where necessary, direct that any such misnomer, inaccurate description, 
clerical, technical or printing error in the electoral roll or in the nomination paper sh all be overlooked.]  
(5) Where the candidate is an elector of a different constituency, a copy of the electoral roll of that 
constituency or of the relevant part thereof or a certified copy of the relevant entries in such roll shall, 
unless it has been file d along with the nomination paper, be produced before the returning officer at the 
time of scrutiny.  
3[(6) Nothing in this section shall prevent any candidate from being nominated by more than one 
nomination paper:  
Provided that not more than four nominati on papers shall be presented by or on behalf of any 
candidate or accepted by the returning officer for election in the same constituency.]  
4[(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6) or in any other provisions of this Act, a 
person shall no t be nominated as a candidate for election ,— 
(a) in the case of a general election to the House of the People (whether or not held 
simultaneously from all Parliamentary constituencies), from more than two Parliamentary 
constituencies;  
(b) in the case of a general election to the Legislative Assembly of a State (whether or not held 
simultaneously from all Assembly constituencies), from more than two Assembly constituencies in 
that State;  
(c) in the case of a biennial election to the Legislative Council of a State having such Council, 
from more than two Council constituencies in the State;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1978, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “clause ( f) of section 7 ” (w.e.f. 26 -11-1978).  
2. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 29, for “the proviso ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966). 
3. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 8, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996). 24 
 (d) in the case of a biennial election to the Council of States for filling two or more seats allotted 
to a State, for filling more than two such seats;  
(e) in the case of b ye-elections to the House of the People from two or more Parliamentary 
constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more than two such Parliamentary constituencies;  
(f) in the case of bye -elections to the Legislative Assembly of a State from two or m ore Assembly 
constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more than two such Assembly constituencies;  
(g) in the case of bye -elections to the Council of States for filling two or more seats allotted to a 
State, which are held simultaneously, for filling more than two such seats;  
(h) in the case of bye -elections to the Legislative Council of a State having such Council from 
two or more Council constituencies which are held simultaneously, from more than two such Council 
constituencies.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, two or more bye -elections shall be deemed to be 
held simultaneously where the notification calling such bye -elections are issued by the Election 
Commission under sections 147, 149, 150 or, as the case may be, 151 on t he same date.]  
1[33A. Right to information. —(1) A candidate shall, apart from any information which he is 
required to furnish, under this Act or the rules made thereunder, in his nomination paper delivered under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 33, also furnish the information as to whether — 
(i) he is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more in a pending 
case in which a charge has been framed by the court of competent jurisdiction;  
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence [other than any offence referred to in sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), or covered in sub -section ( 3), of section 8] and sentenced to imprisonment for one 
year or more.  
(2) The candidate or his proposer, as the case may be, shall, at the time of delivering to the returning 
officer the nomination paper under sub -section ( 1) of section 33, also deliver to him an affidavit sworn by 
the candidate in a prescribed form verifying the information specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The returning officer shall, as soon as  may be after the furnishing of information to him under 
sub-section ( 1), display the aforesaid information by affixing a copy of the affidavit, delivered under     
sub-section ( 2), at a conspicuous place at his office for the information of the electors r elating to a 
constituency for which the nomination paper is delivered.]  
2[33B. Candidate to furnish information only under the Act and the rules. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or any direction, order or an y other 
instruction issued by the Election Commission, no candidate shall be liable to disclose or furnish any such 
information, in respect of his election , which is not required to be disclosed or furnished under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder.]  
34. Deposits .—3[(1) A candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election from a 
constituency unless he deposits or causes to be deposited, — 
(a) in the case of an election from a Parliamentary constituency,  4[a sum of twenty -five thousand 
rupees or where the candidate is a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of twelve 
thousand five hundred rupees]; and  
(b) in the case of an election from an Assembly or Council constituency,  5[a sum of ten thousand 
rupees or where the candidate is  a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, a sum of five 
thousand rupees]:  
Provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more than one nomination paper for election 
in the same constituency, not more than one deposit shall be required of hi m under this sub -section.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 72 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2009, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  25 
 (2) Any sum required to be deposited under sub -section ( 1) shall not be deemed to have been 
deposited under that sub -section unless at the time of delivery of the nomination paper  1[under               
sub-section ( 1) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 1A) of section 33] the candidate has either deposited 
or caused to be deposited that sum with the returning officer in cash or enclosed with the nomination 
paper a receipt showing that the said sum has been deposited by him or on his behalf in the Reserve Bank 
of India or in a Government Treasury.  
35. Notice of nominations and the time and place for their scrutiny .—The returning officer shall, 
on receiving the nomination paper  2[under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 1A) of 
section 33], inform the person or persons delivering the same of the date, time and place fixed for the 
scrutiny of nominations and shall enter on the nomination paper its serial number, and shall sign thereon a 
certificate stating the date on  which and the hour at which the nomination paper has been delivered to 
him; and shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause to be affixed in some conspicuous place in his office a 
notice of the nomination containing descriptions similar to those contained in the nomination paper, both 
of the candidate and of  3[the proposer].  
36. Scrutiny of nominations .—(1) On the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations under         
section 30, the candidates, their election agents, one proposer  4*** of each candidate, and one other 
person duly authorised in writing by each candidate , but no other person, may attend at such time and 
place as the returning officer may appoint; and the returning officer shall give them all reasonable 
facilities for examining the nomination  papers of all candidates which have been delivered within the time 
and in the manner laid down in section 33.  
(2) The returning officer shall then examine the nomination papers and shall decide all objections 
which may be made to any nomination and may, e ither on such objection or on his own motion, after such 
summary inquiry, if any, as he thinks necessary,  5[reject] any nomination on any of the following   
grounds :— 
6[(a) 7[that on the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations the candidate] either is not qualified 
or is disqualified for being chosen to fill the seat under any of the following provisions that may be 
applicable, namely: — 
Articles 84, 102, 173 and 191,  8***. 
9[Part II of this Act and sections 4 and 14 of the Government of Union Territorie s                     
Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)]  10***; or  
(b) that there has been a failure to comply with any of the provisions of section 33 or             
section 34; or  
(c) that the signature of the candidate or the proposer on the nomination paper is not genuine.]   
(3) Nothing contained in  11[clause ( b) or clause ( c)] of sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to authorise 
the 12[rejection] of the nomination of any candidate on the ground of any irregularity in respect of a 
nomination paper, if the candidate has  been duly nominated by means of another nomination paper in 
respect of which no irregularity has been committed.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1976, s. 2 and the Schedule for “under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 33 ” (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for “under sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 9 -9-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 18, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. The words “and one seconder ” omitted by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-8-1956).  
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “refuse ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for clauses  ( a) to ( e) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
7. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 9, for “that the candidate ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
8. The word “and” omitted by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and the Second  Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
9. Subs. by  s. 57 and the Second  Schedule, ibid.,  for “Part II of this Act ” (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
10. Certain words  and figures  omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
11. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 19,   for “clause ( c), clause ( d) or clause ( e)” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
12. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “refusal ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
 26 
 (4) The returning officer shall not reject any nomination paper on the ground of any  1*** defect 
which is not of a substantial character.  
(5) The returning officer shall hold the scrutiny on the date appointed in this behalf under clause ( b) 
of section 30 and shall not allow any adjournment of the proceedings except when such proceedings are 
interrupted or obstructed by riot or open violence or by causes beyond his control:  
Provided that in case  2[an objection is raised by the returning officer or is made by any other person] 
the candidate concerned may be allowed time to rebut it not later than the next day but one following the 
date fixed for scrutiny, and the returning officer shall record his decision on the date to which the 
proceedings have been adjourned.  
(6) The returning officer shall endorse on each nomination paper his decision accepting or rejecting 
the same and, if the nomination pap er is rejected, shall record in writing a brief statement of his reasons 
for such rejection.  
3[(7) For the purposes of this section, a certified copy of an entry in the electoral roll for the time 
being in force of a constituency shall be conclusive eviden ce of the fact that the person referred to in that 
entry is an elector for that constituency, unless it is proved that he is subject to a disqualification 
mentioned in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950).  
(8) Immediately a fter all the nomination papers have been scrutini sed and decisions accepting or 
rejecting the same have been recorded, the returning officer shall prepare a list of validly nominated 
candidates, that is to say, c andidates whose nominations have been found valid, and affix it to his notice 
board.]  
37. Withdrawal of candidature .—(1) Any candidate may withdraw his candidature by a notice in 
writing which shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall be subscribed by him and 
delivered before thr ee O ’clock in the afternoon on the day fixed under clause ( c) of section 30 to the 
returning officer either by such candidate in person or by his proposer,  4*** or election agent who has 
been authorised in this behalf in writing by such candidate.  
5*                           *                              *                                     *                                             * 
(2) No person who has given a notice or withdrawal of his candidature under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
allowed to cancel the notice.  
6[(3) The returning officer shall, on being satisfied as to the genuineness of a notice or withdrawal and 
the identity of the person delivering it under sub -section ( 1), cause the notice to be affixed in some 
conspicuous place in his off ice.] 
7[38. Publication of list of contesting candidates. —(1) Immediately after the expiry of the period 
within which candidatures may be withdrawn under sub -section ( 1) of section 37, the returning officer 
shall prepare and publish in such form and manner  as may be prescribed a list of contesting candidates, 
that is to say, candidates who were included in the list of valid ity nominated candidates and who have not 
withdrawn their candidature within the said period.  
8[(2) For the purpose of listing the names  under sub -section ( 1), the candidates shall be classified as 
follows, namely: — 
(i) candidates of recognised political parties;  
(ii) candidates of registered political parties other than those mentioned in clause ( i); 
(iii) other candidates.  
                                                             
1. The word “technical ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 19 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2. Subs. by Act 40 o f 1961, s. 9, for “and objection is made ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 19, for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. The word “seconder ” omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
5. The proviso omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-8-1956).  
6. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 10, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 21, for section 38 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
8. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 8, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
 27 
 (3) The categories mentioned in sub -section ( 2) shall be arranged in the order specified therein and 
the names of candidates in each category shall be arranged in alphabetical order and the addresses of the 
contesting candidates as given in the nomination papers t ogether with such other particulars as may be 
prescribed].]  
1[39. Nomination of candidates at other elections .—(1) As soon as the notification calling upon the 
elected members or the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or the members of the electoral 
college of a  2[Union territory] to elect a member or members is issued, the Election Commission shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint — 
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be the  3[seventh day] after the date of  
publication of the first -mentioned notification or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding 
day which is not a public holiday;  
(b) the date for the scrutiny of nominations, which shall be  4[the day immediately following] the 
last date for mak ing nominations or, if that day is a public holiday, the next succeeding day which is 
not a public holiday;  
(c) the last date for the withdrawal of candidatures, which shall be  5[the second day] after the date 
for the scrutiny of nominations or , if that da y is a public holiday, the next succeeding day which is not 
a public holiday;  
(d) the date or dates on which a poll shall, if necessary, be taken, which or the first of which shall 
be a date not earlier than the seventh day after the last date for the with drawal of candidatures; and  
(e) the date before which the election shall be completed.  
6*                          *                                              *                               *                              *  
(2) The provisions of sections 31 to 38, excluding sub -sections ( 2) and ( 5) of section 33      
and 7[clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 34], shall apply in relation to any such election as they apply 
in relation to an election in any constituency:  
Provided that — 
(a) any references in the said provisions to the electoral roll of the constituency shall , unless the 
context otherwise requires, be construed, in the case of an election by the members or the elected 
members of the Legislative Assembly of the  State, as references  to the lis t of members o r elected 
members, as the case may be, of that Assembly maintained under sub -section ( 1) of section 152, and 
in the case of an election by the members of the electoral college of a  2[Union territory], as references 
to the list of members of such electoral college maintained under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
8[(aa) the reference in the opening paragraph of sub -section ( 1) of section 33 to “an elector of the 
constituency as proposer ” shall be construed as a reference to “ten per  cent. of the elected members or 
of the members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or of the members of the electoral college of a 
Union territory, as the case may be, or ten members concerned, whichever is less, as proposers ”: 
Provided that where as a  result of the calculation of the percentage referred to in this clause, the 
number of members arrived at is a fraction and if the fraction so arrived at is more than one -half it 
shall be counted as one, and if the fraction  so arrived at is less than one -half it shall be ignored;]  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 22, for section 39 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part C State ”. 
3. Subs.  by Act 40 of 1961, s. 11, for “tenth day ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
4. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 30, for “the second day after ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “the third day ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. The Explanation  omitted by s. 30 , ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 19, for “section 34 ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
8. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 8  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1989).  28 
 1[2[(ab)] in the case of an election to the Legislative Council of a State by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of that State, clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 36 shall be construed as 
including a reference to sub -clause ( d) of clause (3) of article 171;]  
(b) any references in the said provisions to section 30 shall be construed as references to                 
sub-section ( 1) of this section; and  
(c) at the time of presenting the nomination paper, the returning officer may require the person 
presenting the same to produce either a copy of the electoral roll, or part of the electoral roll, in which 
the name of the candidate is included or a certified copy of the relevant entries in such roll.]  
3[39A. Allocation of equitable sharing of time. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, the Election Commission shall, on the basis of the past performance 
of a recogn ised political party, during elections, allocate equitable sharing of time on the cable television 
network and other electronic media in such manner as may be prescribed to display or propagate any 
election matter or to address public in con nection with a n election.  
(2) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub -section ( 1), in respect of an election, shall be 
made after the publication of list of contesting candidates under section 38 for the election and shall be 
valid till forty -eight hours b efore the hour fixed for poll for such election.  
(3) The allocation of equitable sharing of time under sub -section ( 1) shall be binding on all political 
parties concerned.  
(4) The Election Commission may, for the purpose s of this section, make code of cond uct for cable 
operators and electronic media and the cable operators and every person managing or responsible for the 
management of the electronic media shall abide by such code of conduct.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “electronic media ” includes radio and any other broadcasting media notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette;  
(b) “cable television network ” and “cable operator ” have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them under the Cable Television Networks (Regu lation) Act, 1995  (7 of 1995).]  
CHAPTER  II.—Candidates and their Agent s 
4[40. Election agents. —A candidate at an election may appoint in the prescribed manner any one 
person other than himself to be his election agent and when any such appointment is made, notice of the 
appointment shall be given in the prescribed manner to the returning officer.]  
5[41. Disqualification for being an election agent .—Any person who is for the time being 
disqualified under the Constitution or under this Act for being a me mber of either House of Parliament or 
the House or either House of the Legislature of a State or for voting at elections, shall, so long as the 
disqualification subsists, also be disqualified for being an election agent at any election.]  
42. Revocation of the appointment, or death, of an election agent .—(1) Any revocation of the 
appointment of an election agent,  6*** shall be signed by the candidate, and shall operate from the date on 
which it  is lodged with the returning officer.  
7[(2) In the event of such  a revocation or of the death of an election agent whether that event occurs 
before or during the election, or after the election but before the account of the candidate ’s election 
expenses has been lodged in accordance with the provisions of section 78, t he candidate may appoint in 
the prescribed manner another person to be his election agent and when such appointment is made notice 
of the appointment shall be given in the prescribed manner to the returning officer.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 30 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Clause ( aa) relettered as clause ( ab) by Act 1 of 1989, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 23, for section 40 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
5. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 31, for section 41 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. The words “whether he be the candidate himself or not ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 24 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
7. Subs. by s. 24, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28-8-1956).  29 
  
43. [Effect of default in appointment of election agent under section 42.] Omitted by the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment ) Act, 1956 ( 27 of 1956), s. 25 (w.e.f. 28-8-1956) . 
44. [Duty of the election agent to keep accounts .] Omitted  by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f.  28-8-1956).  
1[45. Functions of election agents. —An election agent may perform such functions in connection 
with the election as are authorised by or under this Act to be performed by an election agent.]  
2[46. Appointment of polling agents. —A contesting candidate or his election agent may appoint in 
the prescribed manner such number of agents and relief agents as may be prescribed to act as polling 
agents of such candidate at each polling station provided under section 25 or at the place fixe d under     
sub-section ( 1) of section 29 for the poll.]  
3[47. Appointment of counting agents. —A contesting candidate or his election agent may appoint in 
the prescribed manner one or more persons, but not exceeding such number as may be prescribed, to the  
present as his counting agent or agents at the counting of votes, and when any such appointment is made 
notice of the appointment shall be given in the prescribed manner to the returning officer.]  
48. Revocat ion of the appointment , or death  of, a polling agent or counting agent .—(1) Any 
revocation of the appointment of a polling agent shall be signed by the candidate or his election agent and 
shall operate from the date on which it is lodged with such officer as may be prescribed, and in the event 
of such a revocation or of the death of a polling agent before the close of the poll, the candidate or his 
election agent may appoint in the prescribed manner another polling agent at any time before the poll is 
closed and shall forthwith give notice of such appoi ntment in the prescribed manner to such officer as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Any revocation of the appointment of a counting agent shall be signed by the candidate or his 
election agent and shall operate from the date on which it is lodged with the returning officer, and in the 
event of such revocation or of the death of a counting agent before the commencement of the counting of 
votes, the candidate or his election agent may appoint in the prescribed manner another counting agent at 
any time before the counti ng of votes is commenced and shall forthwith give notice of such appointment 
in the prescribed manner to the returning officer.  
49. Functions of polling agents and counting agents .—(1) A polling agent may perform such 
functions in connection with the poll as are authorised by or under this Act  to be performed by a polling 
agent.  
(2) A counting agent may perform such functions in connection with the counting of votes as are 
authorised by or under this Act to be performed by a counting agent.  
50. Attendance o f a contesting candidate or his election agent at polling stations, and 
performance by him of the functions of a polling agent or counting agent .—(1) At every election 
where a poll is taken, each  4[contesting candidate] at such election and his election ag ent shall have a 
right to be present at any polling station provided under section 25 for the taking of the poll or at the place 
fixed under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 for the poll.  
(2) A 4[contesting candidate] or his election agent may himself do any act or thing which any polling 
agent or the counting agent of such  4[contesting candidate] if appointed, would have been authorised by 
or under this Act to do, or may assist any polling agent or the counting agent of such  4[contesting 
candidate] in doing any such act or thing.  
51. Non-attendance of polling or counting agents .—Where any act or thing is required or 
authorised by or under this Act to be done in the presence of the polling or counting agents, the             
non-attendance of any such agent or  agents at the time and place appointed for the purpose shall not, if the 
act or thing is otherwise duly done, invalidate the act or thing done.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 26, for s. 45 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for s. 46 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for s. 47 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 20, for “candidate ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  30 
  
CHAPTER  III.—General Procedure at Elections  
1[52. Death of a candidate of  a recognis ed political party before poll.—(1) If a candidate , set up 
by a recognised political party, — 
(a) dies at any time after 11.00 A.M. on the last date for making nomination s and his nomination  
is found valid on scrutiny under section 36; or  
(b) whose nomination has been found va lid on scrutiny under section 3 6 and who has not 
withdrawn his candidature under section 37 , dies, 
and in either case, a report of his death is received at any time before the publication of t he list of 
contesting candidate s under section 38; or  
(c) dies as a contesting candidate and a report of his death is received before the commencement 
of the poll,  
the returning officer shall, upon being satisfied about the fact of the d eath of the candidate, by order , 
announce an adjournment of the poll to a date to be no tified later and report the fact to the Election 
Commission and also to the appropriate authority:  
Provided that no order for adjourning a poll should be made in a case referred to in clause ( a) except 
after the scrutiny of all the nominations including th e nomination of the deceased candidate.  
(2) Th e Election Commission shall, on  the receipt of a report from the returning officer under                
sub-section ( 1), call upon the recognised political party, whose candidate has died, to nominate another 
candidate for the said poll within seven days of issue of such notice to such recognised political party and 
the provisions of sections 30 to 3 7 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such nomination as they 
would apply to other nominations:  
Provided  that no person who has given a notice of withdrawal of his candidature under                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 37 before the adjournment of the poll shall be ineligible for being nominated as 
a candidate for the election after such adjournmen t. 
(3) Where a list of contesting candidates had been published under section 38 before the adjournment 
of the poll under sub -section ( 1), the returning officer shall again prepare and publish a fresh list of 
contesting candidates under that section so as to include the name of the candidate who has been validly 
nominated under sub -section  (2). 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, sections 33 and 38, “recognised political party ”, 
means a political party re organised by the Election Commission under  the Election Symbols (Reservation 
and Allotment) Order, 1968.]  
53. Procedure in contested and uncontested elections .—2[(1) If the number of contesting 
candidates is more than the number of seats to be filled, a poll shall be taken.]  
(2) If the number of s uch candidates is equal to the number of seats to be filled, the returning officer 
shall forthwith declare all such candidates to be duly elected to fill those seats.  
(3) If the number of such candidates is less than the number of seats to be filled, the returning officer 
shall forthwith declare all such candidates to be elected and the  3[Election Commission] shall , by 
notification in the Official Gazette , call upon the constituency or the elected members or the members of 
the State Legislative Assembly or  the members of the electoral college concerned  4*** as the case may 
be, to elect a person or persons to fill the remaining seat or seats  5***: 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 9, for section 52 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 30, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. Subs. by s. 30, ibid.,  for “appropriate authority ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. The words “or the elected members of the Coorg Legislative Council ” omitted by Act 49 of 1951, s. 44 and the Fifth     
Schedule (w.e.f. 6 -9-1951).  
5.  Certain words omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 30 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  31 
 Provided that where the constituency or the elected members or the members of the State Legislative 
Assembly or the members of the electoral college  1*** having already been called upon under this          
sub-section, has or have failed to elect a person or the requisite number of persons, as the case may be, to 
fill the vacancy or vacancies, the  2[Election Commiss ion] shall not be bound to call again upon the 
consituency, or such members to elect a person or persons  3[until it is satisfied that if called upon again, 
there will be no such failure on the part of the constituency of such members].  
54. [Special procedu re at elections in constituencies where seats are reserved for                   
Scheduled Caste s or Scheduled Tribes. ] Omitted by the Representation of the People  (Amendment )         
Act, 1961 (40 of 1961), s. 12 (w.e.f.  20-9-1961). 
55. Eligibility of members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes to hold seats not reserved 
for those castes or tribes .—For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that a member of the 
Scheduled Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes shall not be disqualifi ed to hold a seat not reserved for 
members of those castes or tribes, if he is otherwise qualified to hold such seats under the Constitution 
and this Act  4[or under the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963), as the case may be.]  
55A.  [Retirement from contest at elections in Parliament ary and Assembly constituencies. ] Omitted 
by the Representation of the People  (Amendment ) Act, 1958 (58 of 1958), s. 22 (w.e.f.  20-9-1961). 
CHAPTER  IV.—The Poll  
56. Fixing time for poll .—The 5[Election Commission] shall fix the hours during which the poll will 
be taken;  and the hours so fixed shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the total period allotted on any one day for polling at an election in  6[a Parliamen tary or 
Assembly constituency] shall not be less than eight hours.  
57. Adjournment of poll in emergencies .—(1) If at an election the proceedings at any polling 
station provided under section 25 or at the place fixed under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 for the poll are 
interrupted or obstructed by any riot or open violence, or if at an election it is not possible to take the poll 
at any polling station or such place on account of any natural calamity, or any other sufficient cause , the 
presiding officer for such polling station or the returning officer presiding over such place, as the case 
may be, shall announce an adjournment of the poll to a date to be notified later, and where the poll is so 
adjourned by a presiding officer, he shall forthwith inform the returning officer concerned.  
(2) Whenever a poll is adjourned under sub -section ( 1), the returning officer shall immediately report 
the circumstances to the appropriate authority and the Election Commission , and shall, as soon as may be, 
with the previous approval of the Election Commission , appoint the day on which the poll shall 
recommence, and fix the po lling station or place at which  and the hours during which, the poll will be 
taken, and shall not count the votes cast at such election until such adjour ned poll shall have been 
completed.  
(3) In every such case as aforesaid  the returning officer shall notify in such manner as the Election 
Commission may direct the date, place and hours of polling fixed under sub -section ( 2). 
7[58. Fresh poll in the case of destruction, etc., of ballot boxes. —(1) If at any election, — 
(a) any ballot box used at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll is unlawfully taken out 
of the custody of the presiding officer or the returning officer, or is accidentally or in tentionally 
destroyed or lost, or is damaged or tampered with, to such an extent, that the result of the poll at th at 
polling station or place cannot be ascertained; or  
                                                             
1. The words “or the elected members of th e Coorg Legislative Council ” omitted by Act 49 of 1951, s. 44 and the Fifth     
Schedule (w.e.f. 6 -9-1951).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 30, for “appropriate authority ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “until such date as  the  Election Commission may specify in this behalf ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Subs. by s. 32 , ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -8-1856).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 34, for “appropriate authority ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 23, for “a Constitu ency” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
7. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 13, for section 58 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  32 
 1[(aa) any voting machine develops a mechanical failure during the course of the record ing of 
votes; or]  
(b) any such error or irregularity in procedure as is likely to vitiate the poll is committed at a 
polling station or at a place fixed for the poll,  
the returning officer shall forthwith report the matter to the Election Commission.  
(2) Thereupon the Election Commission shall, after taking all material circumstances into           
account; either — 
(a) declare the poll at that polling station or place to be void, appoint a day, and fix the hours, for 
taking a fresh poll at that polling station or place and notify the day so appointed and the hours so 
fixed in such manner as it may deem fit, or  
(b) if satisfied that the result of a fresh poll at that polling station or place will not , in any  way, 
affect the result of the election or that  1[the mechanical failure of the voting machine or] the error or 
irregularity in procedure is not material, issue such directions to the returning officer as it may deem 
proper for the further conduct and completion of the election.  
(3) The provisions of th is Act and of any rules or orders made thereunder shall apply to every such 
fresh poll as they apply to the original poll.]  
2[58A. Adjournment of poll or countermanding of election on the ground of booth     
caputring. —(1) If at any election, — 
(a) booth capturing has taken place at a polling station or at a place fixed for the poll (hereafter in 
this section referred to as a place) in such a manner that the result of the poll at that polling station or 
place cannot be ascertained; or  
(b) booth capturing t akes place in any place for counting of votes in such a manner that the result 
of the counting at that place cannot be ascertained,  
the returning officer shall forthwith report the matter to the Election Commission.  
(2) The Election Commission shall, on th e receipt of a report from the returning officer under        
sub-section ( 1) and after taking all material circumstances into account, either — 
(a) declare that the poll at that polling station or place be void, appoint a day, and fix the hours, 
for taking  fresh poll at that polling station or place and notify the date so appointed and hours so fixed 
in such manner as it may deem fit; or  
(b) if satisfied that in view of the large number of polling stations or places involved in booth 
capturing the result of  the election is likely to be affected, or that booth capturing had affected 
counting of votes in such a manner as to affect the result of the election, countermand the election in 
that constituency.  
Explanation. —In this section, “booth capturing ” shall ha ve the same meaning as in section 135A.]  
59. Manner of voting at elections .—At every election where a poll is taken votes shall be given by 
ballot in such manner as may be prescribed,  3[and, save as expressly provided by this Act, no votes shall 
be received by proxy]:  
4[Provided that the votes at every election to fill a seat or seats in the Council of States shall be given 
by open ballot.]  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of 2003, s. 2, for “and no votes shall be rec eived by proxy ” (w.e.f. 22 -9-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 40 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -8-2003).  33 
 1[60. Special prodecure for voting by certain classes of persons. —Without prejudice to the 
generality of the provisions contained in section 59, provision may be made, by rules made under this 
Act, for enabling ,— 
(a) any of the persons as is referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 8) of section 20 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43  of 1950)  (here inafter in this section referred to as      
the 1950 -Act) to give his vote either in person or by postal ballot or by proxy, and not in any other 
manner, at an election in a constituency where poll is taken;  
(b) any of the following persons to give his vote either in person or by postal ballot, and not in 
any other manner, at an election in a constituency where a poll is taken, namely: — 
(i) any person as is referred to in clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 8) of section 20 of         
the 1950 -Act; 
(ii) the wife of any such person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 20 of      
the 1950 -Act apply and such wife being ordinarily residing with that person in terms of                  
sub-section ( 6) of that section;  
(c) any  person belonging to a class of persons notified by the Election Commission in 
consultation with the Government to give his vote by postal ballot , and not in any other manner, at an 
election in a constituency where a poll is taken subject to the fulfil ment  of such requirement s as may 
be specified in those rules;  
(d) any person subjected to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force to give 
his vote by postal ballot, and not in any other manner, at an election in a constituency where a po ll is 
taken, subject to the fulfilment of such requirements as may be specified in those rules.]  
2[61. Special  procedure for preventing personation of electors. —With a view to preventing 
personation of  electors provision may be made by rules made under thi s Act: — 
(a) for the ma rking with indelible ink of the thumb or any other finger of every  elector who 
applies for a ballot paper or ballot papers for the purpose of  voting at a polling station before delivery 
of such paper or papers to him;  
(b) for the production before the presiding  officer or a polling officer of a polling station by every 
such elector as  aforesaid of identity card before the delivery of a ballot paper or ballot  papers to him if 
under rules made in that behalf under the Representation of the  People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), 
electors of the constituency in which the polling  station is situated have been supplied with identity 
cards with or without their  respecting photographs attached thereto; and  
(c) for prohibiting the delivery of any  ballot paper to any person for voting at a polling station if 
at the time such  person applies for such paper he has already such a mark on his thumb or any  other 
finger or does not produce on demand his identity card before the  presiding officer or a polling  officer 
of the pol ling station].  
3[61A. Voting machines at elections. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, the giving and recording of votes by voting machines in such manner as may be 
prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the Election Commission may, 
having regard to the circ umstances of each case, specify.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section, “voting machine ” means any machine or apparatus 
whether operated electronically or o therwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a 
ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be 
construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting m achine is used at any 
election.]  
 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2003, s. 3, for section 60 (w.e.f. 22 -9-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 25, for section 61 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s.  11 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  34 
 62. Right to vote .—(1) No person who is not, and except as expressly provided by th is Act, every 
person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of any constituency shall be entitled to vote 
in that constit uency.  
(2) No person shall vote at an election in any constituency if he is subject to any of the 
disqualifications referred to in section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950).  
(3) No person shall vote at a general election in more  than one constituency of the same class, and if a 
person votes in more than one such constituency, his votes in all such constituencies shall be void.  
(4) No person shall at any election vote in the same c onstituency more than once, not withstanding 
that his name may have been registered in the electoral roll for th at constituency more than once, and if he 
does so vote, all his votes in that constituency shall be void.  
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether under a sentence of 
imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the police:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive detention 
under any law for the time being in force.  
1[Provided fu rther that by reason of the prohibition to vote under this sub -section, a person whose 
name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not cease to be an elector.]  
2[(6) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall apply to a person who has been a uthorised to 
vote as proxy for an elector under this Act in so far as he votes as a proxy for such elector.]  
 63. [Method of voting .] Omitted by the Representation of the People  (Amendment ) Act, 1961                  
(40 of 1961), s. 14 (w.e.f.  20-9-1961). 
CHAPTER  V.—Counting of Votes  
64. Counting of votes .—At every  election where a poll is taken, votes shall be counted by , or under 
the 3[supervision  and direction] of, the returning officer, and each  4[contesting  candidate], his election 
agent and his  5[counting agents], shall have  a right to be present at the time of counting.  
6[64A. Destruction, loss, etc., of ballot papers at the time of counting. —(1) If at any time before 
the counting of votes is completed any ballot papers used at a polling station or at a place fixed for the 
poll are unlawfully taken out of the custody of the returning officer or are accidentally or intentionally 
destroyed or lost or are damaged or tampered with, to such an extent that the result of the poll at that 
polling station or place cannot be ascertained, the returning officer shall forthwith report the matter to the 
Election Commission.  
(2) Thereupon, the Election Commission shall, after taking all material circumstances into account, 
either — 
(a) direct that the counting of votes shall be stopped, declare the poll at that polling station or 
place to be void, appoint a day, and fix the hours, for taking a fresh poll at that polling station or place 
and notify the date so appointed and hours so fixed in such manner as it may de em fit, or  
(b) if satisfied that the result of a fresh poll at that polling station or place will not , in any way, 
affect the result of the election, issue such directions to the returning officer as it may deem proper for 
the resumption and completion of the counting and for the further conduct and completion of the 
election in relation to which the votes have been counted.  
(3) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or orders made thereunder shall apply to every such 
fresh poll as the y apply to the or iginal poll.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 2013, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 24 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -9-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 36, for “supervision ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 26, for “candidate ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 36, for “counting agent ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 34 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  35 
 65. Equality of votes .—If, after the counting of the votes is completed, an equality of votes is found 
to exist between any candidates, and the addition of one vote will entitle any of those candidates to be 
declared elected, the returning o fficer shall forthwith decide between those candidates by lot, and proceed 
as if the candidate on whom the lot falls had received an additional vote.  
66. Declaration of results .—When the counting of the votes has been completed, the returning 
officer  1[shall, in the absence of any direction by the Election Commission to the contrary, forthwith 
declare] the result of the election in the manner provided by this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
67. Report of the result .—As soon as may be after the result of an election has been declared, the 
returning officer shall report the result to the appropriate authority and the Election Commission, and in 
the case of an election to a House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State also to the Secretary of 
that House, and the appropriate authority shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette the 
declarations containing the names of the elected candidates.  
2[67A. Date of election of candidate .—For the purposes of this Act, the date on which a candidate is 
declared by the returning officer under the provisions of section 53,  3***, 4***, or section 66, to be 
elected to a House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State  5*** shall be the date of election of that 
candidate.]  
CHAPTER  VI.—Multiple Elections  
68. Vacation of seats when elected to both Houses of Parliament .—(1) Any person who is chosen 
a member of both the Houses of the People and the Council of States and who has not taken his seat in 
either House may, by notice in writing signed by him and del ivered to the Secretary to the Election 
Commission  6[within ten days from the date, or the later of the dates, on which he is so chosen, intimate] 
in which of the Houses he wishes to serve, and thereupon, his seat in the House in which he does not wish 
to serve shall become vacant.  
(2) In default of such intimation within the aforesaid period, his seat in the Council of States shall, at 
the expiration of that period , become vacant.  
(3) Any intimation given under sub -section ( 1) shall be final and irrevocabl e. 
7[(4) For the purposes of this section and of section 69, the date on which a person is chosen to be a 
member of either House of Parliament shall be in the case of an elected member, the date of his election 
and in the case of a nominated member, the date of first publication in the Gazette of India of his 
nomination.]  
69. Vacation of seats by persons already members of one House on election to other House of 
Parliament .—(1) If a person who is already a member of the House of the People and has taken h is          
seat in such House is chosen a member of the Council of States, his seat in the House of the People shall,  
8[on the date on which he is so chosen], become vacant.  
(2) If a person who is already a member of the Council of Sta tes and has taken his seat in                
such Council is chosen a member of the House of the People, his seat in the Council of States             
shall,   8[on the date on which he is so chosen], become vacant.  
70. Election to more than one seat in either House of Parliament or in the House or either 
House of the Legislature of a State .—If a person is elected to more than one seat in either House of 
Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State, then, unless within the prescribed 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 35, for “shall forthwith declare ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 o f 1956, s. 37 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. The word and figures “section 54 ” omitted by Act 40 of 1961, s. 15 ( w.e.f.  20-9-1961).  
4. The word, figures and letter “section 55A ” omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 27 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Certain words omitted by Act 103 of 1956, s. 66 ( w.e.f. 1 -1-1957).  
6. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 38, for certain words ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
7. Ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
8. Subs. by s. 39, ibid.,  for certain words ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  36 
 time he resigns all but one of the seats  1[by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker or Chairman, 
as the case may be, or to such other authority or officer as may be prescribed], all the seats shall become  
vacant.  
CHAPTER  VII.—Publication of election Results and Nominations  
2[71. Publication of results of elections to the Council of States and of names of persons 
nominated by the President .—After the elections held in any year in pursuance of the notifications 
issued under section 12, there shall be notified by the appropriate authority in the Official Gazette the 
names of members elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the Sta tes and by the 
members of the electoral colleges  for the various  3[Union territories] at the said elections together with the 
name of any persons nominated by the President to the Council of States under sub -clause (a) of          
clause ( 1) of article 80 or under any other provisions.  
72. [Publication of results of elections for the reconstitution of electoral college s for certain Union 
territories. ] Omitted by the Territorial Councils Act, 1956 (103 of 1956), s. 66 (w.e.f.  1-1-1957).  
73. Publication of results of general elections to the House of the People and the State 
Legislative Assemblies .—Where a general election is held for the purpose of constituting a new House of 
the People or a new State Legislative Assembly, there shall be not ified by  4[the Election Commission] in 
the Official Gazette, as soon as may be after  5[the results of the elections in all the constituencies] [other 
than th ose in which the poll could not be taken for any reason on the date originally fixed under clause ( d) 
of section 30 or for which the time for completion of the election has been extended under the provisions 
of section 153] have been declared by the returning officer under the provisions of section 53 or, as the 
case may be , section 66, the names of the  members elected for those constituencies]  6*** and upon the 
issue of such notification that House or Assembly shall be deemed to be duly constituted: — 
Provided that the issue of such notification shall not be deemed — 
7[(a) to preclude — 
(i) the taking of t he poll and the completion of the election in any Parliamentary or Assembly 
constituency or constituencies in which the poll could not be taken for any reason on the date 
originally fixed under clause ( d) of section 30; or  
(ii) the completion of the electi on in any Parliamentary or Assembly constituency or 
constituencies for which time has been extended under the provisions of section 153; or]  
(b) to affect the duration of the House of the People or the State Legislative Assembly, if any, 
functioning immedi ately before the issue of the said notification.  
8[73A. Special provision as to certain elections .—Notwithstanding anything contained in        
section 73 or in any other provision of this Act, with respect to the general election for the purpose of 
constituting a New House of the People upon dissolution of the Ninth House of the People, — 
(a) the notification under section 73 may be issued without taking into account the Parliamentary 
constituencies in the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and  
(b) the Election Commission may take the steps in relation to election s from the Parliame ntary 
constituencies in the Stat e of Jammu and Kashmir separately and in such manner and on such date or 
dates as it may deem appropriate.]  
  
                                                             
1.  Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 40 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2.  Subs. by s. 41, ibid.,  for sections 71 to 75 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part C States ”. 
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 16, for “the appropriate authority ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 1967, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 11 -4-1967).  
6. Certain words omitted by Act 40 of 1961, s. 16 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 1967, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 11 -4-1967).  
8. Subs. by Act 31 of 1991, s. 2, for sections 73 A and 73AA (w.e.f. 18 -4-1991).  37 
  
74. Publication of results of elections to the State Legislative Councils and of names of persons 
nominated to such Councils .—After the elections held  1[in pursuance of the notifications issued under 
section 15A or] in any year in pursuance of the notificatio ns issued under section 16, there shall be 
notified by the appropriate authority in the Official Gazette the names of the members elected for the 
various Council constituencies and by the members o r the Legislative Assembly of the State at the said 
electio ns together with the names of any persons nominated by the Governor  2*** under sub -clause (e) of 
clause (3) of article 171.]  
3[CHAPTER  VIIA .—DECLARATION OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
75A. Declaration of assets and liabilities .—(1) Every elected candidate for a  House of Parliament 
shall, within ninety days from the date on which he makes and subscribes an oath or affirmation, 
according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule to the Constitution, for taking his seat 
in either House of Parliament , furnish the information, relating to — 
(i) the movable and immovable property of which he, his spouse and his dependant children are 
jointly or severally owners or beneficiaries;  
(ii) his liabilities to any public financial institution; and  
(iii) his liab ilities to the Central Government or the State Government, to the Chairman of the 
Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.  
(2) The information under sub -section ( 1) shall be furnished in such form and in such manner as may 
be prescribed in the rules made under sub -section ( 3). 
(3) The Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may 
be, may make rules for the purposes of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The rules made by the Chairman of  the Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the 
People, under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are made, before the Council of 
States or the House of the People, as the case may be, for a total period of thirty days whi ch may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take effect upon the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner approved with or without modifications or 
disapproved by the Council of States or the Ho use of the People and where they are so approved, they 
shall take effect on such approval in the form in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the 
case may be, and where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.  
(5) The Chairman of t he Council of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may 
be, may direct that any wilful contravention of the rules made under sub -section ( 3) by an elected 
candidate for a House of Parliament referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be dea lt with in the same manner 
as a breach of privilege of the Council of States or the House of the People, as the case may be.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “immovable property ” means the land and includes any building or other structure attached to 
the land or permanently fastened to anything which is attached to the land;  
(ii) “movable property ” means any other property which is not the immovable property and 
includes corporeal  and incorporeal property of every description;  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
2. The words “or Rajpramukh a, as the case may be ” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.2) Order,  1956.  
3. Ins. by Act 72 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  38 
 (iii) “public financial institution ” means a  public financial institution within the meaning of 
section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and includes bank;  
(iv) “bank ” referred to in clause ( iii) means — 
(a) State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India                       
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955);  
(b) subsidiary bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause ( K) of section 2 of the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);  
(c) Regional Rural Bank established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks                
Act, 1976 (21 of 1976);  
(d) corresponding new bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause ( da) of section 5 of 
the Banking Re gulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); and  
(e) co-operative bank having the meaning assigned to it in clause ( cci) of section 5 of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) as modified by sub -clause ( i) of clause ( c) of             
section 56 of that Act; an d 
(v) “dependant children ” means sons and daughters who have no separate means of earning and 
are wholly dependant on the elected candidate referred to in sub -section ( 1) for their livelihood.]  
CHAPTER  VIII. —Election Expenses  
1[76. Application of Chapter. —This Chapter shall apply only to the elections to the House of the 
People and to the Legislative Assembly of a State.]  
77. Account of election expenses and maximum thereof .—(1) Every candidate at an election shall, 
either by himself or by his election agen t, keep a separate and correct account of all expenditure in 
connection with the election incurred or authori sed by him or by his election agent between  2[the date on 
which he has been nominated] and the date of declaration of the result thereof, both dates inclusive.  
3[Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) the expenditure incurred by leaders of a political party on account of travel by air or by any 
other means of transport for propagating programme of the political party shall not be deemed to be 
the expenditure in connection with the election incurred or authorised by a candidate of that political 
party or his election agent for the purposes of this sub -section;  
(b) any expenditure incurred in respect of any arrange ments made, facilities provided or any other 
act or thing done by any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the classes 
mentioned in clause ( 7) of section 123 in the discharge or purported discharge of his official duty as 
mention ed in the proviso to that clause shall not be deemed to be expenditure in connection with the 
election incurred or authorised by a candidate or by his election agent for the purposes of this            
sub-section.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clause  (a) of Explanation  1, the expression “leaders of a political 
party ”, in respect of any election, means, — 
(i) where such political party is a recognised political party, such persons not exceeding forty in 
number, and  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 42, for sections 76 to 78 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 2003, s. 4, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 11 -9-2003).  
 39 
 (ii) where such political party is other than a recognised political party, such persons not 
exceeding twenty in number,  
whose names have been communicated to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officers of 
the States by the political party to be leaders for the purposes of such  election, within a period of seven 
days from the date of the notification for such election published in the Gazette of India or Official 
Gazette of the State, as the case may be, under this Act:  
Provided that a political party may, in the case where any of the persons referred to in clause ( i) or, as 
the case may be, in clause ( ii) dies or ceases to be a member of such political party, by further 
communication to the Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officers of the States, substitute new 
name, during the period ending immediately before forty -eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the 
conclusion of the last poll for such election, for the name of such person died or ceased to be a member, 
for the purposes of designating the new leader in his  place.]  
(2) The account shall contain such particular s, as may be prescribed.  
(3) The total of the said expenditure shall not exceed su ch amount as may be prescribed.  
78. Lodging of account with the district election officer .—1[(1)] Every contesting candidate at an 
election shall , within thirty days from the date of election of the returned candidate or, if there are more 
than one returned candidate at the election and the dates ’ of their election are different, the later of those 
two dates, lodge wit h the 2[district election officer] an account of his election expenses which shall be a 
true copy of the account kept by him or by his election agent under section 77.]  
3*                                  *                                      *                                 *                                 * 
4[PART VA  
FREE SUPPLY OF CERTAIN MATERIAL TO CANDIDATES OF RECOGNISED POLITICAL PARTIES  
78A. Free supply of copies of electoral rolls .—(1) The Government shall, at any election  to be held 
for the purposes of constituting the House of the People or the  Legislative Assembly of a State, supply, 
free of cost, to the candidates of  recognsied political parties such number of copies of the electoral roll, as  
finally published under the Representation of t he People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) and such other material 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The material referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall  be supplied, — 
(i) subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Central Govern ment  in consultation with 
the Election  Commission with respect to the reduc tion of  the maximum expenditure which may be 
incurred by the candidate under section 77; and  
(ii) through such officers as may be specified by the Election  Commis sion who shall act in 
accordance with such general or s pecial directions as  may be given by the Election Commission.  
78B. Supply of certain items to candidates, etc. —(1) The Election Commission shall, at any time 
between the date of pub lication  of the notification calling the election for the purposes of cons tituting the  
House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State and the date on which  the poll is to be taken, 
supply or cause to be supplied, such items as the  Central Govern ment may, by order, determine in 
consultation with the Election Commissi on, to the  electors in the constituencies concerned or to the 
candidates set up by the  recognised political parties.  
(2) Where the Election  Commission supplies the items to the candidates under sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Government may, in consultation  with the Election Commission, impose conditions with respect 
to the reduction of  the maximum expenditure which may be incurred by the candidate under section 77.  
                                                             
1. Section 78 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 47 of 1966, s. 36 ( w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 36, i bid., for “returning officer ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Omitted by Act 2 of 2004, s. 36 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11 -9-2003).  40 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of  section 39A, this Chapter and  clause ( hh) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 169, the expression  “recognised political party ”, has the meaning assigned to it in the Election 
Symbols (Reservation and  Allotment) Order, 1968.]  
 
PART VI  
DISPUTES REGARDING ELECTIONS  
CHAPTER  I.—Interpretation  
79. Definitions .—In this Part and in 1[Part VII] unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) any reference to a High Court or to the Chief Justice or Judge of a High Court shall, in 
relation to a Union territory having a Court of the Judicial Commissioner, be construed as a reference 
to the said Court of the Judicial Commissioner or to the Judicial Commissioner or any Additional 
Judicial Commissioner, as the case may be;]  
3[(b) “candidate ” means a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a 
candidate at any election;]  
(c) “costs ” means all costs, charges and expenses of, or incidental to, a trial of an election 
petition;  
(d) “electoral right ” means the right of a person to stand or not to stand as, or  4[to withdraw or not 
to withdraw] from being, a candidate, or to vote or refrain from voting at an election;  
5[(e) “High Court ” means the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the election 
to which the election petition relates has been held;]  
(f) “returned candidate ” means a candidate whose name has been published under section 67 as 
duly elected.  
CHAPTER  II.—PRESENTATION OF ELECTION PETITIONS  TO ELECTION COMMISSION  
80. Election petitions .—No election shall be called in question except by an election petition 
presented in accordance with the provisions of this Part.  
6[80A. High Court to try election petitions .—(1) The Court having jurisdiction to try an election 
petition shall be the High Court.  
(2) Such jurisdiction shall be exercised ordinarily by a single Judge of the High Court and the Chief 
Justice, shall, from time to time, assign one or more Judges for that purpose:  
Provided that where the High Court consists only of one Judge, he shall try all election petitions 
presented to that Court.  
(3) The High Court in its discretion may, in the interests of justice or convenience, try an election 
petition, wholly or partly, at a place other than the place of seat of the High Court.]  
81. Presentation of petitions .—(1) An election petition calling in question any election may be 
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in  7[sub-section ( 1)] of section 100 and section 101 to 
the 8[High Court] by any candidate at such election or any elector  9[within forty -five days from, but not 
earlier than , the date of election of the returned candidate , or if there ar e more than one returned candidate 
at the election and the dates of their election are different, the later of those two dates].  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47  of 1966, s. 37, for “Parts VII and VIII ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 37, for “to withdraw ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
5. Subs. by s. 37, ibid.,  for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. Ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 44, for “sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
8. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 39, for “Election Commission ” (w.e.f. 14-12-1966).  
9. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 44, for certain words ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  41 
 Explanation. —In this sub -section, “elector ” means a person who was entitled to vote at the election to 
which the election petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not.  
1*                               *                                      *                                     *                                 * 
2[(3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents 
mentioned in the petition  3*** and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own 
signature to be a tr ue copy of the petition.]  
4[82. Parties to the petition. —A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition — 
(a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming  a declaration that the election of all or any of the 
returned candidates is void, claims a further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has 
been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than the petitioner , and where no such further 
declaration is claimed, all the returned candidates; and  
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practice are made in the petition.]  
5[83. Contents of petition. — 
(1) An election petition — 
(a) shall  contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner  relies;  
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner  allege s, including 
as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties  alleged to have committed such corrupt 
practice and the date and place of the  commission of each such practice; and  
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the  Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings:  
6[Provided  that where the pet itioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also  be 
accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the  allegation of such corrupt practice 
and the particulars thereof.]  
(2) Any schedule  or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified  in the 
same manner as the petition].  
7[84. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner. —A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration 
that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected.]  
85. [Procedure on receiving petition .] Omitted by Representation of the People (Amendment)           
Act, 1966 (47 of 1966), s. 40 (w.e.f.  14-12-1966).  
CHAPTER III.—Trial of Election Petitions  
8[86. Trial of election petitions. —(1) The High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does 
not comply with the provisions of section 81 or section 82 or section 117.  
Explanation. —An order of the High Court dismissing an  election petition under this sub -section shall 
be deemed to be an order made under clause ( a) of section 98.  
(2) As soon as may be after an election petition has been presented to the High Court, it shall be 
referred to the Judge or one of the Judges who has or have been assigned by the Chief Justice for the trial 
of election petitions under sub -section ( 2) of section 80A.  
                                                             
1. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s. 39 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 17 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s. 39 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 45, for section 82 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
5. Subs. by s. 46, ibid.,  for section 83 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
6. Ins. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 18 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 47, for sectio n 84 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
8.  Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 41, for sections 86 to 92 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  42 
 (3) Where more election petitions than one are presented to the High Court in respect of the same 
election, all of them shall be referr ed for trial to the same Judge who may, in his discretion, try them 
separately or in one or more groups.  
(4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall, upon application made by him to the High Court 
within fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to any order as to security 
for costs which may be made by the High Court, be entitled to be joined as a respondent.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section and of section 97, the trial of a petition shall be 
deemed to comme nce on the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the High Court and answer 
the claim or claims made in the petition.  
(5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the 
particulars of any corrupt practi ce alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as 
may in its opinion be necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition, but shall not allow 
any amendment of the petition which will have the effect of introducing par ticulars of a corrupt practice 
not previously alleged in the petition.  
(6) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of 
justice in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusi on, unless the High Court 
finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.  
(7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to 
conclude the trial with in six months from the date on which the election petition is presented to the High 
Court for trial.  
87. Procedure before the High Court .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made thereunder, every election petition shall be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in 
accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to the trial 
of suits:  
Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writ ing, 
to examine any witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such witness or witnesses is 
not material for the decision of the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is doing 
so on frivolous grounds or with a view to delay the proceedings . 
(2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall , subject to the provisions of 
this Act, be deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election petition.]  
93. Documentary evidence .—Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, no 
document shall be inadmissible in evidence at the trial of an election petition on the ground that it is not 
duly stamped or registered.  
94. Secrecy of voting not to be infringed .—No witness or other person shall be required to state for 
whom he has voted at an election : 
1[Provided that this section shall not apply to such witness or other person where he has voted by 
open ballot.]   
95. Answering of criminating questions and certificate of indemn ity.—(1) No witness shall be 
excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to a matter in issue in the trial of an 
election petition upon the ground that the answer to such question may criminate or may tend to criminate 
him, or that it may  expose or may tend to expose him to any penalty or forfeiture:  
Provided that — 
(a) a witness, who answers truly all questions which he is required to answer shall be entitled to 
receive a certificate of inde mnity from 2[the High Court]; and  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -9-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 42, for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
 43 
 (b) an answer given by a witness to a question put by or before  1[the High Court] shall not, except 
in the case of any criminal proceeding for perjury in respect of the evidence, be admissible in 
evidence against in any civil or criminal proceedin g. 
(2) When a certifica te of indemnity has been granted to any witness, it may be pleaded by him in any 
Court and shall be a full and complete defence to or upon any charge under Chapter IXA of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), or Part VII of this Act arising out of the matter  to which such certificate relates, 
but it shall not be deemed to relieve him from any disqualification in connection with an election imposed 
by this Act or any other law.  
96. Expenses of witnesses .—The reasonable expenses incurred by any person in attend ing to give 
evidence may be allowed by  1[the High Court] to such person and shall, unless  1[the High Court] 
otherwise directs, be deemed to be part of the costs.  
97. Recrimination when sea t claimed .—(1) When in an election petition a declaration that any 
candidate other than the returned candidate has been duly elected is claimed, the returned candidate or 
any other party may give evidence to prove that the election of such candidate would have been void if he 
had been the returned candidate and a petition  had been presented calling in question his election:  
Provided that the returned candidate or such other party, as aforesaid shall not be entitled to give such 
evidence unless he has, within fourteen days from the date of  2[commencement of the trial], give n notice 
to 1[the High Court] of his intention to do so and has also given the security and the further security 
referred to in sec tions 117 and 118 respectively.  
(2) Every notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by the statement and  3*** 
particulars required by section 83 in the case of an election petition and shall be signed and verified in 
like manner.   
98. Decision of the High Court .—At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition  1[the High 
Court] shall make an order — 
(a) dismissing the election petition; or  
(b) declaring the election of  4[all or any of the returned candidates] to be void; or   
(c) declaring the election of  4[all or any of the returned candidates] to be void and the petitioner or 
any other cand idate to have been duly elected.  5***  
6*                                  *                                   *                                 *                                * 
99. Other orders to be made by the High Court .—(1) At the time of making an order under     
section 98  1[the High Court] shall also make an order — 
7[(a) where any charge is made in the petition of any corrupt practice having been committed at 
the election, recording — 
(i) finding whether any corrupt practice has or has not been proved to have been  committed  
8*** at the election, and the natur e of that corrupt practice; and  
(ii) the names of all persons, if any, who have been proved at the trial to have been guilty of 
any corrupt practice and the nature of that practice; and]  
(b) fixing the tota l amount of cost payable , and specifying the persons by and to whom costs shall 
be paid:  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 42, for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 52, for “the publication of the election petition under section 90 ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
3. The words “list of ” omitted by s. 52, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
4. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for “the returned candidate ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
5. The word “or” omitted by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
6. Clause ( d) omitted by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).  
7. Subs. by s. 54, ibid.,  for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
8. Certain wo rds omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 29 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
 44 
 Provided that  1[a person who is not a party to the petition shall not be named] in the order under        
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) unless — 
(a) he has been given notice to appear before  2[the High Court] and to show cause why he should 
not be so named; a nd 
(b) if he appears in pursuance of the notice, he has been given an opportunity of cross -examining 
any witness who has already been examined by 2[the High Court] and has given evidence against him, 
of calling evidence in his defence and of being heard.  
3[(2) In this section and in section 100, the expression “agent ” has the same meaning as in            
section 123.]   
100. Grounds for declaring election to be void .—4[(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
of  2[the High court] is of opinion — 
(a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified, to 
be chosen to fill the seat under the Constitution or this Act  5[or the Government of Union Territor ies 
Act, 1963 (20 of 1963)]; or  
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or 
by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent; or  
(c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected; or  
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially 
affected — 
(i) by the improper acceptance or any nomination, or  
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate  6[by an agent 
other than his election agent], or  
(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote 
which is void, or  
(iv) by any non -compliance with the provi sions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any 
rules or orders made under this Act,  
2[the High Court] shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.]   
7[(2)] If in the opinion of  2[the High Court], a returned candidate has been guilty  by an agent , other 
than his election agent, of any corrupt practice  8*** but  2[the High Court] is satisfied — 
(a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate or his election 
agent, and every such corrupt practice was commit ted contrary to the orders, and  9[without the 
consent], of the c andidate or his election agent;   
10*                               *                                    *                                  *                                  *  
(c) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable means for preventing the 
commission of corrupt  11*** practices at the election; and  
(d) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt  11*** practice on the part of 
the candidate or any  of his agents,  
then 2[the High Court] may decide that the election of the returned candidate is not void.   
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 54, for “no person shall be named ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
2. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 42, for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 54, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
4. Subs. by s. 55, ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 30, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 0-12-1958).  
7. Sub-section ( 3) re-numbered as sub -section ( 2) by Act 27 of 1956, s. 55 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
8. The words and figures “specified in section 123 ” omitted by s. 55, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
9. Subs. by s. 55, ibid.,  for “without the sancti on or connivance ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
10. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 30  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
11. The words “or illegal ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 55 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    45 
 101. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may be declared to have 
been elected .—If any person who has lodged a petition has, in addition to calling in question the election 
of the returned candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly 
elected and  1[the High Court] is of opinion — 
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received a majority of the valid votes; or  
(b) that but for the votes obtained by th e returned candidate by corrupt 2*** practices the 
petitioner or such other candidate would have obtained  a majority of the valid vo tes,  
1[the High Court] shall  after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void declare the 
petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may  be, to have been duly elected.   
102. Procedure in case of an equality of votes .—If during the trial of an election petition i t appears 
that there is an equality of votes between any candidates at the election and that the addition of a vote 
would entitle any of those candidates  to be declared elected, then — 
(a) any decision made by the returning officer under the provisions of t his Act shall, in so far as it 
determines the question between those candidates, be effective also for the purposes of the petition; 
and 
(b) in so f ar as that question is not determined by such a decision  1[the High Court] shall decide 
between them by lot and proceed as if the one on whom the lot then falls h ad received an additional 
vote.  
3[103. Communicati on of orders of the High Court. —The High Court shall, as soon as may be 
after the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, intimate the substanc e of the decision to the 
Election Commission and the Speaker or Chairman, as the case may be, of the House of Parliament or of 
the State Legislature concerned and, as soon as may be thereafter, shall send to the Election Commission 
an authenticated copy of  the decision.]  
104. [Difference of opinion among  the members of the Tribunal. ] Omitted by the Representation of 
the People (Second Amendment ) Act, 1956 (27 of 1956), s. 57 (w.e.f. 28-8-1956).    
105. [Orders of the Trib unal to be final and conclusive. ] Omitted  by s. 58, ibid. (w.e.f.  28-8-1956).    
106. Transmission of order to the appropriate authority, etc., and its publication .—As soon as 
may be after the receipt of any order made by  1[the High Court] under section 98 or section 99, the 
Election Commission shall forward copies of the order to the appropriate authority and, in the case where 
such order relates to an election  4*** to a House of Parliament or to an election to the House or a House 
of the Legislature of a State, also to the Speaker or  Chairman, as the case may be, of the House concerned 
and 5[shall cause the order to be published — 
(a) where the order relates to an election to a House of Parliament, in the Gazette of India as well 
as in the Official Gazette of the State concerned; and  
(b) where the order relates to an election to the House or a House of the Legislature of the State, 
in the Official Gazette of the State.]  
6[107. Effect of orders of the High Court. —7[(1) Subject to the provisions contained in             
Chapter IV A relating to the stay of operation of an order of the High Court under section 98 or section 99, 
every such order shall take effect as soon as it is pronounced by the High Court.]  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 42, for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. The words “or illegal ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 56 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 43, for s. 103 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. The brackets and words “(other than a primary election) ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 59 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
5. Subs. by s. 59, ibid.,  for certain words ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
6. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 60, for section 107 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Subs. by s. 44, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  46 
 (2) Where by an order under section 98 the election of a returned candidate is declared to be void, 
acts and proceedings in which that returned candidate has, before the date thereof, participated as a 
member of Parliament or as a member of the Legislature of a State shall not be invalidated by reason of 
that order, nor shall such  candidate be subjected to any liability or penalty on the ground of such 
participation.]  
CHAPTER  IV.—Withdrawal and Abatement of Election Petitions  
108. [Withdrawal of petitions  before appointment of Tribunal .] Omitted by the Representation of the 
People (Amendment ) Act, 1966 (47 of 1966), s. 45 (w.e.f.  14-12-1966).    
1[109. Withdrawal of election petitions. —(1) An election petition may be withdrawn only by leave 
of the High Court.  
(2) Where an application for withdrawal is made under sub -section ( 1), notice thereof fixing a date for 
the hearing of the application shall be given to all other parties to the petition and shall be published in the 
Official Gazette.  
110. Procedure for withdrawal of election petition s.—(1) If there are more petitioners than one, no 
application to withdraw an election petition shall be made except with the consent of all the petitioners.  
(2) No application for withdrawal shall be granted if, in the opinion of the High Court, such 
application has been induced by any bargain or consideration which ought not to be allowed.  
(3) If the application is granted — 
(a) the petitioner shall be ordered to pay the  costs of the respondents there  to incurred or 
such portion thereof as the High Court may think fit;  
(b) the  High  Court shall direct that the notice of withdrawal shall be published in the 
Official  Gazette and in such other manner as it may specify and thereupon the notice shall be 
published accordingly;  
(c) a person who might himself have been a petitioner may, within fourteen d ays of 
such publication, apply to be substituted as petitioner in place of the party withdrawing, and upon 
compliance with the condition s, if any, as to security, shall be entitled to be so substituted and to 
continue the proceedings upon such terms as the  High  Court may deem fit.]  
111. Report of withdrawal by the High Court to the Election Commission .—When an application 
for withdrawal is granted by  2[the High Court] and no person has been substituted as petitioner under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of se ction 110, in place of the party withdrawing,  2[the High Court] shall 
report the fact to the Election Commission  3[and thereupon the Election Commission shall publish the 
report in the Official Gazette].  
4[112. Abatement of election petitions .—(1) An election petition shall abate only on the death o r a 
sole petitioner or of the survivor of several petitio n. 
(2) Where an election petition abates under sub -section ( 1), the High Court shall cause the fact to be 
published in such manner as it may deem fit.  
(3) Any person who might himself have been a petitioner may, within fourteen days of such 
publication, apply to be substituted as petitioner and upon compliance with the conditions , if any, as 
security, shall be entitled to be so substituted and to contin ue the proceedings upon such terms as the High 
Court may deem fit.]  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s.  46, for section s 109 and 110 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 47, ibid.,  for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 61 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).    
4. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 48, for section s 112 to 115 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  47 
 116. Abatement or substitution on death of respondent .—If before the conclusion of the trial of an 
election petition, the sole respondent dies or gives notice that he does not intend to oppose the petition or 
any of the respondents dies or gives such notice and there is no other respondent who is opposing the 
petition,  1[the High Court] shall cause notice of such event to be published in the Official Gazette, and 
thereupon any person who might have been a petitioner may, within fourteen days of such publication, 
apply to be substituted in place of such respondent to oppose the petition, and shall be entitled to continue 
the proceedings upon such terms as  1[the High Court] may think fit.  
2[CHAPTER  IVA.—APPEALS  
3[116A. Appeals to Supreme Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court on any question (whether of law or fact) 
from every order made by a High Court under section 98 or section 99.  
(2) Every appeal under this Chapter shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the order of the High Court  under section 98 or section 99 : 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal  after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such 
period.  
116B . Stay of operation of order of High Court .—(1) An application may be made to the High  
Cour t for stay of operation of an order made by the High Court under section 98  or section  99 before the 
expiration of the time allowed for appealing therefrom  and the High Court may, on sufficient cause being 
shown and on such terms and  conditions as it may think fit, stay the operation of the order; but no  
application for stay shall be made to the High Court after an appeal has been  preferred to the Supreme 
Court.  
(2) Where an  appeal has been preferred against an order made under section 98 or section 99,  the 
Supreme Court may, on sufficient cause being shown and on such terms and  conditions as it may think 
fit, stay the operation of the order appealed from.  
(3) When the  operation of an order is stayed by the High Court or, as the case may be, the  Supreme 
Court, the order shall be deemed never to have taken effect under  sub-section ( 1) of section 107; and a 
copy of the stay order shall immediately be  sent by the High Court or, as the case may be, the Supreme 
Court, to the  Election Commission and the Speaker or  Chairman, as the case may be, of the  House of 
Parliament or of the State Legislature concerned.  
116C . Procedure in appeal .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules, if any, made  
thereunder, every appeal shall be heard and determined by the Supreme Court as  nearly as may be in 
accordance with the procedure applicable to the hearing and  determination of an appeal from any final 
order passed by a High Court in the  exercise of its original civil jurisdiction; and all the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , and the Rules of the Court , (including  provisions as to the 
furnishing of security and the execution of any order of the  Court) shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to such appeal.  
(2) As soon as an appeal is decided, the Supreme Court shall intimate the substance  of the decision to 
the Election Commission and the Speaker or Chairman, as the  case may be, of the House of Parliament or 
of the State Legislature concerned  and as soon as may be thereafter shall send  to the Election Commission 
an authenticated copy of the decision; and upon its receipt, the Election  Commission shall — 
(a) forward  copies thereof to the authorities to which copies of the order of the High Court  were 
forwarded under section 160; and  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 49, for “the Tribunal ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 62 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
3. Subs. by Act 47  of 1966, s. 50, for sections 11 6A and 116B (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  48 
 (b) cause the  decision to be published in the Gazette or Gazettes in which that order was  
published under the said section.]]  
CHAPTER  V.—Costs and Security for Costs  
1[117. Security for costs. —(1) At the time of presenting an election petition, the petitioner shall 
deposit in the High Court in accordance with the rules of the High Court a sum of two thousand rupees as 
security for the costs of the petition.  
(2) During the course of the trial of an el ection petition, the High Court may, at any  time, call upon 
the petitioner to give such further security for costs as it may direct.  
118. Security for costs from a respondent .—No person shall be entitled to be joined as a respondent 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 86 unless he has given such security for costs as the High Court may 
direct.  
119. Costs .—Costs shall be in the dis cretion of the High Court : 
Provided that where a petition is dismissed under clause ( a) of section 98, the returned candidate shall 
be entitled to the costs incurred by him in contesting the petition and accordingly the High Court shall 
make an order for costs in favour of the returned candidate.]  
121. Payment of costs out of security deposits and return of such deposits .—(1) If in any  order as 
to costs under the provisions of this Part there is a direction for payment of costs by any party to any 
person, such costs shall, if they have not been already paid, be paid in full, or so far as possible , out of the 
security deposit and the fur ther security deposit, if any, made by such party under this Part, on an 
application made in writing in that behalf  2[within a period of one year, from the date of such order] to  
3[the High Court] by the person in whose favour the costs have been awarded.  
(2) If there is any balance left of any of the said security deposits after payment under sub -section ( 1) 
of the costs referred to in that sub -section, such balance, or where no costs have been awarded or no 
application as aforesaid has been made within th e said period of  4[one year] the whole of the said security 
deposits may, on an application made in that behalf in writing to  3[the High Court] by the person by 
whom the deposits have been made , or if such person dies after making such deposits by the legal 
representative of such person, be returned to the said person or to his legal representative, as the case may 
be. 
122. Execution of orders as to costs .—Any order as to costs under the provisions of this part may be 
produced before the principal civil cou rt of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction any person directed by such order to pay any sum of money has a place of residence o r 
business, or where such place is within a presidency -town, before the court of small causes havi ng 
jurisdiction there, and such court shall execute the order or cause the same to be executed in the same 
manner and by the same procedure as if it were a decree for the payment of money made by itself in a 
suit: 
Provided that where any such costs or any portion thereof may be recovered by an application made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 121, no application shall lie under this section  5[within a period of one 
year from the date of such order] unless it is for the recovery of the balance of any costs which has been 
left unrealised after an application has been made under that sub -section owing to the insufficiency of the 
amount of the security deposits referred to in that sub -section.  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act  47 of 1966, s. 51, for section s 117, 118, 119, 119A and 120 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 52, for “the Election Commission ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 34, for “six mon ths” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Subs. by s. 35, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  49 
 PART VII  
1[CORRUPT PRACTICES AND ELECTORAL OFFENCES ] 
2[CHAPTER  I.—CORRUPT PR ACTICE S 
123. Corrupt practices .—The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of 
this Act: — 
3[(1) “Bribery ” that is to say ,— 
(A) any gift , offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the 
consent of a candidate or his election agent of any gratification, to any person whomsoever, with 
the object, directly or indirectly of inducing — 
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or  4[to withdraw or not to withdraw] from being a 
candidate at an election, or  
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a reward to — 
(i) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for  5[having withdrawn  or not having  
withdrawn] his candidature; or  
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from voting;  
(B) the receipt of, or agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a motive or a 
reward — 
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for  6[withdrawing or not withdrawing] 
from being, a candidate; or  
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for voting or refraining 
from voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any elector to vote or refrain from voting, or 
any candidate  4[to withdraw or not to withdraw] his candidature.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause the term “gratification ” is not restricted to 
pecuniary gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and it includes all forms of entertainment 
and all forms of employment for reward but it does not include the payment of any expenses          
bona fide  incurred at, or for  the purpose of, any election and duly entered in the account of election 
expenses referred to in section 78.]  
(2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the 
part of the candidate or his agent, or of  any other person  7[with the consent of the candidate or his 
election agent], with the free exercise of any electoral right:  
Provided that — 
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such person as is 
referred to therein who— 
(i) the  reatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an 
elector is interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and ex -communication 
or expulsion from any caste or community; or  
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any 
person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an object of divine 
displeasure or spiritual censure,  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 65, for the heading “CORRUPT AND ILLEGAL PRACTICES AND ELECTROAL OFFENCES ”       
(w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
2. Subs. by s. 66, ibid.,  for th e heading Chapter s I and II ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
3. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 36, for clause ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
4. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 53, for “to withdraw ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
5. Subs. by s. 53, ibid.,  for “having withdrawn ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. Subs. by s. 53, ibid.,  for “withdrawing ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
7. Ins. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 36 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  50 
 shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right  of such candidate or elector within 
the meaning of this clause;  
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or the mere exercise of a legal 
right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interfe rence within 
the meaning of this clause.  
1[(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate or 
his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, 
community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or the use of, or appeal to, national 
symbols, such as the national flag or the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the 
election of that candidate or for prejudicially af fecting the election of any candidate:  
2[Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall be deemed to be a religious 
symbol or a national symbol for the purposes of this clause.]  
(3A) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes 
of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community, or language, by a candidate or his 
agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of  the 
prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.]  
3[(3B) The propagation of the practice or the commission of sati or its glorification by a candidate or 
his agent or any other person with the c onsent of the candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of 
the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “sati” and “glorification ” in relation to sati shall       
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Commission of Sati (Prevention)                       
Act, 1987  (3 of 1988) ]. 
(4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person  4[with the consent of a 
candidate or his election agent], of any statement of fact which is false, and which he either believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any candidate or in 
relation to the candidature, or  withdrawal,  5*** of any candidate, being a statement reasonably calculated 
to prejudice the prospects of that candidate ’s election.  
(5) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessle by a candidate 
or his agent or by an y other person  4[with the consent of a candidate or his election agent]  6[or the use of 
such vehicle s or vessel for the free conveyance] of any elector (other than the candidate himself , the 
members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling statio n provided under section 25 or a place 
fixed under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 for the poll:  
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at their joint costs 
for the pu rpose of conveying him or them to and from an y such polling station or place fixed for the poll 
shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle 
or vessel not propelled by mechanical power:  
Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tramcar or railway  
carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such polling 
station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause.  
Explanation. —In this clause, the expression “vehicle ” means any vehicle used or capable of being 
used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and whether 
used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.  
(6) The incu rring or authori sing of expenditure in contravention of section 77.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 23, for clause ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 8 (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 1988, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -3-1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 36 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. The words “or retirement from contest ” omitted by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
6. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 53, “for the conveyance ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  51 
 (7) The obtaining or procuring or a betting or attempting to obtain or procure by a candidate or his 
agent or, by any other person  1[with the consent of a candidate or his election agent],  any assistance (other 
than the giving of vo te) for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate ’s election,  2[from any person 
whether or not in the service of the Government] and belonging to any of the following classes, 
namely: — 
(a) gazetted officers;  
(b) stipendiary judges and magistrates;  
(c) members of the armed forces of the Union;  
(d) members of the police forces;  
(e) excise officers;  
3[(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as lambardars malguzars, patels, 
deshmuk hs or by any other name, whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are remunerated by a 
share of, or commission on, the amount of land rev enue collected by them but who do not disc harge 
any police functions; and  
(g) such other class of persons in the s ervice of the Government as may be prescribed:  
4[Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the 
classes aforesaid, in the discharge or puported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or 
provides  any facilities or do es any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent or 
any other person acting with the consent of the candidate or his election agent , (whether by reason of the 
office held by the candidate or for any oth er reason), such arrangement s facilities or act or thing shall not 
be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate ’s election ;] 
5[(h) class of persons in the service of a local authority, university, government company or 
institution or concern or undertaking appointed or deputed by the Election Commission in connection 
with the conduct of elections .] 
6[(8) Booth capturing by a candidate or his agent or other person.]  
Explanation. —(1) In this section the expression “agent ” includes an election agent, a polling agent 
and any person who is held to have acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of 
the candidate.  
(2) For the purposes of clause ( 7), a person shall be deemed to assist in the furtherance o f the 
prospects of a candidate ’s election if he acts as an election agent  7*** of that candidate.  
8[(3) For the p urposes of clause ( 7), notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the 
publication in the Official Gazette of the appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or 
removal from service of a person in the service of the Central Government (incl uding a person serving in 
connection with the administration of a Union territory) or of a S tate Government shall be conclusive  
proof — 
(i) of such appointment, resignation, termination of service, dismissal or removal from service, as 
the case may be, and  
(ii) where the date of taking effect of such appointment, resignation, termination of service, 
dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, is sta ted in such publication, also of the fact 
that such person was appointed with effect from the said date, or in the case of resignation, 
termination of service, dismissal or removal from service , such person ceased to be i n such service 
with effect from the said date.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 36 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2009, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 36, for sub -clause ( f) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
4. Ins. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 8 (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  
5. Ins. by Act 41 of 2009, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  
6. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
7. The words “or a polling agent or a counting agent ” omitted by Act 47 of 1966, s. 53 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
8. Added by Act 40 of 1975, s. 8 (w.e.f. 6 -8-1975).  52 
 1[(4) For the purposes of clause ( 8), “booth capturing ” shall have the same meaning as in            
section 135A.]  
CHAPTER  III.—Electoral offences  
2[125. Promoting enmity between classes in connection with election. —Any person who in 
connection with an election under this Act promotes or attempts to promote on grounds of religion, race, 
caste, community or language, feelings of enmity or hatred, between different classes of the citizens of 
India shall he pun ishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both.]  
3[125A . Penalty for filing false affidavit, etc. —A candidate who himself or through his proposer, 
with intent to be elected in an election, — 
(i) fails to fu rnish information relating to sub -section ( 1) of section 33 A; or  
(ii) give false information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false; or  
(iii) conceals any information,  
in his nomination paper delivered under sub -section ( 1) of section 33 or in  his affidavit which is required 
to be delivered under sub -section ( 2) of section 33 A, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend t o six months, or with fine, or with both .] 
4[126. Prohibition of public meetings during period of forty -eight hours ending with hour fixed 
for conclusion of poll .— 
(1) No person shall — 
(a) convene, hold, attend, join or address any public meeting or procession in connection with 
an election; or  
(b) display to the public any election matter by means of cinematograph, television or other 
similar apparatus; or  
(c) propagate any election matter to the public by holding, or by arranging the holding of, any  
musical concert or any theatrical performance or any other entertainment or amusement with a 
view to attracting the members of the public thereto,  
in any polling area during the period of forty -eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of 
the poll for any election in th at polling area.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine, or with both.  
(3) In this section, the expression “election matter ” means any matter intended or calculated to 
influence or affect the result of an election.]  
5[126A . Restriction on publication and dissemination of result of exit polls, etc .—(1) No person 
shall conduct any exit poll and publish or publici se by means of the print or electronic media or 
disseminate in any other manner, whatsoever, the result of any exit poll during such period, as may be 
notified by the Election Commission in this regard.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Election  Commission shall, by a general order, notify the 
date and time having due regard to the following, namely: — 
(a) in case of a general election, the period may commence from the beginning of the hours fixed 
for poll on the first day of poll and continue til l half an hour after closing of the poll in all the States 
and Union territories;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 24 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
3. Ins. by 72 of 2002, s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 19 96, s. 10, for section 126 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996). 
5. Ins. by Act 41 of 2009 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2010).  53 
 (b) in case of a bye-election or a number of bye -election s held together, the period may 
commence from the beginning of the hours fixed for poll on and from the first day of poll and 
continue till half an hour after closing of the poll:  
Provided that in case of a number of bye -elections held together on different days, the period may 
commence from the beginning of the hours fixed for poll on the first day of poll and continue till half 
an hour after closing of the last poll.  
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “exit poll ” means an opinion survey respecting how electors have voted at an election or 
respecting how all the electors have performed with regard to the identification of a political party or 
candidate in an election;  
(b) “electronic media ” includes internet, radio and television including Internet Protocol 
Television, satellite, terrestrial o r cable channels, mobile and such other media either owned by the 
Government or private person or by both;  
(c) “print media ” includes any newspaper, magazine or periodical, poster, placard, handbill or any 
other document;  
(d) “dissemination ” includes publication in any “print media ” or broadcast or display on any 
electronic media.  
 126B . Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offe nce under sub -section ( 2) of section 126A has 
been committed by a company, every person who , at the time the offence was committed , was in charge 
of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company,  shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves t hat the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company  and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.]  
127. Disturbances at election meetings .—(1) Any person who at a public meeting to which this 
section applies acts, or incites others to act, in a disorderly manner for the  purpose of preventing the 
transaction of the business for which the meet ing was called together,  1[shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to  2[six months or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees], or with both.]  
3[(1A) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.]  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 19 96, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996). 54 
 (2) This section applies to any public meeting of a political character held in any constituency 
between the date of the issue of a notification under this Act calling upon the constitue ncy to elect a 
member or members and the date on which such election is held.  
(3) If any police officer reasonably suspe cts any person of committing an  offence under                 
sub-section ( 1), he may, if requested so to do by the chairman of the meet ing, require that person to 
declare to him immediately his name and address and, if that person refuses or fails so to declare his name 
and address, or if the police officer reasonably suspects him of giving a false name or address, the police 
officer may arrest him without warrant.  
1[127A. Restrictions on the printing of pamphlets, posters, etc. —(1) No person shall print or 
publish, or cause to be printed or published, any election pamphlet or poster which does not bear on its 
face the names and addresses of the printer and the publisher thereof.  
(2) No person shall print or cause to be printed any election pamphlet or poster — 
(a) unless a declaration as to the identity of the publisher thereof, signed by him and attested by 
two persons to whom he is personally known, is delivered by him to the printer in duplicate; and  
(b) unless, within a reasonable time after the printing of the document, one copy of the 
declaration is sent by the printer, together with one copy of the document, — 
(i) where it is pri nted in the capital of the State,  to the Chief Electoral Officer;  and 
(ii) in any other case, to the district magistrate of the district in which it is printed.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) any process for multiplying copies of a document, ot her than copying it by hand, shall be 
deemed to be printing and the expression “printer ” shall be construed accordingly; and  
(b) “election pamphlet or poster ” means any printed pamphlet, hand -bill or other document 
distributed for the purpose of promoting or prejudicing the election of a candidate or group of 
candidates or any placard or poster having reference to an election, but does not include any hand -
bill, placard or poster merely announcing the date, time, place and other particulars of an election 
meeting or routine instructions to election agents or workers.  
(4) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may  extend 
to two thousand rupees, or with both.]  
128. Maintenance of Secrecy of voting .—(1) Every officer, clerk, agent or other person who 
performs any duty in connection with the recording or counting of votes at an election shall maintain, and 
aid in maintaining, the secrecy of the voting and shall not (except for some purpose authori sed by or 
under any law) communicate to any person any information calculated to violate such secrecy : 
2[Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply t o such officer, clerk, agent or other 
person who performs any such duty at an election to fill a seat or seats in the Council of States.]  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term whic h may extend to three months or with fine or with both.  
129. Officers, etc., at elections not to act for candidates or to influence voting .—(1) No person 
who is  3[a district election officer or a returning officer], or an assistant returning officer, or a presiding or 
polling officer at an election, or an officer or clerk appointed by the returning officer for the presiding 
officer to perform any duty in connection with an election shall in the conduct or the management of the 
election do any act (other tha n the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of a 
candidate.  
                                                             
1. Ins.  by Act 40 of 1961, s. 26 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11 -9-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 55, for “a returning officer ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
 55 
 (2) No such person as aforesaid, and no member of a police force, shall endeavour — 
(a) to persuade any person to give his vote at an election, or  
(b) to dissuade any  person from giving his vo te at an election, or  
(c) to influence the voting of any person at an election in any manner.  
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may exte nd to six months or with fine or with both.  
1[(4) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 3) shall be cognizable.]  
130. Prohibition of canvassing in or near polling stations .—(1) No person shall, on the date or 
dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station, commit any of the following acts within the polling 
station or in any public or private place within a distance of  2[one hundred metres] of the polling station, 
namely: — 
(a) canvassing for votes; or  
(b) soliciting the vote of any elector;  or 
(c) persuading any elector not to vote for any particular candidate; or  
(d) persuading any elector not to vote at the election; or  
(e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an official notice) relating to the election.  
(2) Any person who contravenes  the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.  
(3) An offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable.  
131. Penalty for disorderly conduct in or near polling stations .—(1) No person shall, on the date 
or dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station, — 
(a) use or operate with in or at the entrance of the polling station, or in any public or private place 
in the neighbo urhood thereof, any apparatus for amplifying or reprod ucing the human voice, such as a 
megaphone or a loudspeaker, or  
(b) shout, or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, within or at the entrance of the polling station 
or in any public or private place in the neighbo urhood thereof,  
so as to cause annoyance to  any person visiting the polling station for the poll, or so as to interfere with 
the work of the officers and other persons on duty at the polling station.  
(2) Any person who contravenes, or wilfully aids or abets the contravention of, the provisions of       
sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine or 
with both.  
(3) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or 
has committed an offence punisha ble under this section, he may direct any police officer to arrest such 
person, and thereupon the police officer shall arrest him.  
(4) Any police officer may take such steps, and use such force, as may be reasonably necessary for 
preventing any contraventi on of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), and may seize any apparatus used for 
such contravention.  
132. Penalty for misconduct at the polling station .—(1) Any person who during the hours fixed for 
the poll at any polling station misconducts himself or fails  to obey the lawful directions of the presiding 
officer may be removed from the polling station by the presiding officer or by any police officer on duty 
or by any person authori sed in this behalf by such presiding officer.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 55 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid.,  for “one hundred yards ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  56 
 (2) The powers conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall not be exercised so as to prevent any elector who is 
otherwise entitled to vote at a polling station from having an opportunity of voting at that station.  
(3) If any person who has been so removed from a polling station re -enters the poll ing station without 
the permission of the presiding officer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 3) shall be cognizable.  
1[132A. Penalty for failure to observe procedure for voting. —If any elector to whom a ballot 
paper has been issued, refuse d to observe the procedure prescribed for voting the ballot paper issued to 
him shall be liable for cancellation.]  
2[133. Penalty for illegal hiring or procuring of conveyance at elections. —If any person is guilty 
of any such corrupt practice as is specified in clause ( 5) of section 123 at or in connection with an 
election, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to thr ee months and with fine.]  
134. Breaches of official duty in connection with elections .—(1) If any person to whom this section  
applies is without reasonable cause guilty of any act or omission in breach of  his official duty, he shall be 
punishable with fine  which may extend to five  hundred rupees.  
3[(1A) An offence  punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.]  
(2) No suit or  other legal proceedings shall lie against any such person for damages in respect  of any 
such act or omission as aforesaid.  
(3) The persons  to whom this section applies are the  4*** 5[district  election officers, returning 
officers], assistant returning officers, presiding  officers, polling officers and any other person appointed to 
perform any duty in  connection with  6*** the rece ipt of nominations o r withdrawal of  candidatures, or the 
recording or counting of votes at an election; and the  expression “official duty ” shall for the purposes of 
this section be  construed accordingly, but shall not include duties imposed otherwise than by or  under this 
Act 4***. 
7[134A. Penalty for Government servants for acting as election agent, polling agent or counting 
agent .—If any person in the service of the Government acts as an election agent or a polling agent or a 
counting agent of a candidate  at an election, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.]  
8[134B. Prohibition of going armed to or near a polling station. —(1) No person, other than the 
returning officer, the presid ing officer, any police officer and any other person appointed to maintain 
peace and order at a polling station who is on duty at the polling station, shall, on a polling day, go armed 
with arms, as defined in the A rms Act, 1959  (54 of 1959) , of any kind w ithin the neighbourhood of a 
polling station.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine, or with both.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959), where a person is 
convicted of an offience under this section, the arms as defined in the said Act found in his possession 
shall be liable to confiscation and the licence granted in relation to such arms shall be dee med to have 
been revoked under section 17 of that Act.  
(4) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 2) shall be cognizable.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 12, for section 133 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
3. Ins. by Act 47 of 19 66, s. 58 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
4. Certain words omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 37 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 58, for “returning officers ” (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
6. The words “the preparation of an electoral roll ” omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 37 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
7. Ins. by Act 47 of 19 66, s. 59 (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
8. Ins. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  57 
 135. Removal of ballot papers from polling station to be an offence .—(1) Any person who at any 
election  1[unauthorisedly] takes, or  attempts to take, a ballot paper out of a polling station, or wilfully aids 
or abets the doing of any such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both . 
(2) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or 
has committed an offence punishable under sub -section ( 1), such officer may, before such person leaves 
the polling station, arrest or direct a police  officer to arrest such person and may search such person or 
cause him to be searched by a police officer:  
Provided that when it is necessary to cause a woman to be searched, the search shall be made by 
another woman with strict regard to decency.  
(3) Any ballot paper found upon the person arrested on search shall be made over for safe custody to 
a police officer by the presiding officer, or when the search is made by a police officer, shall be kept by 
such officer in safe custody.  
(4) An offence punishable  under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
2[135A. Offence of booth capturing. —3[(1)] Whoever commits an offence of booth capturing shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  4[shall not be less than one year but which may extend 
to three year s and with fine, and where such offence is committed by a person in the service of the 
Government, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years 
but which may extend to five years and with fine.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of  5[this sub -section and section 20 B], “booth capturing ” includes, 
among other things, all or any of the following activities, namely: — 
(a) seizure of a polling station or a place fixed for the poll by any person or persons , making 
pollin g authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting machines and doing of any other Act which 
affects the orderly conduct of elections;  
(b) taking possession of a polling station or a place fixed for the poll by any person or persons , 
and allowing only his or their own supporters to exercise their right to vote and  4[prevent others from 
free exercise of their right to vote];  
(c) 6[coercing or intimidating or threatening directly or indirectly,] any elector and preventing him 
from going  to the polling station or a place fixed for the poll to cast his vote;  
(d) seizure of a place for counting of votes by any person or persons, making the counting 
authorities surrender the ballot papers or voting machines and the doing of anything which af fects the 
orderly counting of votes;  
(e) doing by any person in the service of Government, of all or any of the aforesaid activities or 
aiding or conniving at, any such activity in the furtherance of the prospects of the election of a 
candidate.]  
7[(2) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.]  
8[135B. Grant of paid holiday to employees on the day of poll. —(1) Every person employed in any 
business, trade, industrial undertaking or any other establishment and entitled to vote at an election to the 
House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State shall, on the day of poll, be granted a holiday.  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 14, for “fraudulently ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
3. Section 135A renumbered  as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 21 of 1996, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “this section ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “threatening ” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
7. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
8. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  58 
 (2) No deduction or abatement of the wages of any such person shall be made on account of a holiday 
having been granted in accorda nce with sub -section ( 1) and if such person is employed on the basis that 
he would not ordinarily receive wages for such a day, he shall nonetheless be paid for such day the wages 
he would have drawn had not a holiday been granted to him on that day.  
(3) If an employer contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), then such 
employer shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) This section shall not apply to any elector whose absence may cause danger or subs tantial loss in 
respect of the employment in which he is engaged.  
135C . Liquor not to be sold, given or distributed on polling day .—(1) No spirituous, fermented or 
intoxicating liquors or other substances of a like nature shall be sold, given or distribute d at a hotel, eating 
house, tavern, shop or any other place, public or private, within a polling area during the period of       
forty -eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the poll for any election in that polling 
area.  
(2) Any pers on who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine , which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
(3) Where a person is convicted of an offence under t his section, the spirituous, fermented, or 
intoxicating liquors or other substances of a like nature found in his possession shall be liable to 
confiscation and the same shall be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
136. Other offences and penalties therefor .—(1) A person shall be guilty of an  electoral offence if 
at any election he — 
(a) fraudulently  defaces or fraudulently destroys any nomination paper; or  
(b) fraudulently  defaces, destroys or removes any list, notice or  other document affixed by or  
under the authority of returning officer; or  
(c) fraudulently  defaces or fraudulently destroys any ballot paper or the official mark on any  
ballot paper or any declaration of identity or official envelop used in  connection wit h voting by postal 
ballot; or  
(d) without due  authority supplies any ballot paper to any person  1[or receives any  ballot paper 
from any person or is in possession of any ballot paper]; or  
(e) fraudulently puts into any ballot box anything other than the ballot paper which  he is 
authorised by law to put in; or  
(f) without due authority destroys, takes, opens or otherwise interferes with any  ballot box or 
ballot papers than in use for the purposes of the election; or  
(g) fraudulently or without due authorit y, as the case may be, attempts to do any of  the foregoing 
acts or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such acts.  
(2) Any person  guilty of an electoral offence under this section shall, — 
(a) if he is  a returning officer or an assistant returning officer or a presiding officer at a  polling 
station or any other officer or clerk employed on official duty in  connection with the election, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to two years or with fine or with both;  
(b) if he is an y other person, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to six 
months or with fine or with both.  
(3) For the  purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be on official duty if his  duty is to 
take part in the conduct of an election or part of an election  including the counting of votes or to be 
responsible after an election for the  used ballot papers and other documents in connection with such 
election, but the  expression “official duty ” shall not include any duty imposed  otherwise than by or under 
this Act  2***. 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 70 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
2. Certain words omitted by Act 58 of 1958, s. 38 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  59 
 1[(4) An offence  punishable under sub -section ( 2) shall be cognizable.]  
137. [Prosecution regarding certain offences .] Omitted by the Representation of the People 
(Amendment ) Act, 1966 (47 of 1966), s. 61 (w.e.f.  14-12-1966).  
138. [Amendment of Act 5 of 1898 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 
and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  17-9-1957). 
PART VIII  
DISQUALIFICATIONS  
139—145. [Chapters I to III. ] Omitted by the Representation of the People (Amendment )                 
Act, 1966 (47 of 1966), s. 62 (w.e.f.  14-12-1966).  
2[CHAPTER IV.—POWERS OF ELECTION COMMISSION IN CONNECTION WITH INQUIRIES AS 
TO DISQUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS  
146. Powers of Election Commission .—(1) Where in connection with the tendering of any opinion 
to the President under article 103 or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 4) of section 14 of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963), or to the Governor under article 192, the 
Election Commission considers it necessary or proper to make an inquiry, and the Commission is 
satisfied that on the basis of the affidavits filed and the documents produced in such inquiry by the parties 
concerned of their own accord, it cannot come to a de cisive opinion on the matter which is being inquired 
into, the Commission shall have, for the purposes of such inquiry, the powers of a civil court, while trying 
a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matter s, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or a copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) The Commission shall also have the power to require any person, subject to any privilege which 
may be cl aimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such 
points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject matter 
of the inquiry.  
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to  be a civil court and when any such offence, as is described in 
section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), is 
committed in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commission may after record ing the facts 
constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)3, forward the case to a magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the 
magistrate to whom any such case is f orwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the       
accused as if the case had been forwarded to him under section 482 of the Code of Criminal                  
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)3. 
(4) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be deeme d to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
146A . Statements made by person to the Election Commission .—No statement made by a person 
in the course of giving evidence before the Election Commission shall subject him to, or be used against 
him in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:  
Provided that the statement — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 1966, s. 60, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 14 -12-1966).  
2.  Ins. by Act 17 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -9-1965).  
3. See now the corresponding provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  60 
 (a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by the Commission to answer, or  
(b) is relevant to the subject -matter of the inquiry.  
146B . Procedure to be followed by the Election Commission .—The Election Commission shall 
have the power to regulate its own procedure (including the fixing of places and tim es of its sittings and 
deciding whether  to sit in public or in private ). 
146C . Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Commission or any person acting under the direction of the Commiss ion in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the foregoing provisions of 
this Chapter or of any order made thereunder or in respect of the tendering of any opinion by the 
Commission to the President or, as t he case may be, to the Governor or in respect of the publication, by or 
under the authority of the Commission of any such opinion, paper or proceedings. ] 
PART IX  
BYE-ELECTIONS  
147. Casual vacancies in the Council of States .—1[(1)] When before the expiration of the term of 
office of a member elected to the Council of S tates, his s eat becomes vacant or is declared vacant or his 
election to the Council of States is declared void, the Election Commission shall by a notification in the 
Gazette of India call upon the elected members of the Legislative Assembly or the members of the 
electoral college concerned  2***, as the case may be, to elect a person for the purpose of filling the 
vacancy so caused before such date as may be specified in the notificatio n and the provisions of this Act 
and of the rules and orders made thereunder shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to the election of a 
member to fill such vacancy.  
3[(2) As soon as may be after the date of commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, bye -election s shall be held to fill the vacancies existing on that date in the seats allotted to the 
States of Assam, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh and the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh  and 
Manipur .] 
148. [Casual vacancies i n the electoral colleges for certain Union territories .] Omitted by the 
Territorial Councils Act,  1956 (103 of 1956), s. 66 (w.e.f.  1-1-1957).  
149. Casual vacancies in the House of the People .—(1) When the seat of a member elected to the 
House of the People becomes vacant or is declared vacant or his election to the House of the People is 
declared void, the Election Commission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), by a 
notification in the Gazette of India, call upon the parliamentary constitu ency concerned to elect a person 
for the purpose of filling the vacancy so caused before such da te as may be specified in the notification, 
and the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder shall apply, as f ar as may be, in  
relation to the election of a member to fill such vacancy.  
(2) If the vacancy so caused be a vacancy in a seat reserved in any such constituency for the 
Scheduled Castes or for any Scheduled Tribes, the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall spec ify 
that the person to fill that seat shall belong to the Scheduled Castes or to such Scheduled Tribes, as the 
case may be.  
150. Casual vacancies in the State Legislative Assemblies .—When the seat of a member elected to 
the Legislative Assembly of a State becomes vacant or is declared vacant or his election to the Legislative 
Assembly is declared void, the Election Commission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), by 
a notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the Assembly constituency c oncerned to elect a person for 
the purpose of filling the vacancy so caused before such date as may be specified in the notification, and 
the provisions of this Act and of the rules and orders made thereunder shall apply, as far as may be, in 
relation to t he election of a member to fill such vacancy.  
                                                             
1. Section 147 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
2. The words “or the elected members of the Coorg Legislative Council ” omitted by Act 49 of 1951, s. 44 and the Fifth Schedule 
(w.e.f. 6 -9-1951).  
3. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  61 
 (2) If the vacancy so caused be a vacancy in a seat reserved in any such constituency for the 
Scheduled Castes or for any Scheduled Tribes, the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall specify 
that the p erson to fill that seat shall belong to the Scheduled Castes or to such Scheduled Tribes, as the 
case may be.  
151. Casual vacancies in the State Legislative Councils .—When before the expiration of the term 
of office of a member elected to the Legislative Council of a State, his seat becomes vacant or is declared 
vacant or his election to the Legislative Council is declared void, the Election Commission shall, by a 
notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the Council constituency concerned or the mem bers of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State, as the case may be, to elect a person for the purpose of filling the 
vacancy so caused, before such date as may be specified in the notificat ion, and the provisions of this Act 
and of the rules and orders made  thereunder shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to the election of a 
member to fill such vacancy.  
1[151A. Time limit for filling vacancies referred to in sections 147, 149, 150                                
and 151. —Notwithstanding anything contain ed in section 147, section 149, section 150 and section 151, 
a bye -election for filling any vacancy referred to in any of the said sections shall be held within a period 
of six months from the date of the occurrence of the vacancy:  
Provided that nothing co ntained in this section shall apply if — 
(a) the remainder of the term of a member in relation to a vacancy is less than one year ; or 
(b) the Election Commission in consultation with the Central Government certifies that it is 
difficult to hold the bye -election within the said period.]  
PART X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
152. List of members of the State Legislative Assemblies and electoral colleges to be maintained 
by returning officers concerned .—(1) The returning officer for an election  by the elected members of 
the Legislative Assembly of a State to fill a seat or  seats in the Council of States or for an election, by the 
members of the  Legislative Assembly of a State to fill a seat or seats in the Legislative  Council of the 
State shall, for the purposes of such elect ion maintain in his  office in the prescribed manner and form a 
list of elected members or a list of  members, as the case may be, of that Legislative Assembly.  
(2) The returning officer for an election  by the members of the electoral college for a  2[Union 
territory]  3*** 4*** to fill a seat or seats in the Council of States shall, for  the purposes of such election, 
maintain in his office in the prescribed manner  and form a list of members of that electoral college  4***. 
(3) Copies of the lists referred to in  sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be made available for sale.  
5[153. Extension of time for completion of election. —It shall be competent for the Election 
Commission for reasons which it considers sufficient, to extend the time for the completion of any 
election by making necessary amendments in the notification issued by it under section 30 or                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 39.]  
154. Term of office of members of the Council of States .—6[(1) Subject to the provisions of        
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 2A), the term of office of a member of  the Council of States, other than a member 
chosen to fill a casual vacancy, shall be six years.]  
(2) 7*** Upon the first constitution of the Council of States the President shall, after constitution with 
the Election Commission, make by order such provision as he thinks fit for curtailing the term of office of 
some of the members then chosen in order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members holding 
seats of each class shall retire in every second year  thereafter.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1996, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1996).  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part C State ”. 
3. The words “or group of such States ” omitted by Act 27 of 1956, s. 77 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
4. Certain words omitted by Act 49 of 1951, s. 44 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 6 -9-1951).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 78 for section 153 ( w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
6. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956, for sub -section ( 1). 
7. Certain words omitted, ibid. 62 
 1[(2A) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members may retire on the second day of 
April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the President shall, as soon as may be 
after the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956 , after consultation with the 
Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms of office of 
the members elected under sub -section ( 2) of section 147. ] 
(3) A member chosen t o fill a casual vacancy shall be chosen to serve for the remainder of his 
predecessor ’s term of office.  
155. Commencement of the term of office of members of the Council of States .—(1) The term of 
office of a member of the Council of States whose name is r equired to be notified in the Official Gazette 
under section 71 shall begin on the date of such notification.  
(2) The term of office of a member of the Council of Sta tes whose name is not required to be notified 
under section 71 shall begin on the date of publication in the Official Gazette of the declaration 
containing the name of such person as elected under section 67 or of the notification issued under           
sub-clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 80 or under any other provision announcing the nomin ation of such 
person to the Council of States, as the case may be.  
156. Term of office of members of State Legislative Councils .—(1) The term of office of a 
member of the Legislative Council of a State, other than a member chosen to fill a casual vacancy, shall 
be six years, but upon the first constitution of the Council the Governor  2*** shall, after consultation with 
the Election Commission, make by order such provision as he thinks fit for curtailing the term of office of 
some of the members then chosen in order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members holding 
seats of each class shall retire in every second year thereafter.  
(2) A member chosen to fill a casual vacancy shall be chosen to serve for the remainder of his 
predecessor ’s term of offi ce. 
157. Commencement of the term of office of members of the Legislative Councils .—(1) The term 
of office of a member of the Legislative Council of a State whose name is required to be notified in the 
Official Gazette under  3[section 74] shall begin on th e date of such notification.  
(2) The term of office of a member of the Legislative Council of a State whose name is not required 
to be notified under  3[section 74] shall begin on the date of publication in the Official Gazette of the 
declaration containing  the name of such person as elected under section 67 or of the notification issued 
under sub -clause ( e) of clause ( 3) of article 171, announcing the nomination of such person to the 
Council, as the case may be.  
4[158. Return or forfeiture of candidate's deposit. —(1) The deposit made under section 34 or 
under that section read with sub -section ( 2) of section 39 shall either be returned to the person making it 
or his legal representative or be forfeited to the appro priate authority in accordance with the pr ovisions of 
this section.  
(2) Except in cases hereafter mentioned in this section, the deposit shall be returned as soon as 
practicable after the result of the election is declared.  
(3) If the candidate is not shown in the list of contesting candidates, or  if he dies before the 
commencement of the poll, the deposit shall be returned as soon as practicable after the publication of the 
list or after his death, as the case may be.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the deposit shall be forfeited  if at an election where a 
poll has been taken, the candidate is not elected and the number of valid votes polled by him does not 
exceed one -sixth of the total number of valid votes polled by all the candidates or in the case of election 
of more than one m ember at the election, one -sixth of the total number of valid votes so polled divided by 
the number of members to be elected:  
                                                             
1.  Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws  (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
2. The words “or the Rajpramukh, as the case may be ” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.2) Order, 1956 , ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 1956, s. 79, for “section 75 ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1956).   
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1958, s. 39 , for section 158 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  63 
 Provided that where at an election held in , accordance with the system of proportional representation 
by means of the single trans ferable vote, a candidate is not elected, the deposit made by him shall be 
forfeited if he does not get more than one -sixth of the number of votes prescribed in this behalf as 
sufficient to secure the return of a candidate.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section s (2), (3) and ( 4),— 
(a) if at a general election, the candidate is a contesting candidate in more than one Parliamentary 
constituency or in more than one assembly constituency, not more than one of the deposits shall be 
returned, and the other shall be forfeited.]  
(b) if the candidate is a contesting candidate at an election in more than one council constituency 
or at an election in a Council constituency and at an election by the members of the State Legislative 
Assembly to fill seats in the Legislative Council, not more than one of the deposits shall be returned, 
and the others shall be forfeited.]  
1[159. Staff of certain authorities to be made available for election work. —(1) The authorities 
specified in sub -section ( 2) shall, when so reques ted by a Regional Commissioner appointed under       
clause ( 4) of article 324 or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State, make available to any returning officer 
such staff as may be necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with an elect ion. 
(2) The following shall be the authorities for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), namely: — 
(i) every local authority;  
(ii) every university established or incorporated by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act;  
(iii) a Government company as defined  in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(iv) any other institution, concern or undertaking which is established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act or which is controlled, or financed wholly or substantially by funds provided, 
directly or indirectly, by the Central Government or a State Government.]  
160. Requisitioning of Premises, vehicles, etc., for election purposes .—(1) If it appears to the State 
Government that in connection with an election held within the State — 
(a) any pre mises are needed or are likely to be needed for the purpose of being used as a 
polling  station or for the storage of ballot boxes after a poll has been taken, or  
(b) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or is likely to be needed for the purpose of trans port 
of ballot boxes to or from any polling station, or transport of members of the police force for 
maintaining order during the conduct of such election, or transport of any officer or other person for 
performance of any duties in connection with such el ection,  
that Government may by order in writing requisition such premises, or such vehicle, vessel or animal, as 
the case may be, and may make such further orders as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient in 
connection with the requisitioning:  
Provi ded that no vehicle, vessel or animal which is being lawfully used by a candidate or his agent for 
any purpose connected with the election of such candidate shall be requisitioned under this sub -section 
until the completion of the poll at such election.  
(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing addressed to the person deemed by the 
State Government to be the owner or person in possession of the property, and such order shall be served 
in the prescribed manner on the person to whom it is a ddressed.  
(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub -section ( 1), the period of such requisition shall 
not extend beyond the period for which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in 
that sub -section.  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1998, s. 2, for section 159 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1997).  64 
 (4) In this  section ,— 
(a) “premises ” means any land, building or part of a building and includes a hut, shed or other 
structure or any part thereof;  
(b) “vehicle ” means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, 
whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise.  
161. Payment of compensation .—(1) Whenever in pursuance of section 160 the State Government 
requisitions any premises, t here shall be paid to the persons interested compensation the amount of which 
shall be determined by taking into consideration the following, namely: — 
(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if no rent is so payable, the rent payable for 
similar  premises in the locality;  
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises the person interested is compelled to 
change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change:  
Provided that where any person  interested being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so 
determined makes an application within the prescribed time to the State Government for referring the 
matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator  appointed in 
this behalf by the State Government may determine:  
Provided further that where there is any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the 
apportionment of the amount of compensation, it shall be referred by the State Govern ment to an 
arbitrator appointed in this behalf by th at Government for determination, and shall be determined in 
accordance with the decision of such arbitrator.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “person interested ” means the person who was in 
actual possession of the premises requisitioned under section 160 immediately before the requisition, or 
where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such premises.  
(2) Whenever in pursuance of section 160 the St ate Government requisitions any vehicle, vessel or 
animal, there shall be paid to the owner thereof compensation the amount of which shall be determined by 
the State Government on the basis of fares or rates prevailing in the locality for the hire of such vehicle, 
vessel or animal:  
Provided that where the owner of such vehicle, vessel or animal being aggrieved by the amount of 
compensation so determined makes an application within the prescribed time to the State Government for 
referring the matter to an ar bitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator 
appointed in this behalf by the State Government may determine:  
Provided further that where immediately before the requisitioning the vehicle or vessel was by virtue 
of a hire -purchase agreement in the possession of a person other than the owner, the amount determined 
under this sub -section as the total compensation payable in respect of the requisition shall be apportioned 
between that person and the owner in such manner as the y may agree upon, and in default of agreement, 
in such manner as an arbitrator appointed by the State Government in this behalf may decide.  
162. Power to obtain information .—The State Government may with a view to requisitioning any 
property under section 160 or determining the compensation payable under section 161, by order, require 
any person to furnish to such authority as may be specified in the order such information in his possession 
relating to such property as may be so specified.  
163. Powers of en try into and inspection of premises, etc. —(1) Any person authori sed in this 
behalf by the State Government may enter into any premises and inspect such premises and any vehicle, 
vessel or animal therein for the purpose of determining whether, and if so in what manner, an order under 
section 160 should be made in relation to such premises, vehicle, vessel or animal, or with a view to 
securing compliance with any order made under that section.  
(2) In this section the expressions “premises ” and “vehicle ” have the same meanings as in           
section 160.  65 
 164. Eviction from requisitioned premises .—(1) Any person remaining in possession of any 
requisitioned premises in contravention of any order made under section 160 may be summarily evicted 
from the prem ises by any officer empowered by the S tate Government in this behalf.  
(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any woman not appearing in public reasonable 
warning and facility to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of  any building 
or do any other act necessary for effecting such eviction.  
165. Release of premises from requisition .—(1) When any premises requisitioned under          
section 160 are to be released from requisition, the possession thereof shall be delivere d to the person 
from whom possession was taken at the time when the premises were requisitioned, or if there were no 
such person, to the person deemed by the Sta te Government to be the owner of such premises, and such 
delivery of possession shall be a full  discharge of the State Government from all liabilities in respect of 
such delivery, but shall not prejudice any rights in respect of the premises which any other person may be 
entitled by due process of law to enforce against the person to whom possession  of the premises is so 
delivered.  
(2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises requisitioned under section 160 is to be 
given under sub -section ( 1) canno t be found or is not readily as certainable or has no agent or any other 
person empowered to accept delivery on his behalf, the Sta te Government shall cause a notice declaring 
that such premises are released from requisition to be affixed on some conspicuous part of such premises 
and publish the notice in the Official Gazette.  
(3) When a notice referred to in s ub-section ( 2) is published in the Official Gazette, the premises 
specified in such notice shall cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such publication 
and be deemed to have been delivered to the person entitled to poss ession thereof; and the State 
Government shall not be liable for any compensation or other claim in respect of such premises for any 
period after the said date.  
166. Delegation of functions of the S tate Government with regard to requisitioning .—The State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any powers conferred or any duty 
imposed on that Government by any of the provisions of sections 160 to 165 shall, under such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified in the direction, be e xercised or discharged by such officer or class of officers 
as may be so specified.  
167. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisitioning .—If any person contravenes 
any order made under section 160 or section 162, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.  
168. [Special provisions with respect to Rulers of former Indian States .] Omitted by Rulers of Indian 
States (Abolition of Privileges ) Act, 1972 (54 of 1972), s. 4 (w.e.f.  9-9-1972). 
PART XI  
GENERAL  
169. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Election 
Commission, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules1 for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
2[(a) the form of affidavit under sub -section ( 2) of section 33A;]  
3[(aa)] the duties of presiding officers and polling officers at  polling stations;  
4[(aaa) the form of contribution report;]  
                                                             
1. See the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.  
2. Ins. by Act 72 of 2002 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  
3. Clause ( a) renumbered as ( aa) by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2002).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 2003 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 11-9-2003).  
 66 
 (b) the checking of voters by reference to the electoral roll;  
4[(bb) the manner of allocation of equitable sharing of time on the cable television network and 
other electronic media;]  
(c) the manner in which votes are to be given both generally and in the case of illiterate voters or 
voters under physical or other disability;  
(d) the manner in which votes are to be given by a presiding officer, polling officer, polling agent 
or any other person , who being an elector for a constituency is authorised or appointed for du ty at a 
polling station at which he is not entitled to vole;  
(e) the procedure to be followed in respect of the lender of vote by a person representing himself 
to be an elector afte r another person has voted as such elector;  
1[(ee) the manner of giving and recording of voles by means of voting machines and the 
procedure as to voting to be followed at polling stations where such machines are used;]  
(f) the procedure as to voting to be  followed at elections held in accordance with the system of 
proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote;  
(g) the scrutiny and counting of votes including cases in which a recount of the votes may be 
made before the declaration of the result of the election;  
1[(gg) the procedure as to counting of votes recorded by means of voting machines;]  
(h) the safe custody of  2[ballot boxes, voting machines], ballot papers and other election papers, 
the period for which such papers shall be preserved and the inspection and production of such papers;  
3[(hh) the material to be supplied by the Government to the candidates of recognised political 
parties at any election to be held for the purposes of constituting the House of the People or the 
Legislative Assembly of a State;]  
(i) any other matter required to be prescribed by this Act.  
4[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  5[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,] the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to validit y of anything previously done under the rule.]  
170. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to question the 
legality of any action taken or of any decision given by the returning officer or by any other person 
appointed under this Act in connection with an election.  
171. [Repeal of Act 39 of 1920 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  17-9-1957).  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1989, s. 16 (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid.,  for “ballot boxes ” (w.e.f. 15 -3-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 2003, s. 6 (w.e.f. 11-9-2003).  
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1961, s. 29, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1961).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Scheduled Areas (Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHEDULED AREAS (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1951  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Assimilation of laws . 
4. Transitional provisions . 
5. Savings.  
6. Provision for removal of difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE SCHEDULED AREAS (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1951  
[23rd June , 1951 .] 
An Act to assimilate certain laws in force in the scheduled areas to the laws in force in the 
districts of Darrang and Lakhimpur of the State of Assam.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Areas 
(Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1951.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2.  Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “law” means so much of any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, rule, order or bye -law as relates to 
any of the matters enumerated in List I and III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution ; 
(c) “scheduled areas ” means the areas specified in the Schedule . 
3. Assimilation of laws .—(1) All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or 
are in force in, the scheduled areas shall on that day cease to be in force in the scheduled areas except 
as respects things done or omitted to be done before that day, and for the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 ( 10 of 1897) shall apply in relation to 
such cesser as it applies in relation to the repeal of an enactment by a Central Act.  
(2) All laws which immed iately before the appointed day extend to, or are in force in, the Darrang 
district of the State of Assam shall as from that day extend to, or , as the case may be , come into force 
in, the areas specified in paragraph 1 of the Schedule.  
(3) All laws which i mmediately before the appointed day extend to, or are in force in, the 
Lakhimpur district of the State of Assam shall as from that day extend to, or, as the case may be, 
come into force in, the areas specified in paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Schedule.  
4. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central 
Government of the State of Assam may, by order, direct that during such period, not exceeding twelve 
months from the appointed day, as may be specified in the order, any law which immediately before 
the appointed day was in force in the scheduled areas, shall be deemed to have continued to be in 
force therein or any specified part thereof, and may further likewise direct that any law which would 
have extended to, or come i nto force in, the scheduled areas on the appointed day, shall not be deemed 
to have extended thereto or come into force therein or any specified part thereof.  
5. Savings .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, all suits, cases and other legal 
proceedings between the parties all of whom belong to the Scheduled Tribes specified in Item 2 of 
Part I—Assam, of the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, or such other 
tribe or tribes, as may be specified in this behalf, shall be tri ed and continue to be tried under the 
                                                           
1. 1st  October , 1951, vide  Notification  No. S.  R. O. 1461 , dated 15th September, 1951, see Gazette of India, Part II,  s. 3. 3 
 Assam Frontier (Administration of Justice) Regulation, 1945 (Regulation 1 of 1945) as if this Act had 
not been passed.  
6. Provision for removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition under 
section 3 from one law or group of laws to another law or group of laws, the Central Government 
may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary for th e 
removal of the difficulty.  
 
________4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2  (c)] 
1. So much of the area included in the Balipara  Frontier Tract, as is comprised within the line 
drawn from the eastern boundary of the district of Kamrup at Pillar No.  98 on the Bor  Nadi eastwards 
along the Inner Line of the Balipara Frontier Tract as defined in Assam Government Notification      
No. 6778 -A.P., dated the 2nd November, 1934, till it reaches the boundary of the Lakhimpur district; 
thence southwards along the western boundary of the Lakhimpur district; to the point where it meets 
the boundary of the Darrang district;  thence westwards alon g the northern boundary of the Darrang 
district to a point where it meets the eastern boundary of the Kamrup district; thence northwards along 
this boundary to the starting point.  
2. So much of the area included in the Abor Hills and Mishmi Hills districts  (Sadiya Frontier 
Tract) as is comprised within the line drawn from the point 498 at Dipa in a straight line to the 
junction of the Remi river with a nameless stream about a mile southeast of the junction of Remi and 
Tode Korong rivers;  thence in  a straigh t line to point milestone No.  4 from Kobo on the               
Kobo -Pasighat road; thence in a straight line to the  junction of Sisseri and Gango rivers;  thence along 
the left bank of the Gango river to its junction with the Dibag river; thence in a straig ht line to the  
confluence of Hazingaadi with Kundil river (about half a miles north of point 492 of the Kundil river); 
thence in a straight line to point 625 on the right bank of the Tipu -Balijan river (about four miles north 
of the  confluence of Haru  Nadi with Balijan); thence down the Balijan river following its right bank to 
its confluence with the Lohit river; thence across the Lohit river and down its left bank to Noa  Dihing  
Mukh; thence up the right bank of the Noa  Dihing river to its confluence with  the Dirak river; thence 
up the left bank of the Dirak river to where it meets and boundary between the Sadiya Frontier Tract 
and the Lakhimpur district; thence westwards along the northern boundary of the Lakhimpur district 
to the starting point.  
3. So mu ch of the area included in the Tirap Frontier Tract as is comprised within the line drawn 
from the confluence of the Koria  Pani and the Burhi  Dihing rivers up the right bank of the Burhi  
Dihing river to the confluence of the Namphuk and the Namchik rivers;  thence up the left bank of the 
Namchik river to its confluence with the Kathang river; thence up the Kathang  Hka to its junction 
with the Lekha  Hka; thence up the Lakha  Hka to its source and thence to point 894; thence in a     
south -westerly direction dow n a nameless stream that originates from point 894, to its junction with 
the Tirap river; thence up the left bank of the Tirap river to a point due east of height 2438 on the 
Lungokan range; thence due west to height 2438; thence in a north -westerly direct ion down the 
Kapang  Wa stream to its junction with the Tipang river; thence down the Tipang river to its junction 
with Kumkal  Wa; thence in a south -westerly direction alone the ridge of Tuting  Tak Kan range to the 
saddle between this range and Lompi Parbat  range; thence in a north -westerly direction down a 
nameless stream that originates from this saddle, to its junction with Likhapani or Tehi stream; thence 
down the Likhapani stream to its junction with the  Tirap river; thence down the Tirap river  to its 
junction with the Burhi  Dihing river; thence down the Burhi  Dihing river to its junction with the 
Manmaw Jan; thence up the Manmaw Jan and Monggang  Khasi stream as far as it forms the eastern 
boundary of the Upper Dihing  reserved forest; thence along western boundary of the Upper Dihing 
reserved forest ; thence along the western boundary of the Upper Dihing reserved forest (east block) to 
the point where it meets the Pengri  Hka;  thence down the Pengri  Hka to the Burhi  Dihing river and up 
the Burhi  Dihing to the starting point.  
 
 
--------------------------The State Financial Corporations Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS ACT, 1951  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION OF STATE  FINANCIAL  CORPORATION S THEIR CAPITAL AND MANAGEMENT  
3. Establishment of State Financial Corporations.  
3A. Establishment of Joint Financial Corporations.  
4. Share capital and share -holders.  
4A. Special class of shares.  
4B. Transfer of share capital to Development Bank .  
4C. Payment of amount.  
4D. Issue of redeemable preference shares.  
4E. Reduction of share capital.  
4F. Restriction on exercising of voting right.  
4G. Proxy voting.  
4H. Transfer of share capital to Small Industries Bank.  
5. Transfer of shares . 
6. Conversion of shares guaranteed by State Government.  
7. Additional capital of Financial Corporation and its borrowing powers.  
8. Deposits with the Financial Corporation.  
9. Managements.  
10. Board of directors.  
10A. [ Omitted .] 
11. Term of office and retirement of directors.  
12. Disqualifications for being a director.  
13. Removal of d irector from office.  
14. Resignation of office by director and filling up of casual vacancies.  
15. Chairman of Boar d. 
16. Remuneration of directors.  
17. Managing director.  
18. Executive Committee.  
19. Meetings of the Board and Committee.  
20. Powers of Executive Committee.  
21. Advisory Committee.  
22.  Offices and agencies.  
23. Officers and other employees of the Financial Corporation.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD  
SECTIONS  
24. General duty of the Board.  
25. Business which Financial Corporation may transact . 
25A. Power to acquire rights.  
25B. Gifts, grants , etc. 
26. Limit of accommodation.  
27. Power to impose conditions for accommodation.  
28. Prohibited business . 
29. Rights of Financial Corporation in case of default.  
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period.  
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by Financial Corporation.  
32. Procedure of district judge in respect of applications under section 31.  
32A. Power of Financial Corporation to appoint directors or administrators of an industrial concern 
when management is taken over.  
32B. Effect of notified order under section 32A.  
32C. Powers and duties of directors and administrators . 
32D. No right to compensation for termination of contract of managing agent, managing director, etc.  
32E. Application of Act 1 of 1956.  
32F. Restriction on tiling of suite for dissolution, etc., of an industrial concern not being a company 
when its management is taken over.  
32G. Recovery of amounts due to the Financial Corporation as an arrear of land  revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
INVESTMENT OF FUNDS, ACCONTS AND AUDIT  
33. Funds of  the Financial Corporation.  
34. Investment of funds.  
35. Disposal of profits.  
35A. Special reserve fund.  
36. General meetings.  
37. Audit.  
37A. Inspection . 
38. Returns . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
39. Power to give instructions to Financial Corporation on questions of policy.  
40. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy.  
41. Indemnity of directors.  
41A. Protection of action taken by persons appointed under section 27 or section 32A . 
41B. Nomination in respect of deposits, bonds, etc . 
42. Offences.  
43. Provisions relating to income -tax and super -tax. 
43A. Delegation of powers . 
43B. Reports to the Board . 3 
 SECTIONS  
44. Act 18 of 1891 to apply to the books of the Financial Corporation . 
45. Liquidation of Financial Corporation.  
46. Power to apply Act to certain financial institutions i n existence at commence ment of Act. 
46A. Extension of jurisdiction of the Financial Corporation to other States by   agreement.  
46B. Effect of Act on other laws . 
47. [Omitted .] 
48. Power of Board to make regulations.  
48A. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature.  
48B. Power to make rules.  
49. Power to remove difficulty . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
  4 
 THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS ACT, 19511 
ACT NO. 63 OF 1951  
[31st October , 1951 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of State Financial Corporations.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2***. 
(3) It shall come into force in any State on such date3  as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act  unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Board of directors of the Financial Corporation;  
4[(aa) “Development Bank ” means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under 
the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964);]  
5[(b) “Financial Corporation ” means a Financial Corporation established under section 3 and 
includes a Joint Financial Corporation established under section 3A;]  
6[(c) “industrial concern ” means any conce rn engaged or to be engaged in — 
(i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods;  
7[(ii) mining or development of mines;]  
(iii) the hotel industry;  
(iv) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or by air  8[or by ropeway or by 
lift]; 
(v) the generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of power;  
(vi) the maintenance, repair, resting or servicing of machinery of any description or vehicles 
or vessels or motor boats or trailers or tractors;  
(vii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with the aid of machinery or power;  
9[(viii) the setting up or development of an industrial area or industrial estate;]  
(ix) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or maintenance thereof;   10*** 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule; to Pondicherry by Reg. 
7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule; to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule and to the State of 
Sikkim on 24 th October, 1975, vide notification No. S.O. 615(E), dated 23rd October, 1975.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
3. 1st August, 1952 (in the whole of India except the State of Jammu and K ashmir), vide notification No. S.R.O. 1317, dated  28th 
July, 1952, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3.  
4. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 2 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 2, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
6. Subs. by Act 77 of 1972,  s. 2, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1985, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985)  
8. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985)  
9. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for sub -clause ( viii)  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985) . 
10. The word “or” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985) . 
 5 
 1[(x) providing weigh  bridge facilities;  
 (xi) providing engineerin g, technical, financial, management, marketing or other services or 
facilities for industry;  
(xii) providing medical, health or other allied, services;  
(xiii) providing  software or hardware services relating to information technology, 
telecommunications or electronics including satellite linkage and audio or visual cable 
communication;  
(xiv) setting up or development of tourism related facilities including amusement park s, 
convention centres, restaurants, travel and transport (including those at airports), tourist service 
agencies and guidance and counselling services to the tourists;  
(xv) construction;  
(xvi) development, maintenance and construction of roads;  
(xvii) prov iding commercial complex facilities and community centres including conference 
halls;  
(xviii) floriculture;  
(xix) tissue culture, fish culture, poultry farming, breeding and hatcheries;  
(xx) service industry, such as altering, ornamenting, polishing, finis hing, oiling, washing, 
cleaning or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
transport, delivery or disposal;  
(xxi) research and development of any concept, technology, design, process of product , 
whether in rela tion to any of the matters aforesaid, including any activities approved by the Small 
Industries Bank; or  
(xxii) such other activity as may be approved by the Small Industries Bank;]  
2[Explanation  1.—The expression “processing of goods ” includes any art or process for producing, 
preparing or making an article by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, electrical or 
any other like operation.]  
3[Explanation  2. —If any doubt arises as to whether a concern is an industrial  concern or not, the 
same shall be referred to the 4[Small Industries Bank ] for its decision and the decision of the 4[Small 
Industries Bank ] thereon shall be final.]  
 (d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules or regulations made under this Act;  
5[(da) the expression “public sector bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the 
State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), a corresponding new ban k constituted under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980                     
(40 of 1980);]  
(e) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(f) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 2, for clauses ( x) to ( xiii) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2.  Explanation  renumbered as Explanation  1 by Act 43 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1985).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
4. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 2, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  6 
 1[(fa) “Small Industries Bank ” means the Small Industries Development Bank of India established 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989              
(39 of 1989);]  
 2[ 3[(fb)] “State Co -operative Bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in Clause ( f) of section 
2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); ] 
 4[(fc)] “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, m eans the Administrator thereof;  
(g) “underwriting ” means contract, with or without conditions, to subscribe for stocks, shares, 
bonds or debentures of an industrial concern with a view to the resale of the whole or any part 
thereof.  
CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION OF STATE  FINANCIAL  CORPORATION S, THEIR CAPITAL AND MANAGEMENT  
3. Establishment of State Financial Corporations .—(1) The State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, establish a Financial Corporation for the State under such name as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) The Financial Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name notified under sub-section ( 1), 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to  
5[acquire, hold and dispose of] property and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
6[3A. Establishment of Joint Financial Corporations .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 3, two or more States may, after consultation with the  7[Small Industries Bank], enter into an 
agreement that there shall be one Financial Corporation for the group of States participating in the 
agreement and if the agreement is published in the Official Gazette of each of those States, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Joint Fi nancial Corporation to serve 
the needs of those States under such name as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) An inter -State agreement under sub-section ( 1) among  the participating States may — 
(a) provide for the fixation of the authorised capital of  the Joint Financial Corporation, the 
number of fully paid -up shares into which it shall be divided and the allocation among the 
participating States of the shares to be distributed under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(b) provide  for the sharing of the liability for me guarantee under section 6 or section 7  8[or 
section 8];  
(c) provide for the number of directors to be nominated to the Board by each participating State 
Government;  
(d) provide  for the apportionment among the participating States of expenditure in connection 
with the Joint Financial Corporation;  
9*   *   *   *  * 
(f) determine which of the participating State Governments shall exercise the several functions of 
the State Governme nt under this Act, and references in this Act to the State Government, in relation 
to the Joint Financial Corporation, shall, save as otherwise expressly provided, be construed 
accordingly;  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).   
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 2, for Clause ( fb) (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).   
3. Clause ( ff) re-lettered as clause ( fb) thereof by Act 39 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4. Clause ( fff) re-lettered as clause ( fc) thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5.  Subs. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 3, for “acquire and to hold” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
6.  Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
7.  Subs. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 24, for “Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  
8.  Ins. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
9. Omitted by Act 43 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21-8-1985).  7 
 (g) provide for consultation among the participating States either  generally or with reference to 
particular matters arising under this Act;  
(h) make such incidental and consequential provisions, not inconsistent with this Act, as may be 
deemed necessary or expedient for giving effect to the agreement.  
(3) The Joint Fina ncial Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name notified under                      
sub-section ( 1), having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(4) Any reference in this Act to “State ” in relation to a Joint Financial Corporation established for two 
or more States, shall be construed as a reference to each such State.]  
4. Share capital and share -holders .—1[(1) The authorised capital of the Financial Corporation shall 
be such sum as may be fixed by the State Government i n this behalf, but it shall not  be less than fifty 
lakhs of rupees  or exceed five hundred crores of rupees:  
Provided that the State Government may, on the recommendation of the Small Industries Bank, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, increase the authorised capital up to one thousand crores of rupees.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 4D, the autho rised capital shall be divided into such number of 
fully paid -up shares of the same face value and such number of fully paid -up redeemable preference 
shares of the same face value and shall be issued to the parties mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of 
sub-section ( 3) and in the case of parties referred to in clause ( d) of that sub -section, such shares shall be 
issued at such times and in such manner as the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, determine.  
(3) Subject to the appro val of the State Government and the Small Industries Bank, the Board shall 
determine the number of shares which may, resp ectively, be distributed among — 
(a) the State Government;  
(b) the Small Industries Bank;  
(c) public sector banks, the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the 
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), other insurance companies owned or controlled 
by the Central Government, other institutions owned or contro lled by the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be; and  
(d) parties other than those referred to in clause ( a), or clause ( b) or clause ( c): 
Provided that the number of shares which may be allocated to parties referred to in clause (d) shall in 
no case exceed forty -nine per cent.  of the total number of issued equity shares:  
Provided further that no increase in the issued equity capital shall be made in such a manner that the 
parties referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) hold in aggregate, at any time less than            
fifty-one per cent.  of the issued equity capital of the Financial Corporation.]  
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the allocation of shares among the parties 
referred to in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub-section ( 3) and the allotment of such shares shall be made by the 
Financial Corporation in such manner as may be prescribed.  
2[(5) If any shares allocated to any of the parties referred to in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub-section ( 3) 
remain unsubscribed, they shall be subscribed for equally by the State Government and the  3[Small 
Industries Bank].]  
4[4A. Special class of shares. —5[(1) The State Government may, in consultation with the  3[Small 
Industries Bank], specify from time to time such part of the unissued capital of the Financial Corporation 
as shall be allocated for the issue of a special class of shares.]  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 4, for sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2.  Subs. by Act 43 of 1985, s. 3, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 21-8-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 4, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4.  Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
5.  Subs. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 26, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  8 
 (2) The special class of shares so allocated under sub-section ( 1), shall be, — 
(a) divided into such number of shares of the same face value as the State Government may, in 
consultation with the  1[Small Industries Bank], determine ; 
(b) subscribed by the State Government and the  1[Small Industries Bank] and they may do so in 
such proportion as may be agreed upon by and between them and the Financial Corporation shall 
make allotment of such shares accordingly.  
(3) The funds representing the capital subscribed as aforesaid shall be used only for such purposes, in 
such manner and for rendering assistance to such class or category of industrial concerns, as the  1[Small 
Industries Bank] may, in consultation with and after obtaini ng the advice of the State Government, 
specify in this behalf from time to time and nothing contained in  2*** section 48 shall apply thereto.  
(4) The rate of dividend declared on the special class of shares in respect of any accounting year of a 
Financial Corporation shall not exceed the rate of dividend in respect of its other shares.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub-sections ( 2) to ( 5) of section 4, section 5, and  3[sub-sections ( 1) to ( 4) of 
section 6], shall apply to the special class of shares.]  
4[4B. Tran sfer of share capital to Development Bank  .—On such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify (hereinafter referred to as the specified date), all the 
shares of every Financial Corporation subscribed by the Reserve Bank as on the date immediately 
preceding the specified date, shall, stand transferred to, and v ested in, the Development Bank.  
4C. Payment of amount .—The Reserve Bank shall be given by the Development Bank, in cash, for 
the transfer to, and vestin g in, the Development Bank of the shares of every Financial Corporation which 
have been subscribed by the Reserve Bank, an amount equal to the face value of the shares of the 
Financial Corporation so subscribed.]  
5[4D. Issue of redeemable preference shares .—(1) On and after the commencement of the State 
Financial Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000,  the Financial Corporation may — 
(a) issue redeemable preference shares on such terms and in such manner as the Board may 
decide; and  
(b) convert, such number of e quity shares as it may decide into redeemable preference shares, 
with the prior approval of the State Government and the Small Industries Bank, by a resolution passed 
in the general meeting of the shareholers:  
Provided that such conversion shall in no case  reduce the equity shares held by the parties referred to 
in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub-section ( 3) of section 4 to less than fifty -one per cent . of the issued equity 
capital of the Financial Corporation.  
(2) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall — 
(a) carry such fixed rate of dividend as the Financial Corporation may specify at the time of such 
issue or conversion; and  
(b) neither be transferable nor carry any voting rights.  
(3) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be redeemed by the Financial 
Corporation in such instalments and in such manner as the Board may determine.  
4E. Reduction of share capital .—(1) The Financial Corporation, with the prior approval of the State 
Government and the Small Industries Bank, may, by resolution passed in a general meeting of the 
shareholders, reduce its share capital in any way.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 5, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “section 47” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “sub -section ( 1) of section 6” ( w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4. Ins. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 27 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 6 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  9 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the s hare capital  may be reduced by — 
(a) extinguishing or reducing the liability on any of its equity shares in respect of share capital not 
paid-up; or  
(b) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, 
cancelling any paid -up share  capital which is lost or is unrepresented by available assets; or  
(c) either  with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, paying 
off any paid -up share capital which is in excess of the wants of the Financial Corporation.  
4F. Restriction on exercising of voting right .—Every shareholder of the Fin ancial Corporation 
holding equity shares shall have a right to vote in respect of such shares on every resolution and his 
voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share of the paid -up equity capital of the Financial 
Corporation:  
Provided  howeve r, that no shareholder, other than a shareholder referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) 
of sub-section ( 3) of section 4, shall be entitled t o exercise voting rights in respect of any equity share 
held by him in excess of ten per cent . of the issued equity capital.  
4G. Proxy voting .—In a general meeting referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4D 
and sub-section ( 1) of section 4E, the resolution for conversion or reduction of share capital shall be 
passed by shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, and the 
votes cast in favour of the resolution are not less than three times the number of vo tes, if any, cast against 
the resolution by shareholders so entitled and voting.  
4H. Transfer of share capital to Small Industries Bank .—On such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify (hereinafter referred to as the notified date) all the 
shares of every Financial Corporation subscribed by the De velopment Bank and the amount outstanding 
in respect of loans in lieu of capital provided by the Development Bank as on the date immediately 
preceding the notified date, shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Small Industries Bank, such 
transfer sh all be at such rate and be paid in cash or such other manner as may be mutually agreed upon 
between the Development Bank and the Small Industries Bank.]  
1[5. Transfer of shares . —(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ( 2), the shares of the 
Financial Corporation shall be freely transferable.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall entitle the parties referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) 
of sub-section ( 3) of section 4 to transfer any of the shares held by them in the Financial Corporation if 
such transfer will result in reducing the aggregate value of shares held by them to less than fifty -one per 
cent. of the issued equity capital of the Financial Corporation.  
(3) The Board may refuse to register the transfer of any shares in t he name of the transferee on any 
one or more of the following grounds, a nd on no other ground, namely: — 
(a) the transfer of the shares is in contravention of the provisions of the Act or regulations made 
thereunder or any other law;  
(b) the transfer of the  shares, in the opinion of the Board, is prejudicial to the interests of the 
Financial Corporation or to the public interest;  
(c) the transfer of shares is prohibited by an order of a court, tribunal or any other authority under 
any law for the time being in force.  
4. The Board shall, before the expiry of two months from the date on which the instrument of transfer 
of shares of the Financial Corporation is lodged with it for the purpose of registration of such transfer, not   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39  of 2000, s. 7, for sections 5 to 10 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  10 
 only form, in good faith, its opinion as to whether such registration ought not or ought to be refused on 
any of the grounds referred t o in sub -section ( 3) but also, — 
(a) if it has formed the opinion that such registration ought not to be so refused, effect such 
registration; and  
(b) if it has formed the opinion that such registration  ought to be refused on any of the grounds 
mentioned in sub-section ( 3), intimate the transferor and the transferee by notice in writing.  
(5) An appeal against the order of refusal of the Board under sub-section ( 4) shall lie to the Central 
Government and the procedure for filing and hearing of such appeal shall be in accordance with the rules 
made by the Cen tral Government in this behalf.  
6. Conversion of shares guaranteed by State Government .—(1) On the c ommencement of the 
State Financial Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000, every shareholder shall be given by the Financial 
Corporation an option to require the Financial Corporation to convert the shares held by him into shares 
of the same nominal value with out the State Government guarantee and issue fresh share certificate or to 
pay the amount paid in respect of such shares not exceeding the face value of the shares held by him.  
(2) The option referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be given by the Financial Corporation to every 
existing shareholder before the expiry of three months from the commencement of the State Financial 
Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000 and shall be exercised by the shareholder within three months from 
the date of receipt of such optio n. 
(3) The option exercised under sub-section ( 2) shall be final and shall not be altered or rescinded after 
it has been exercised.  
(4) If, a shareholder exercises option for receiving the payment within the stipulated time, the 
Financial Corporation shall , on surrender of the share certificate held by him , pay him the amount paid in 
respect of such shares not exceeding the face value thereof:  
Provided that if any shareholder fails to exercise the option given to him under sub-section ( 1), within 
the time s tipulated in sub-section ( 2), he shall be deemed to have exercised the first option.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 4) shall be deemed to result in reduction of the share capital and 
the Financial Corporation may, subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 4, allot the shares 
surrendered by any shareholder, to any other person.  
(6) The Financial Corporation shall keep at its head office a register, in one or more books, of 
shareholders and shall enter therein the following particulars so  far as they may be av ailable, namely: — 
(i) the name, addresses and occupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of the shares 
held by each shareholder, distinguishing each share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a shareholder; and  
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the shares held with a depository under the 
Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996).  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 6), it shall be lawful for the Financial 
Corporation to keep the register of the shareholders in computer floppies or diskettes, compact disk o r any 
other electronic form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extract from, the register of shareholders, certified to be a true copy under th e hand of an officer of the 
Financial Corporation authoris ed in this behalf, shall, in all  legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence.  
(9) The register of beneficial owners maintained by a depository under section 11 of the Depositories 
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall be deemed to be a register of shareholders for the purposes of this Act.  11 
 (10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 6), (7) and ( 8), no notice of any trust, 
express, implied or constructive, shall be entered on the register of sha reholders or be receivable by the 
Financial Corporation:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a depository in respect of shares held by it as a 
registered owner on behalf of a beneficial owner.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub-sections ( 6), (9) and this sub -section, the expressions 
“beneficial owner ”, “depository ” and “registered owner ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in clauses ( a), (e) and ( j) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 19 96 (22 of 1996).  
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), the shares of the 
Financial Corporation shall be deemed to be included among the securities enumer ated in section 20 of 
that Act.  
7. Additional capital of Financial Corpora tion and its borrowing powers. —(1) The Financial 
Corporation may issue and sell bonds and debentures for the purpose of increasing its working capital.  
(2) The State Government may, on a request being made to it by the Financial Corporation, guarantee 
the bonds and debentures issued by the Financial Corporation as to the repayment of principal and the 
payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by that Government.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter  mentioned in this sub -section, such of 
the bonds and debentures issued by the Financial Corporation as are guaranteed by the State Government 
as to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest and receipts issued by it for such of deposits 
as ar e guaranteed by the State Government as to the repayment of the principal and payment of interest 
shall be deemed to be included among the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 
1882 (2 of 1882) , and also to be approved securities fo r the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938                       
(4 of 1938) . 1*** 
(4) The Financial Corporation may, for the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act, 
borrow money from the Reserve Bank — 
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed period not exceeding ninety days from the 
date on which the money is so bo rrowed against the security of — 
(i) stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable property) in which a trustee is 
authorised  to invest trust money by any law for the time being in force in India, or  
(ii) such bills of exchange and promissory notes as are eligible for purchase or re -discount by 
the Reserve Bank or as are fully guaranteed as to the repayment of the principal and payment of 
interest by a State Government;  
(b) repayable on the expiry of a fixed period not exceeding eighteen months from the date on 
which the money is so borrowed, against securities of the Central Government or of any State 
Government of the maturity,  or subject to the previous approval of the State Government, against 
bonds and debentures issued by the Financial Corporation and maturing within a period not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date on which the money is so borrowed and every such bond an d 
debenture shall be guaranteed by the State Government:  
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Financial Corporation under clause ( b) shall not at any 
time exceed in the aggregate twice the paid -up share capital thereof.  
(5) The Financial Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act, 
borrow money from the State Government, any financial institution, scheduled bank, insurance company 
or any other person approved by the Board on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.  
(6) The total amount of bonds and debentures issued and outstanding, the amounts borrowed by the 
Financial Corporation under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 4) and sub-section  (5) and of the contingent 
                                                           
1. The words and figures “and the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949)”  omitted by Act 4 of 2013,  s. 17 and the Schedule  
(date to be notified).  12 
 liabilities of the Financial Corporation in the form of guarantees given by it or underwriting agreements 
entered into by it, shall not exceed ten times the amount of the paid -up share capital and reserve fund of 
the Financial Corporation:  
Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with the prior approval of the Small Industries Bank, 
exceed the aforesaid limit up to thirty time the amount of the paid -up share capital and reserve fun d of the 
Financial Corporation.  
 8. Deposits with Financial Corporation .—(1) The Financial Corporation may accept from the Sta te 
Government, or with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank, from a local authority or any other person 
deposits repayable after the expiry of a period which shall not be less than twelve months from the date of 
the making of the deposit and on such othe r terms as the Board thinks fit:  
Provided that the total amount of such deposits shall not exceed twice the paid -up share capital of the 
Financial Corporation:  
Provided further that the State Government may permit the Financial Corporation to accept deposi ts 
up to a higher limit not exceeding ten times the paid -up share capital of the Financial Corporation.  
(2) Any deposit accepted under sub-section ( 1), other than a deposit from the State Government may, 
if so required by the Financial Corporation, be guaranteed by the State Government as to the repayment of 
the pri ncipal and payment of interest.  
9. Management .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of affairs and 
business of the Financial Corporation shall vest in a Board of director s which may exercise all powers and 
do all such acts and things, as may be exercised or done by the Financial Corporation and are not by this 
Act expressly directed or required to be done by the Financial Corporation in general meeting.  
(2) The Board may direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall also be exercisable in 
such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified by it, by the chairman, managing 
director or the whole -time director.  
10. Board of directors .—The Boa rd of directors shall con sist of the following, namely: — 
(a) a director to be nominated as chairman under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;  
(b) two directors nominated by the State Government of whom one director shall be a person who 
has special knowledge of  or experience in small -scale industries:  
Provided that in the case of a Joint Financial Corporation, the number of directors shall be such as the 
State Governments of the participating States may, by agreement among themselves, think fit to nominate 
each participating State Government nominating not more than two directors:  
Provided further that in the case of a Joint Financial Corporation, the director, who shall have special 
knowledge of, or experience in, small -scale industries, shall be nominated by th at participating State 
which, according to the terms of agreement between the participating States, is entitled to make such 
nomination;  
(c) two directors nominated by the Small Industries Bank;  
(d) two  directors nominated in the prescribed manner by the parties mentioned in clause ( c) of             
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(e) such number of directors elected, in the prescribed manner, by share -holders, other than those 
mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub-section ( 3) of section 4, whose names are entered on the 
register of shareholders of the Financial Corporation, ninety days before the date of the meeting in 
which such election takes place o n the following basis, namely: — 
(i) where the t otal amount of issued equity share capital held by such shareholders is ten           
per cent . or less of the total issued equity capital, two directors;  
(ii) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held by such shareholders is more 
than ten  per cent . but less than twenty -five per cent . of total issued equity capital, three directors;  13 
 (iii) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held by such shareholders is  
twenty -five per cent . or more of total issued equity capital, four dir ectors; and  
(iv) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held by equity shareholders referred 
to in this clause does not permit election of all the four directors, the Board shall co -opt such 
number of directors as is required to make up the said number who shall retire in equal number on 
the assumption of charge by the elected directors in the order of their co -option;  
(f) a managing director appointed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of            
section 17:  
Provided tha t on the first constitution of the Board, the directors referred to in clause ( d) shall be 
nominated by the State Government and directors so nominated shall, for the purpose of this Act, be 
deemed to be elected directors:  
Provided further that all the dir ectors of the Board first constituted, other than the managing director, 
shall retire at the end of the first year.]  
10A. [Board of directors .] Omitted by the State Financial Corporation  (Amendment ) Act, 2000              
(39 of 2000), s. 8 (w.e.f . 5-9-2000).  
1[11. Term of office and retirement of directors .—(1) A nominated director shall hold office during 
the pleasure of the authority nominating him.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), a nominated director shall hold office for such term 
not exceeding three years and shall also be eligible for re -nomination:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.  
(3) An elected director other than a director deemed to be elected under the first proviso to clause ( d) 
of section 10 shall hold office for three years and shall also be eligible for re -election:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.  
12. Disqualifications for being a director .—No person shall be a director, if he — 
(a) has been found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdiction and the finding is 
in force; or  
(b) is or at any time has been, adjudicated  as insolvent or has su spended payment of his debts or 
has compounded with his creditors; or  
(c) has been convicted by a court of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment of not less than six months and a period of five years has not elapsed 
from the date of expiry of the sentence; or  
(d) is elected by the persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 3) of section 4 but not 
registered as shareholder in his own right of unencumbered shares of a nominal value of not less than 
ten thousand rupees in the Financial Corporation; or  
(e) has not paid any call in respect of shares of the Financial Corporation held by him, whether 
alone or jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last day fixed  for the payment of 
the call.]  
13. Removal of director from of fice.—2[(1)] The State Government may remo ve from office any 
director who — 
(a) is, or has become, subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 12; or  
(b) without  excuse sufficient in the opinion of the State Government to exonerate it, is absent 
without leave of the Board from more than three consecutive meetings of the Board.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 9, for sections 11 and 12 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2. Section 13 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  14 
 1[(2) The shareholders, other than those mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub-section ( 3) of 
section 4, whose names are entered on the register of shareholders, may, after giving to the director a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the manner as may be prescribed, by resolution passed by 
majority of the votes of such shareholder s holding in the aggregate not less than one -half of the total 
issued equity share capital held by all such shareholders, remove any director elected under clause ( d) of 
section 10 and elect in his place another person to fill the vacancy so caused.]  
14. Resignation of office by director and filling up of casual vacancies .—2[(1) Any director elected 
under clause ( d) of section 10 may, by giving notice in w riting to the Chairman of the Board, resign from 
his office and on such resignation being accepted, sha ll be deemed to have vacated hi s office.]  
(2) A casual vacancy in the office of an elected director shall be filled by election and a director so 
elected shall hold office for the unex pired portion of the term of hi s predecessor.  
(3) No act or proceeding o f the B oard shall b e questioned on the ground mere ly of the existence of 
any vacancy in, or any defe ct in the constitution of the B oard.  
3[15. Chairman of Boar d.—(1) The Small Industries  Bank shall, in consultation with the State  
Government nominate a director as a Chairman of the Board for such period not exceeding three years  
and on such terms and conditions as the Small Industries Bank may specify:  
Provided  that the Chairman shall not be a whole -time director unless he is  also appointed to function 
as the managing director:  
Provided further  that the Chairman shall so long as he remains a director be  eligible for                       
re-appointment as Chairman.  
(2) The Chairman shall preside over the meetings of the  Board and the general meetings of t he 
Financial Corporation.]  
4[16. Remuneration of directors .—The directors other than the managing director and not being 
servants of the Government shall be paid such fees as may be prescribed for attending meetings of the 
Board and, if they are members of  the Executive Committee, or any other committee appointed by the 
Financial Corporation, for attending meetings of such committee.]  
 17. Managing director .—5[(1) The managing director shall — 
(a) be appointed, in consultation with the Small Industries Bank, by the State Government;  
(b) be a whole -time officer of the Financial Corporation;  
(c) perform such duties as the Board, by regulations, entrust or delegate to him;  
(d) hold  office for such term not exceeding three years as the State Government may specify and 
shall be eligible for re -appointment;  
(e) receive such salary and allowances and be subject to other terms and conditions of service as 
the Board may, with the previous  approval of the State Government, determine.]  
 6[(2) The State Government may, after consulting the Board, remove the managing director from 
office:  
Provided that no managing director shall be so removed unless he has been given an opportunity of 
showing cause against his removal.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 10 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) and ( 1A) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for section 15 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 7, for section 16 ( w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
5. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 13, for section 17 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
6. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956)  15 
 1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the State Government, with prior 
consultation of the Small Industries Bank, shall have the right to terminate the term of office of the 
managing director at any time, before the expiry of the term specified under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) 
by giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months salary and allowances in 
lieu of such notice and the managing director shall also have right to relinquish his office at any time 
before the expiry of term specified under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) by giving to the State Government 
notice of not less than three months in writing.]  
2[18. Executive Committee .—(1) The B oard shall constitute an Executive Committee consisting of 
the chairman and managing director, the whole -time directors and such other directors as it may deem fit:  
Provided that in the case of a Joint Financial Corporation, if the directors nominated under clause ( b) 
of section 10 represent different State Government s then, all of them shall be me mbers of the Executive 
Com mittee.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may be prescribed or as  may be 
delegated  to it by the B oard.  
(3) The B oard may constitute such other committees whether consisting wholly of directors or wholly 
of, other persons of partly of directors and partly of other persons for such purpose or purposes as it may 
think fit.]  
19. Meetings of the Board and Committee .—(1) The  Board and the  Executive Committee 
shall  meet at such times and  places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of  
business at its  meetings as may be  provided by regulations made under this Act.  
(2) All questions at a  meeting shall be decided by a majority of votes of the  members present, and in 
the case of equality of votes, the Chairman  or in  his absence, any other person presiding,  shall have a 
second or casting vote.  
(3) No director shall vote on any matter in which he is interested.  
3[ 4*   *   *   *  * 
 (5) If for any reason the Chairman of the  Board or the Chairman of the Executive Committee  is 
unable to attend any  meeting of the  Board or, as the case  may b e, of the Executive Committee, — 
(a) in the case of the  meeting of the  Board, a director  5*** authorised by the Chairman of  
the Board in writing shall  preside at such meeting, but if the  director so authorised is absent or if no 
such authorisation has been made, the  Board may elect a director to preside at  the meeting; and  
(b) in the case of the  meeting of the Executive Committee, a  member authorised in writing by the 
Chairman of  that Committee shall preside at that  meeting, but if the  member so authorised is  absent 
or if no such authorisation has been made, the Committee may elect any of  its members to preside at  
that meeting.]  
20. Powers of Executive Committee .—(1) Subject to such general  or special directions as the B oard 
may from time to time give, the Executive Committee may deal with any matter  within the competence of 
the B oard.  
(2) The minu tes of every me eting of the Executive Committee  6[shall, after conf irmation thereof at 
the next me eting of the Executive C ommittee, be laid] before the B oard at the ne xt following me eting of 
the B oard.  
21. Advisory Committee .—The Financial Corporation may appoint  7[one or more committee or 
committees consisting wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of 
other persons] for the purpose of assisting the Financial Corporation in the efficient discharge of its 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 13 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2. Subs.  by s. 14, ibid., for section 18 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 of 1962, s . 9, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f.  16-4-1962).  
4. Omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. The words “, not being the managing  director ” omitted by Act 43 of 1985, s . 12 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
6. Subs. by s. 1 3, ibid., for “shall be laid” (w.e.f. 21-8-1985).  
7. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “one or more advisory committee or committees” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  16 
 functions and, in pa rticular, for the purpose of securing that those functions are exercised with due regard 
to the circumstances and conditions prevailing in, and the requirements of, particular areas or industries.  
1[22. Offices and agencies .—The Financial Corporation shall  establish its head office and other 
offices and agencies at such places as the State Government may, from time to time specify and save as 
aforesaid, the Financial Corporation may establish additional offices or agencies in such other places 
within the St ate as it may consider necessary.]  
23. Officers and other employees of the Financial Corporation .—The Financial Corporation may 
appoint  such officers, advisers and employees as it considers necessary for the  efficient performance of its 
functions, and determine, by regulations, their  conditions of appointment and service and t he 
remuneration payable to them.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD  
 24. General duty of the Board .—The Board in discharging its functions under this Act  shall act on 
business principles due regard being had by it to the interests of industry, commerce and the general 
public.  
3[25. Business which Finan cial Corporation may transact. —4[(1) The Financial Corporation may, 
subject to the provisions of this Act,  carry on and transact any of the follow ing kinds of business, 
namely:— 
(a) guaranteeing, on such terms and con ditions as may be agreed upon, — 
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns which are repayable within a period not exceeding 
twenty years, and are f loated in the public market;  
(ii) loans raised by industrial concerns from scheduled banks or State co operative banks 5[or 
other financial institutions ]; 
(b) guaranteeing, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, deferred payments due 
from any industrial concern in connection with its purchase of capital goods within India;  
(c) underwriting of the issue of stock, shares, bonds or debentures by industrial concerns;  
(d) transferring for consideration any instruments relating to loans and advances granted by it to 
industrial concerns;  
(e) acting as agent of the Central Government or the State Government or the Development Bank 
or the Small Industries Bank or the IFCI Limited formed and registered under the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) or any othe r financial institution notified in this behalf by the Central Government in 
respect of any matter connected with, or arising out of, the grant of loans or advances to an industrial 
concern, or subscription to debentures of an industrial concern or relatin g to the business of the 
Development Bank, Small Industries Bank, IFCI Limited or financial institution;  
(f) subscribing to, or purchasing of, the stock, shares, bonds or debentures of an industrial concern 
or any other concern;  
(g) retaining  as part of its assets any stock, shares, bonds or debentures which it may acquire by 
subscription or in fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities and disposing of the stock, shares, bonds or 
debentures so acquired;  
(h) granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an industrial concern, 
repayable within a period not exceeding twenty years from the date on which they are granted or 
subscribed to, as the case may be:  
Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with the prior approval of the Small Industries Bank, 
exceed the said limit of twenty years up to a further period of ten years:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to preclude the Financial 
Corporation from granting loans or advances to, or subscr ibing to debentures of, and industrial concern to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 13, for section 22 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
2. The proviso omitted by Act 39 of 2000, s. 16 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 10, for section 25 (w.e.f.  16-4-1962).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s. 15 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  17 
 which may be attached an option to convert such debentures or loans into stock or shares of the industrial 
concern:  
Provided also that the Financial Corporation may, in the exercise of such option, convert the amounts 
outstanding on such debentures or loans into stock or shares of the industrial concern if such concern 
increases its subscribed capital by the issue of further stock or shares in accordance with and subject to, 
the provisions of Section 81 of t he Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
Explanation .—In this clause, the expression “the amounts outstanding on such debentures or loans ” 
shall mean the principal, interest and other charges payable on such debentures or loans as at the time 
when the amounts a re sought to be converted into stock or shares;  
(i) accepting or discounting promissory notes and bills of exchange made, down, accepted or 
endorsed by industrial concerns or by any person selling capital goods manufactured by one industrial 
concern to ano ther industrial concern;  
(j) undertaking research and surveys for evaluating or dealing with marketing or investments or 
undertaking and carrying on techno -economic studies or other activities in connection with the 
development of any industry;  
(k) providi ng technical and administrative assistance to any industrial concern or any person for 
the promotion, management or expansion of any industry;  
(l) planning and assisting in the promotion and development of industries;  
(m) providing consultancy and merchant  banking services;  
(n) acting as the trustee for the holders of debentures or other securities;  
(o) leasing, sub -leasing or giving on hire or hire -purchase of industrial plant, equipment, 
machinery or any other asset;  
(p) factoring;  
(q) providing  export related credit and services;  
(r) undertaking money market related activities;  
(s) setting up of mutual funds and undertaking asset management activity;  
(t) promoting, forming or conducting or assisting in the promotion, formation, or conduct of 
companies, subsidiaries, societies, trusts or such other associations of persons as it may deem fit;  
(u) opening or confirming or endorsing letters of credit and negotiating or collecting bills and 
other documents drawn thereunder;  
(v) doing such other busine ss as the Small Industries Bank may authorise, and or generally the 
doing of such acts and things as may be incidental to or consequential upon, the exercise of its powers 
or the discharge of its duties under this Act.  
(2) The Financial Corporation may rec eive, in consideration of any of the services mentioned in            
sub-section ( 1), such commission, brokerage, interest, remuneration or fee as may be agreed upon.]  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 7, the aggregate of contingent liabilities of 
the Financial Corporation under clauses ( a), (b) 2[(c) and ( ca)] of sub-section ( 1) shall not at any time 
exceed twice the paid -up share capital and reserve fund of the Corporation except with the prior approval 
of the State Government and in consultation with the  3[Small Industries Bank] but in no case shall exceed 
thrice the paid -up share capital and reserve fund of the Corporation.]  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 43 of 1985, s. 15 ( w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
2. Subs . by Act 77 of 1972, s . 15, for “and (c) ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 17, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  18 
 1[(4) Nothing contained in this section shall entitle any Financial Co rporation to hold shares in any 
company, whether as pledgee, mortgagee or absolute owner, of an amount exceeding thirty per cent . of 
the subscribed share capital of that company or thirty per cent . of its own paid -up share capital and free 
reserves, whiche ver is less.  
(5) If, on the commencement of the State Financial Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1972                        
(77 of 1972), any Financial Corporation is holding shares in excess of the limits specified in                        
sub-section ( 4), the Corporation shall report the matter forthwith to the Reserve Bank and shall, within 
such period as the Reserve Bank may allow, so reduce its share holding as to conform to the provi sions of 
that sub-section.]  
2[25A. Power to acquire rights .—The Fina ncial Corporation shall have the right to acquire, by 
transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any such financial institution as may be notified by the 
Central Government (including any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or  advance 
granted or any amount recoverable by such institution, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue 
of any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement or in any other manner:  
Provided that such loan or advance or amount  relates to any business which the Financial Corporation 
may transact under this Act.]  
3[25B. Gifts, grants , etc.—The Financial Corporation may receive gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from Government or any other source.]  
4[26. Limit of accommodation .—On and from the commencement of the State Financial 
Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000  (39 of 2000) , the Financial Corporation shall not enter into any 
arrangements under clause ( a), (d) or ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 with any industrial concern so 
that the total amount outstanding against that concern in respect of all such arrangements together with 
the amount of the face value of the shares and stocks of that concern whether subscribed or agreed to be 
subscribed and the outst anding liabilities on account of underwriting agreements and the deferred 
payments guarantees is more than — 
(i) five hundred lakhs of rupees in the case of a corporation established by or under any other law 
or a company as defined in section 3 of the Comp anies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or a co -operative 
society registered under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) or any other law relating to                    
co-operative societies for the time being in force; and  
(ii) two hundred lakhs of rupees  in any other case:  
Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with the prior approval of the Small Industries Bank, 
exceed the limit under clause ( i) or clause ( ii) up to four times.]  
27. Power to impose conditions for accommodation .—(1) In entering into any arrangement under 
section 25 with an industrial concern, the Financial  Corporation may impose such conditions as it may 
think necessary or expedient  for protecting the interests of the Financial Corporation and securing that the  
accommodation granted by it is put to the best use by the industrial concern.  
5[(2) Where any arrangement entered into by the  Financial Corporation with an industrial concern 
provides for the appointment  by the Financial Corporation of one or more directors of  such industrial  
concern, such provision and any appointment of directors made in pursuance  thereof shall be valid and 
effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary  contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or in 
any other law for the time bein g in force or in the memorandum, articles  of association or any other 
instrument relating to the industrial concern, and  any provision regarding share qualification, age limit, 
number of directorships,  removal of office of directors and such like condition s contained in any such  law 
or instrument aforesaid shall not apply to any director appointed by the  Financial Corporation in 
pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 15 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
2.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s . 16 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 18 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f 5 -9-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 17, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  19 
 (3) Any director appointed in pursuance of sub-section ( 2) shall— 
(a) hold  office during the pleasure of the  Financial Corporation and may be removed or 
substituted by any person by order in writing by the Financial  Corporation;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by  reason only of his being a director  or for anything done  
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation  
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation  and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors  liable to such retireme nt.] 
28. Prohibited business .—1[(1)] The Financial Corporation shall not — 
2[(a) except as provided in section 8, accept deposits;  
(b) except as provided in clauses  3[(da)], (f) and ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25, subscribe to 
the shares or stock of any company;]  
(c) grant any loan or advance on the security of its own shares;  
4[(d) grant any form of assistance to any industrial concern in respect of which the aggregate of 
the paid -up share capital and free reserves exceeds ten crores of rupees or suc h higher amount not 
exceeding thirty crores of rupees as the State Government, on the recommendation of the Small 
Industries Bank, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.]  
5[(2) The Financial Corporation shall not enter into any kind of busi ness with any industrial concern, 
of which any of the directors of the Financial Corporation is a proprietor, partner, director, manager, 
agent, employee or guarantor, or in which one or more directors of the Financial Corporation together 
hold substantial  interest:  
Provided that this section shall not apply to any industrial concern if any directo r of the Financial 
Corporation — 
(i) is nominated as a director of the Board of such concern by the Government or a Government 
company as defined in section 617 of  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or by a Corporation 
established by or under any other law; or  
(ii) is elected on the Board of such concern by virtue of shares held in the concern by Government 
or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the C ompanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or by a 
Corporation established by or under any other law, by reason only of such nomination or election, as 
the case may be.  
Explanation .—“Substantial interest ” in relation to an industrial concern means the beneficial inter est 
held by one or more of the directors of the Financial Corporation or by any relative [as defined in clause 
(41) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ] of such director whether singly or taken 
together, in the shares of the industrial conc ern, the aggregate amount paid -up on which either exceeds 
five l akhs of rupees or five per cent.  of the paid -up share capital of the industrial concern, whichever is 
less. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section ( 2)— 
(i) shall not apply to any transaction relating to the business entered into prior to the 
commencement of the State Financial Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1972 (77 of 1972) and all such 
business and any transaction in relation thereto may be implemented or continued as if that Act had 
not come  into force;  
                                                           
1. Section 28 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 77 of 1972, s . 18 (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  
2. Subs . by Act 6  of 1962, s . 13, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
3. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 18 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
4. Subs . by Act 39 of 2000, s . 20, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 18 (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  20 
 (ii) shall apply only so long as the conditions precedent to s uch disability as set out in                 
sub-section continue.]  
29. Rights of Financial Corporation in case of default .—(1) Where any industrial concern, which is 
under a liability to the Financial Corporation under an agreement, makes any default in repayment of any 
loan or advance or any instalment thereof  1[or in meeting its obligations in relation to any guarantee given 
by the Corporation] or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with the Financial 
Corporation, the Financial Corporation shall have the  2[right to take over the management or possession 
or both of the industrial concerns], as well as the  3[right to transfer by way of lease or sale] and realise the 
property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Financial Corporation.  
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Financial Corporation, in exercise of its powers  4*** under 
sub-section  (1), shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred  5[as if the transfer] 
had been made by the owner of the property.  
(3) The Financial Corporation shall have the same rights and powers with respect to goods 
manufactured or prod uced wholly or partly from goods forming part of the security held by it as it had 
with respect to the orig inal goods.  
6[(4) 7[Where any action has been taken against an industrial concern] under the provisions of               
sub-section ( 1), all costs,  8[charges and expenses which in the opinion of the Financial Corporation have 
been properly incurred] by it  9[as incidental thereto] shall be recoverable from the industrial concern and 
the money which is received by it   10*** shall, in the absence of any c ontract to the contrary, be held by it 
in trust to be applied firstly, in payment of such costs, charges and expenses and, secondly, in discharge of 
the debt due to the Financial Corporation, and the residue of the money so received shall be paid to the 
person entitled thereto.]  
(5) 7[Where the Financial Corporation has taken any action against an industrial concern] under the 
provisions of sub-section ( 1), the  Financial Corporation shall be deemed to be the owner of such concern, 
for the purposes of suits by or against the concern, and shall sue and be sued in the name of  11[the 
concern].  
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding anyt hing in any 
agreement to the contrary, the Financial Corporation may, by notice in writing, require any industrial 
concern to which it has granted any loan or advance to discharge forthwith in full its liabilities  to the 
Financial Corporation,  — 
(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading information in any material particular was 
given by the industrial concern in its application for the loan or advance; or  
(b) if the industrial concern has failed to comply with the terms of its contract with t he Financial 
Corporation in the matter of the loan or advance; or  
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the industrial concern is unable to pay its debts or 
that proceedings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or  
(d) if the proper ty pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the Financial Corporation as 
security for the loan or advance is not insured and kept insured by the industrial concern to the 
satisfaction of the Financial Corporation or depreciates in value to such an e xtent that, in the opinion 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 19 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
2. Subs.  by s. 19, ibid., for “right to take over the management of the industrial concern” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 14, for “right to sell” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
4. The words “of sale and relaisation” omitted by s. 14 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
5. Subs. by  s.14,  ibid., for “as if the sale”(w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
6. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
7. Subs . by Act 77 of 1972, s . 19, for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -12-1956).  
8. Subs . by Act 6 of 1962, s . 14, for “charges and expenses properly incurred ” (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
9. Subs . by Act   77 of 1972, s . 19, for “as incidental to such management, or transfer and realization. ” (w.e.f. 30-12-1956).  
10. The words “from such management, or transfer and realization ” omitted by s .19, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
11. Subs . by Act 6 of 1962, s . 14, for “the owner fo r the concern ” (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  21 
 of the Board, further security to the satisfaction of the Board should be given and such security is not 
given; or  
(e) if, without the permission of the Board, any machinery, plant or other equipment, whether 
forming part of the security or otherwise, is removed from the premises of the industrial concern 
without being replaced; or  
(f) if for any reason it is necessary to protect the interests of the Financial Corporation.  
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by Financial Corporation .—(1) Where an 
industrial concern, in breach of any agreement, makes any default in repayment of any loan or advance or 
any instalment thereof  1[or in meeting its obligations in relation to any guarantee given by the 
Corporation] or ot herwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with the Financial Corporation 
or where the Financial Corporation requires an industrial concern to make immediate repayment of any 
loan or advance under section 30 and the industrial concern fails to  make such repayment,  2[then, without 
prejudice to the provisions of section 29 of this Act and of section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882 (4 of 1882)] any officer of the Financial Corporation, generally or specially authorised  by the Board 
in this behalf, may apply to the district judge within the limits of whose jurisdiction the industrial concern 
carries on the whole or a substantial part of its business for one or more of the following reliefs,               
namely:— 
(a) for an order for the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the  
3[Financial Corporation] as security for the loan or advance; or  
4[(aa) for enforcing the liability of any surety; or]  
(b) for transferring the management of the industrial concern to the Financial Corporation; or  
(c) for an ad interim injunction restraining the industrial concern from transferring or removing its 
machinery or plant or equipment from the premises of the industria l concern without the permission 
of the Board, where such removal is apprehended.  
(2) An application under sub-section ( 1) shall state the nature and extent of the liability of the 
industrial concern to the Financial Corporation, the ground on which it is made and such other particulars 
as may be prescribed.  
32. Procedure of district judge in respect of applications under section 31 .—(1) When the 
application is for the reliefs mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 31, the district 
judge shall pass an ad interim order attaching the security, or so much of the property of the industrial 
concern as would on being sold realise in his estimate an amount equivalent in value to the outstanding 
liability of the indus trial concern to the Financial Corporation, together with the costs of the proceedings 
taken under section 31, with or without an ad interim injunction restraining the industrial concern from 
transferring or removing its machinery, plant or equipment.  
5[(1A) When the application is for the relief mentioned in clause ( aa) of sub-section ( 1) of section 31, 
the district judge shall issue a notice calling upon the surety to show cause on a date to be specified in the 
notice why his liability should not be enfo rced.]  
(2) When the application is for the relief mentioned in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 31, the 
district judge shall grant an ad interim  injunction restraining the industrial concern from transferring or 
removing its machinery, plant or equ ipment and issue a notice calling upon the industrial concern to show 
cause, on a date to be specified in the notice, why the management of the industrial concern should not be 
transferred to the Financial Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 20 (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s . 15 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
3. Subs . by s. 15, ibid., for “Corporation ” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956) 
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s .  19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985). 
5. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  22 
 (3) Before passing any order under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) 1[, or issuing a notice under                
sub-section ( 1A),] the district judge may, if he thinks fit, examine the officer making the application.  
2[(4) At the same time as he passes an order under sub-section ( 1), the district judge shall issue to the 
industrial concern or to the owner of the security attached a notice accompanied by copies of the order, 
the application and the evidence, if any, recorded by him calling upon it or him to show cause on a date to 
be specified in the notice why the ad interim  order of attachment should not be made absolute or the 
injunction confirmed.  
(4A) If no cause is shown on or before the date specified in the notice under sub-section ( 1A) the 
district judge shall forthwith order  the enforcement of the liability of the surety.]  
(5) If no cause is shown on or before the date specified in the notice under sub-sections ( 2) and ( 4), 
the district Judge shall forthwith make the ad interim order absolute and direct the sale of the attach ed 
property or transfer the management of the indus trial concern to the Financial Corporation or confirm the 
injunction.  
(6) If cause is shown, the district judge shall proceed to investigate the claim of the Financial 
Corporation in accordance with the p rovisions contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) 
insofar as such provisions may be applied thereto.  
(7) After making an investigation under sub-section ( 6), the district judge may — 
(a) confirm  the order of attachment and direct the sale of the attached property;  
(b) vary the order of attachment so as to release a portion of the property from attachment and 
direct the sale of the remainder of the attached property;  
(c) release the property from attachment;  
(d) confirm or dissolve the injunction;  3***; 
1[(da) direct the enforcement of the liability of the surety or reject the claim made in this behalf; 
or] 
(e) transfer  the management of the industrial concern to the Financial Corporation or reject the 
claim made in this behalf:  
Provided that when making an order under clause ( c) 1[or making an order rejecting the claim to 
enforce the liability of the surety under clause  (da) or making an order rejecting the claim to transfer the 
management of the industrial concern to the Financial Corporation under clause ( e)], the district judge 
may make such further orders as he thinks necessary to protect the interests of the Financi al Corporation 
and may apportion the costs of the proceedings in such manner as he thinks fit:  
Provided further that unless the Financial Corporation intimates to the district judge that it will not 
appeal against any order releasing any property from atta chment  1[or rejecting the claim to enforce the 
liability of the surety or rejecting the claim to transfer the industrial concern to the Financial Corporation], 
such order shall not be given effect to, until the expiry of the period fixed under sub-section (9) within 
which an appeal may be preferred or, if an appeal is preferred, unless the High Court otherwise directs 
until the appeal is disposed of.  
(8) An order of attachment or sale of property under this section shall be carried into effect as far as 
practicable in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (5 of 1908) for the attachment or 
sale of property in execution of a decree as if the Financial Corporation were the decree -holder.  
4[(8A) An order under this section transferring the mana gement of an industrial concern to the 
Financial Corporation shall be carried into effect, as far as may be practicable, in the manner provided in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
3. The word “or” omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
4. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 16  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  23 
 the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the possession of immovable property or the delivery of 
movable property in execution of a degree, as if the Financial Corporation were the decree -holder.]  
(9) Any party aggrieved by an order  1[under sub-section ( 4A), sub-section ( 5)] or sub-section ( 7) may, 
within thirty days from the date of the order, appeal to  the High Court, and upon such appeal the High 
Court may, after hearing the parties, pass such orders thereon as it thinks proper.  
(10) Where proceedings for liquidation in respect of an industrial concern have commenced before an 
application is made under  sub-section ( 1) of section 31, nothing in this section shall be construed as 
giving to the Financial Corporation any preference over the other creditors of the industrial concern not 
conferred on it by any other law.  
2[(11) The functions of a district judge under thi s section shall be exercisable — 
(a) in a presidency town, where there is a city civil court having jurisdiction, by a judge of that 
court and in the absence of such court, by the High Court; and  
(b) elsewhere, also by an additional district judge  3[or by any judge of the principal court of civil 
jurisdiction].]  
3[(12) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that any court competent to grant an ad interim 
injunction under this section shall also have the power to appoint a Receiver and  to exercise all the other 
powers incidental thereto. ] 
4[32A. Power of Financial Corporation to appoint directors or administrators of an industrial 
concern when management is taken over .—(1) When the management of an industrial concern is taken 
over by the Financial Corporation, the Financial Corporation may, by order notified in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as many persons as it thinks fit,— 
(a) in any case in which the industrial concern is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) to be directors of that industrial concern; or  
(b) in any other case, to be administrators of that industrial concern.  
(2) The power to appoint directors or administrators under this section in cludes the power to appoint 
any individual, firm or company to be the managing agent or manager of the industrial concern on such 
terms and conditions as the Financial Corporation may think fit.]  
5[(3) Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or in a ny other law for the time being in force 
or in any instrument relating to the industrial concern shall, insofar as it makes in relation to a director, 
any provision for the holding of any share qualification, age limit, restriction on the number of 
directo rships, retirement by rotation or removal from office, apply to any director appointed by the 
Financial Corporation under this section.]  
32B. Effect of no tified order under section 32A. —On the issue of a not ified order under               
section 32A .— 
(a) in any case in which the industrial  concern is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) all  persons holding office as directors of the industrial concern and in any other  
case, all persons holding any office having the powers of superin tendence,  direct ion and control of the 
industrial concern, immediately before the issue of  the notified order, shall be deemed to have vacated 
their offices as such;  
(b) any contract of management between the  industrial concern and any managing agent or an y 
director or manager there  of holding office as such immediately before the issue of the notified order 
shall  be deemed to have terminated;  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 43 of 1985, s . 20, for “under sub -section ( 5)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
2. Subs . by Act 6 of 1962, s . 15 for sub -section ( 11) (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
3. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 21 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
4. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
5. Ins. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 16 (w.e.f. 16-4-1962).  24 
 (c) in the case of an industrial concern which  is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) the m anaging  agent, if any, appointed under section 32A shall be deemed to have 
been duly  appointed in pursuance of the said Act and the memorandum and articles of  association of 
the industrial concern and the provisions of the said Act and  the memorandum and articles shall, 
subject to the other provisions contained in  this Act, apply accordingly, but no such managing agent 
shall be removed from  office except with the previous consent of the Financial Corporation;  
(d) the directors or the administrators  appoint ed under section 32A shall take such steps as may 
be necessary to take  into their custody or under their control all the property, effects and actionable  
claims to which the industrial concern is, or appears to be, entitled, and all  the property and effect s of 
the industrial concern shall be deemed to be in the  custody of the directors or administrators, as the 
case may be, as from the  date of the notified order;  
(e) the directors appointed under section 32A  shall, for all purposes, be the directors of the 
industrial concern duly  constituted under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and such directors, or 
as the case may be, the administrators appointed under section 32A, shall alone be  entitled to exercise 
all the powers of the directors or as the case may be, of  the persons exercising powers of 
superintendence, direction and control, of the  industrial concern, whether such powers are derived 
from the said Act or from  the memorandum or articles of association of the industrial concern or from 
any other sourc e whatsoever.]  
32C. Powers and duties of directors and administrators .—(1) Subject to the control of the 
Financial Corporation, the directors, or as the case may be, the administrators appointed under section 
32A, shall take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently managing the business of the 
industrial concern and shall exercise such powers and have such duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers vested in them under sub-section ( 1), the 
directo rs or as the case may be, the administrators appointed under section 32A, may, with the previous 
approval of the Financial Corporation, make an application to a court for the purpose of cancelling or 
varying any contract or agreement entered into any time before the issue of the notified order under 
section 32A, between the industrial concern and any other person and the court may, if satisfied after due 
inquiry that such contract or agreement had been entered into in bad faith and is detrimental to the 
interests of the industrial concern, make an order cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject 
to such conditions as it may think fit to impose) that contract or agreement and the contract or agreement  
shall have effect accordingly.  
32D. No right  to compensation for termination of contract of managing agent, managing 
director, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any contract or in any law for 
the time being in force, no managing agent, managing director or any other dire ctor or a manager or any 
person in charge of management of an industrial concern shall be entitled to any compensation for the 
loss of office or for the premature termination under this Act of any contract of management entered into 
by him with such concer n. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall affect the right of any such managing agent or 
managing director, or any other director or manager or any such person in charge of management to 
recover from the industrial concern, moneys recoverable other wise th an by way of such compensation.  
32E. Applicatio n of Act 1 of 1956. —(1) Where the management of an industrial concern, being a 
company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), is taken over by the Financial Corporation, 
then, notwithstandin g anything contained in the said Act or in the memorandum or articles o f association 
of such concern, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such concern or any other person to nominate or 
appoint any person to be a director of the concern;  
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such concern shall be given effect 
to unless approved by the Financial Corporation;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such concern or for the appointment of receiver in respect 
thereof shal l lie in any court, except with the consent of the Financial Corporation.  25 
 (2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1) and to the other provisions contained in this 
Act and subject to such other exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if an y, as the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall continue to apply to such concern in the same manner as it 
applied theret o before the issue of the notified order under section 32A.  
32F. Restriction on filing of suite for dissolution, etc., of an industrial concern not being a 
company when its management is taken over .—(1) Where the management of an industrial concern 
not being a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) is taken over by the Financial 
Corporation, no suit or proceedings for dissolution or for partition shall, insofar as it relates to that 
industrial concern, lie in any court or before any tr ibunal or other authority except with the consent of the 
Financial Corporation.  
(2) No proceeding for the appointment of any official assignee or receiver in relation to any industrial 
concern the management of which has been taken over by the Financial Co rporation shall lie in any court 
except with consent of the Financial Corporation.]  
1[32G. Recovery of amounts due to the Financial Corporation as an arrear of land              
revenue .—Where any amount is due to the Financial Corporation in respect of an y accommodation 
granted by it to any industrial concern, the Financial Corporation or any person authorised by it in writing 
in this behalf, may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the State 
Government for the recovery of the amount due to it, and if the State Government or such authority, as 
that Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied, after following such procedure as may be 
prescribed, that any amount is so due, it may issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector, and the 
Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.]  
CHAPTER IV 
INVESTMENT OF FUNDS, ACCONTS AND AUDIT  
33. Funds of the Financial Corporation .—(1) Every Financial Corporation shall have its own fund, 
and all receipts of the Financial Corporation shall be carried thereto and all payments by the Corporation 
shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank   2[or the State Bank of 
India or a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959                 
(38 of 1959)]  3[or in any of the banks specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and  Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970)   1[or any of the banks 
specified in column 2 of the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 
Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980)]  4[or, in consultation with the Reserve Bank,  in a scheduled bank or 
a State   Co-operative Bank].  
5[34. Investment of funds .—The Financial Corporation may invest its funds in accordance with 
applicable guidelines and prudential norms as may be prescribed and in such securities as the Boar d may 
decide from time to time.]  
35. Disposal of profits .—(1) The Financial Corporation shall establish a reserve fund.  
(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of assets and all other matters 
which are usually provided for by banking companies, the Financial Corporation may out of its net annual 
profits declare a dividend:  
6*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s. 21 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
2. Subs . by Act 6 of 1962, s . 17, for “or with any agency of the Reserve Bank other than a Government treasury ”                     
(w.e.f. 16 -4-1962) . 
3.  Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 22 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
4. Subs . by Act 56 of 1956, s . 18, for “or in a scheduled bank in consultation with the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
5. Subs . by Act 39 of 2000, s . 21, for section 34 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
6. The proviso omitted by s. 22 , ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  26 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
2[35A. Special reserve fund .—(1) the Financial Corporation may establish a special reserve fund, to 
which shall be transferred such portion of the dividends accruing to the State Government Development 
Bank and the Small Industries Bank on the shares of the Financial Corporation as may be fixed by 
agreement between the State Government, Development Bank and the Small Industries Ba nk: 
Provided that after the notified date this sub -section shall have effect as if for the words “the State 
Government, the Development Bank and the Small Industries Bank ”, the words “the State Government 
and the Small Industries Bank ” have been substitute d except as regards all dividends accruing in respect 
of any completed accounting period prior to the notified date.  
(2) No shareholder of the Financial Corporation, other than the State Government or the Small 
Industries Bank, shall have any claim to the special reserve fund.  
(3) The amount standing to the credit of the special reserve fund may be utilised by the Financial 
Corporation for only such purposes as are approved by the State Government and the Small Industries 
Bank.]  
36. General meetings .—(1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as the annual general meeting) 
shall be held annually at a place in the State where there is an office of the Financial Corporation within  
3[four months] from the date on which the annual accounts of the Financial C orporation are closed, and a 
general meeting may be convened by the Board at any other time.  
4[(2) The shareholders present at the annual general meeting shall be  entitled to discuss and adopt — 
(a) the balance -sheet and profit and loss account of the Finan cial Corporation made up to the date 
on which its accounts are closed and balanced;  
(b) the report of working of the Financial Corporation for the period covered by the accounts;  
(c) the auditor ’s report on the balance -sheet and accounts; and  
(d) proposals  for declaration of dividend and capitalisation of reserves.  
(3) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting may also discuss any other matter to be 
transacted at such meetings in accordance with the provisions of this Act.]  
37. Audit .—5[(1) The accounts of the Financial Corporation shall be audited by auditors duly 
qualified to act as the auditors under sub-section ( 1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956                 
(1 of 1956), who shall be appointed by the Financial Corporation in general meeting of shareholders out 
of the panel of auditors approved by the Reserve Bank of India for such terms and on such remuneration 
as the Reserve Bank may fix.]  
(2) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance -sheet of the F inancial 
Corporation, and it shall be his duty to examine it, together with the accounts and vouchers relating 
thereto, and every auditor shall have a list delivered to him of all books kept by the Financial Corporation 
and shall at all reasonable times ha ve access to the books, accounts and other documents of the Financial 
Corporation and may in relation to such accounts examine any director or officer of the Financial 
Corporation.  
(3) The auditors shall make a report to the shareholders upon the annual ba lance -sheet and accounts, 
and in every such report they shall state whether in their opinion  the balance -sheet is a full and fair 
balance -sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and 
correct view of the state of affairs of the Financial Corporation, and in case they had called for any 
explanation or  information from the Board, whether it has been given and whether it is satisfactory.  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 39 of 2000, s. 22 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2. Subs . by s. 23, ibid., for section 35A  (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Subs . by Act 43 of 1985, s . 24, for “three months ” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
4. Subs.  by Act 39 of 2000, s. 24, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Subs.  by s. 25, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  27 
 (4) The State Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, at 
any time issue directions to the auditors requiring them to report to  it upon the adequacy of measures 
taken by the Financial Corporation for the protection of its shareholders and creditors or upon the 
sufficiency of their procedure in auditing the affairs of the Financial Corporation and may enlarge or 
extend the scope of  the audit or direct that a different procedure in audit be adopted, or direct that any 
other examination be made by the auditors, if in its opinion public interest so requires.  
(5) The Financial Corporation shall send a copy of every report of the auditor s to the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India at least one month before it is placed before the shareholders.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub -sections, the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India may, either of his own moti on or on a request received in this behalf from a State 
Government, undertake such audit and at such times as he may consider necessary:  
1*   *  *   *    * 
(7) Every audit report under sub-section ( 6) shall be forwarded to the State Government and the 
Government shall cause the same to be laid before the Legislature of the State.  
37A. Inspection .—(1) The  2[Small Industries Bank] at any time may, with the approval of the 
Central Government, and on being directed so to do by that Government shall cause an  inspection to be 
made by one or more of its officers of the working of any Financial Corporation and its books and 
accounts; and the  2[Small Industries Bank] shall send the report of such inspection to the Central 
Government and to the State Government and shall supply a copy thereof to the Financial Corporation.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or every officer of the Financial Corporation to produce to 
any officer making an inspection under sub-section (1) all such books, accounts and other documents in 
his custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and information relating to the affairs of the 
Financial Corporation as the said officer may require of him within such time as the said officer may 
specify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any other 
law for the time being in force, no court, tribunal or other authority shall have power to require 
the 2[Small Industries Bank] or any of its officers to produce before such court, t ribunal or other authority 
the report of the inspection made by it under sub-section ( 1) or any copy thereof.  
(4) The State Government may, after considering any report sent to it under sub-section ( 1), give such 
instructions to the Board as it considers n ecessary and it shall be the duty of the Board to comply with 
such instructions.]  
38. Returns .—3[(1) The Financial Corporation shall furnish to the State Government, the  4[Small 
Industries Bank] and the Reserve Bank such statements and returns in such form  as the State Government, 
the 4[Small Industries Bank] or the Reserve Bank may require from time to time.]  
(2) The Financial Corporation shall furnish   5[to the State Government, the  4[Small Industries Bank] 
and the Reserve Bank] within  6[four months] of the close of each financial year a statement in the 
prescrib ed form of its assets and liabilities as at the close of that year, together with a profit and loss 
account for the year, the auditors ’ report and a report of the working of the Financial Corporation during 
the year and copies of the said statement, accoun t and reports shall be published in the Official Gazette 
and shall also be laid before the Legislature of the State.  
  
                                                           
1. The proviso omitted by Act 39 of 2000, s. 2 5 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
2.  Subs. by s. 2 6, ibid., for “Development Bank” (w.e.f.  5-9-2000).  
3. Subs . by Act 43 of 1985, s . 25, for sub -sections ( 1) and (2) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
4. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 27, for “Development Bank”  (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Subs . by Act 52 of 1975, s . 38, for “to the State Government and to the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  
6. Subs . by Act 56 of 1956, s . 22, for “three months ” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  28 
 CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
39. Power to give instructions to Financial Corporation on questions of policy .—(1) In the 
discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided  by such instructions on questions of policy as may be 
given to it by the State  Government  1[in consultation with  2[and after obtaining  the advice of,] the  3[Small 
Industries Bank]].  
(2) If any dispute arises between the  State  Government and the Board as to whether a question is or is 
not a question of  policy, the decision of the State Government shall be final.  
4[(2A) Nothing  contained in sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2) shall apply in a case where a  State 
Government holds less than fifty -one per cent . of the equity shares in  the Financial Corporation.  
(2B) Notwithstanding the equity share holding  of a Financial Corporation by a State Government, the 
State Government may  advise the Financial Corporations on the matters  of policy.]  
(3) If the Board  fails to carry out the instructions on the question of policy laid down by the  State 
Government  5[under sub-section ( 1) of this section or the  instructions given to the Board under                  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3 7A], the  State Government shall have the power to supersede the Board and 
appoint a new  Board in its place to function until a properly constituted Board is set up,  and the decision 
of the State Government as to the grounds for superseding the  Board shall not be questioned in any court.  
40. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy .—6[(1) The Financial Corporation shall not, except as 
otherwise required by this Act or any other law for the time being in force, divulge any information 
relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with 
the law or practice and usage, customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Financial 
Corporation to divulge such information.  
(2) The Financial Corporation may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act, collect from, or furnish to — 
(a) the Central Government;  
(b) the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955             
(23 of 1955), any subsidiary bank within the meaning of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) 
Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), any corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) , or under section 3 of 
the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980) , any 
other scheduled bank, any  7[State Co -operative Bank, the Small Industries Bank or the Development 
Bank],  
such credit information  or other information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in such manner and 
at such time as it may think fit,  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “credit information ” shall have the 
same meaning as in clause (c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) , subject 
to the modification that the banking company referred to therein shall mean a bank referred to in             
clause ( b) of this sub -section.]  
8[(3)] Every  director, auditor, officer or other employee of the Financial Corporation shall, before 
entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 23 (w.e.f.1 -10-1956).  
2. Inserted by Act 77 of 1972, s. 26 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 28, for “Develo pment Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
4. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 23, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
6. Ins. by Act 48 of 1983, s. 6  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1983).  
7. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 29, for “State co -operati ve Bank or the Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
8. Section 40 re -numbered as sub -section ( 3) thereof by Act 48 of 1983, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1983).  29 
 1[(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the cr edit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005  (30 of 2005) .] 
41. Indemnity of directors .—(1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Financial Corporation 
against all losses and expenses incurred by him in the discharge of his duties except such as are caused by 
his own wilful act or default.  
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any ot her director or for any officer or other employee of 
the Financial Corporation or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Financial Corporation by the 
insufficiency or deficiency of value of or title to any property or security acquired or taken on behal f of 
the Financial Corporation or by  the wrongful act of any person under obligation to the Financial 
Corporation or by  anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto.  
2[41A. Protection of action taken by persons appointed under section 27 or section 32A .—No 
suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person appointed as director, 
administrator, managing agent or manager by the Financial Corporation i n pursuance of Section 27 or 
section 32A for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done by him as such director, 
administrator, managing agent or manager .] 
3[41B. Nomination in respect of deposits, bonds, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force, where a nomination in respect of any deposits, bonds or other 
securities is made in the prescribed manner, the amount due on such deposits, bonds or securities shall, on 
the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest in, and be payable to, the nominee subject to any right, 
title or interest of any other person to such deposits, bonds or securities.  
(2) Any payment by the Financial Corporation in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) 
shall constitute a full discharge to the Financial Corporation o f its liability in respect of such deposits, 
bonds or securities.]  
42. Offences .—(1) Whoever, in any bill of lading, warehouse receipt or other document given to the 
Financial Corporation, whereby security is given or is purported to be given to the Financial Corporation 
for any accommodation granted by it under this Act, wilfully makes any false statement or knowingly 
permits any false statement to be made shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever, without the consent in writing of the Financial Corporation, uses the name of the 
Financial Corporation in any prospectus or advertisement shall be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act otherwise than on a 
complaint in writing signed by an officer of the Financial Corporation authorised by the Board in this 
behalf.  
43. Provisions relating to income -tax and super -tax.—For the purposes of the  4[Income -tax Act, 
1961(43 of 1961)], the Financial Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of that 
Act and shall be liable to income -tax and super -tax accordingly on its income, profits and gains:  
Provided that any sum paid by the State Government under the guarantee given in pursuance 
of 5*** 6[section 7 or section 8] shall not be treated as the income, profits and gains of the Financial 
Corporation and any interest on debentures,  7[bonds or deposits] paid by the Financial Corporation out of 
such sum shall not be treated as expenditure incurred by it:  
                                                           
1. Ins. Act 30 of  2005 , s. 34 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -12-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1962, s . 21 (w.e.f . 16-4-1962).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 30 (w.e.f . 5-9-2000).  
4. Subs . by Act 43 of 1985, s . 26, for “Indian Income -tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922) ” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
5. The words and figure “section 6 or” omitted by  Act 39 of 2000,  s. 31 (w.e.f. 5-9-2000).  
6. Subs. by Act 6 of 1962, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
7. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “or bonds” (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  30 
 Provided further that in the case of any shareholder such portion of a dividend as has been paid out of 
any such sum advanced by the State Government shall be deemed to be  1[his] income from “interest on 
securities ” 2[and the income -tax shall be payable thereon as if it were the interest receivable on any 
security of a State Government issued income -tax free] within the meaning of section 8 of that Act.  
3[43A. Delegation of powers .—The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
managing director or to any other officer of the Financial Corporation  4[or to any committee appointed 
under section 21] subject to such conditions and limita tions, if any, as may be specified in the order such 
of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary.]  
4[43B. Reports to the Board .—(1) The minutes of every meeting of the committee appointed under 
Section 21 shall, after confirmation thereof at the next  meeting of the committee, be laid before the Board 
at the next following meeting of the Board.  
5*   *   *   *   *.] 
44. Act 18 of 1891 to apply to the books of the Financial Corporation .—The Financial 
Corporation shall be deemed to be a bank for the purposes of the Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891                 
(18 of 1891).  
45. Liquidation of Financial Corporation .—No provision of law relating to the winding up of 
companies or corporations shall apply to the Financial Corporation, and the Financial Corporation shall 
not be placed in liquidation, save by order of the State Government and in such manner as it may direct.  
46. Power to apply Act to certain financial institutions in existence at commencement of              
Act.—(1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the 
provisions of this Act shall, subject to such exceptions and restrictions as may be specified, apply to  6[any 
institution established by a State Government] which has for its object the financing of industrial 
concerns, and on the issue of such notification, the institution shall be deemed to be a Financial 
Corporation established by the State Government for the State within the meaning of this Act, and the 
provisions of this Act shall become applicable thereto according to the tenor of the notification:  
7[Provided that no notification shall be issued under this sub -section in respect of any institution 
unless  a request is made in that behalf by the State Government concerned.]  
(2) Any notification issued under sub-section ( 1) may suspend the operation of any enactment 
applicable to any such institution immediately before the issue of the notification.  
8[46A. E xtension of jurisdiction of the Financial Corporation to other States by             
agreement .—(1) Where a Financial Corporation has been established for any State  9[and one or more 
other States not served in whole or in part by a Financial Corporation] desires that the Financial 
Corporation  10[should serve the needs of those States or of any area therein], and the States, after 
consultation with the  11[Small Industries Bank], enter into an agreement which is published in the Official 
Gazettes of each of th ose States, then the Financial Corporation shall, on the issue of a notification in the 
Official Gazette by the Central Government, serve the needs of those States  12[or, as the case may be, of 
the area therein] in terms of the agreement  12[and any Financial Corpora tion or any State may enter into 
separate or successive agreements as aforesaid with one another or with other Financial Corporations of 
States and in relation to different areas of the States].  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 48 of 1952, s . 3 and second Schedule , for “its” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1952).  
2. Subs . by Act 6 of 1962, s . 22, for “Declared to be income -tax free ” (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
3. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -4-1962).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1985, s.  27 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
5. Omitted by Act 39 of 2000, s . 32 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
6. Subs . by Act 43 of 1985, s . 29, for “Any institution in existence at the commencement of this Act ” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
7. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
8. Ins. by Act 56 of 1956, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
9. Subs. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 27, for “and any other State” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
10. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “ should serve its needs”  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1972).  
11. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 33, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
12. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s. 27 (30 -12-1972).  31 
 1[(1A) Any agreement entered into under sub-section ( 1) may be modified or rescinded by mutual 
agreement between the parties thereto and every such mutual agreement shall also provide for the 
apportionment of assets and liabilities.]  
(2) An inter -State agreement among the participating States may, as far as may be, make all such 
provisions as are referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 3A.  
46B. Effect of Act on other laws .—The provision of this Act and of any  rule or orders made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law 
for the time being in force or in the memorandum or articles of association of an industrial concern or in 
any other instrument hav ing effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, but save as aforesaid, the 
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being 
applicable to an industrial concern.]  
47. [Power of Board to make reg ulations .] Omitted by the State Financial Corporations  (Amendment ) 
Act, 2000 (39 of 2000), s. 34 (w.e.f . 5-9-2000).  
48. Power of Board to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, after consultation with the  2[Small 
Industries Bank] and with the previous sanction of the State Government, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act, including the final decision on doubts or 
disputes regarding the validity of elections;  
(b) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, the first allotment of the shares of 
the Financial Corporation shall be made;  
(c) the  manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, the shares of the Financial 
Corporation may be held and transferred and generally all matters relating to the rights and duties of 
shareholders;  
3[(ca) the maintenance of register of shareholders, part iculars to be entered in such register, the 
safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of register of shareholders on computer floppies or 
diskettes, compact disk or any other electronic form the inspection and closure of the register of 
shareholders and  all other matters connected therewith under section 6;  
(cb) the manner of nomination of directors under clause ( d) of section 10;  
(cc) the entrusting or delegation of duties to the managing director by the Board under clause ( c) 
of sub-section ( 1) of section 17;  
(cd) the functions of Executive Committee under sub-section ( 2) of section 18;  
(ce) the guidelines and prudential norms in accordance with which investment may be made 
under section 34;  
(cf) the manner in which nomination may be made under section 4IB; and  
(cg) the investments (whether by way of deposits in bank or otherwise) of the amounts which are 
not for the time being required for transaction of business;]  
(d) the manner in which general meetings shall be convened, the procedure to be followed thereat 
and the manner in which voting rights may be exercised;  
(e) the calling of meetings of the Board, and of the Executive Committee, fees for attending 
meetings thereof and the conduct of business thereat;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 77 of 1972, s . 27 (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 35, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
3. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  32 
 (f) the manner and terms of issue and repayme nt of bonds and debentures by the Financial 
Corporation;  
(g) the conditions which the Financial Corporation may impose in granting loans or advances;  
1*   *  *   *   * 
(i) the forms of returns and statements required under this Act;  
(j) the duties and cond uct of officers, other employees, advisers and agents of the Financial 
Corporation;  
(k) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other benefit funds for employees of the 
Financial Corporation;  
(l) the taking over of the management of any industria l concern on a breach of its agreement with 
the Financial Corporation;  
(m) the appointment of  2[committees] for the purposes of this Act,  3[fees for attending meetings 
thereof and the conduct of business thereat]; and  
(n) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Financial Corporation.  
4[(o) the form and manner in which the balance -sheet and the accounts of the Financial 
Corporation shall be prepared;  
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
5[(3) All regulations made under  this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and any such 
regulation shall have effect from such earlier or later date as may be specified in the regulations.]  
6[48A. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature . —7*** and every regulation 
made under section 48 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.]  
8[48B. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying ou t the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may 
provide for the procedure for filing and hearing of appeals under sub-section ( 5) of section 5.  
(3) Every rule made under this Ac t shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the se ssion immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form o r be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
49. Power to remove difficulty .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, as amended by the Public Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (52 of 1975), the 
Central Government may, by order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions, for the purpose of 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three years from the 
commencement of the said Amendment Act.]  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 43 of 1985, s . 30 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985).  
2. Subs . by s. 30, ibid., for “advisory committees for technical and other advice ” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1985)  
3. Ins. by act 56 of 1956, s . 25 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1956).  
4. Ins. by Act 39 of 2000, s. 35 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
5. Subs . by Act 77 of 1972, s . 28, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30-12-1972).  
6. Ins. by Act 4  of 1986, s . 2 and Sch edule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
7. The words “Every  rule made under section 47 and” omitted by Act 39 of 2000, s . 36 (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  
8. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -9-2000).  33 
 THE SCHEDULE  
1[See section 40  (3)] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I, .............................................................................. do hereby declare that I will faithfully, trul y and 
to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of me as a director, officer, 
employee or auditor  (as the case may be) of the Financial Corporation and which properly relate to any 
office or position in the said Financial Corporation held by me.  
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitle d thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Financial Corporation, nor will I allow any 
such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the 
Financial Corporation and relating to the business  of the Financial Corporation.  
 
Signature . 
 
Signed before me : 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1983, s. 6, for “( See section 40)” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1983).  
--------------------------The Visva-Bharati Act, 1951--------------------------
1 
 THE VISVA -BHARATI ACT, 1951  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Visva -Bharati as an institution of national importance . 
3. Definitions . 
THE UNIVERSITY  
4. Incorporation . 
5. Effect of incorporation of the University in certain cases . 
5A.The objects of the University . 
5B. Principles to be followed in organising activities of the University . 
6. Powers of the Unive rsity.  
7. Territorial jurisdiction of the University . 
7A. Maintenance of examination centres outside territorial limits . 
8. University to be open to all races, creeds and classes . 
9. Teaching at the University . 
THE PARIDARSAKA  (VISITOR ) 
10. The Paridarsaka (Visitor) . 
THE PRADHANA  (RECTOR ) 
11. The Pradhana (Rector) . 
OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY  
12. Officers of the University . 
13. The Acharya (Chancellor) . 
14. The Upacharya (Vice -Chancellor) . 
15. [Omitted .] 
16. The Karma -Sachiva (Registrar) . 
17. Other officers . 
AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
18. Authorities of the University . 
19. The Samsad  (Court) . 
22. The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council).  
24. The Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council).  
25. Other authorities of the University . 
26. Alumni Association . 
STATUTES , ORDINANCES  AND REGULATIONS  
27. Statutes . 
28. Statutes, how made . 2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Matters to be provided for in the Ordinances . 
30. Power  to make Ordinances . 
31. Regulations . 
32. Residence . 
ADMISSIOIN AND EXAMINATIONS  
33. Admission . 
34. Examinations . 
ANNUAL  REPORT S AND ACCOUNTS  
35. Annual report . 
36. Annual Accounts . 
SUPPLEMENTARY  PROVISIONS  
37. Adhyapakas of the University to be appointed under a written contract . 
38. Tribunal of Arbitration . 
38A. Power to suspend adhyapaka or other member of academic staff . 
38B. Authorities by whom order for removal or dismissal or adhyapaka , etc., may be made and the 
procedure therefor . 
39. Pension and provident funds . 
40. Filling of casual vacancies . 
41. Removal from membership of the University . 
42. Disputes as to constitution of any University authority or body . 
43. Constitution of committees . 
44. Proceedings of the University authorities not invalidated by vacancies . 
44A. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
44B. Mode of proof of University record . 
45. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. [ Repealed ]. 
THE SECOND SCHE DULE.  
 
  3 
 THE VISVA -BHARATI ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1951  
[9th May , 1951.]  
An Act to declare the institution known as “Visva -Bharati ” to be an institution of national 
importance and to provide for its functioning as a unitary teach ing and residential university.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be call ed the Visva -Bharati Act, 1951.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Visva -Bharati as an inst itution of national importance .—Whereas the late 
Rabindranath Tagore (Thakur) founded an institution known as Visva -Bharati at Santiniketan in the 
district of Birbhum in West Bengal the objects of which are such as to make the institution one of national 
importance, it is hereby declared  that the institution known as “Visva -Bharati ” aforesaid is an insti tution 
of national importance 2[and is as such hereb y constituted as a University].  
3[3. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless th e context otherwise 
requires ,— 
(a) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
statutes;  
(b) “Acharya (Chancellor) ” and “Upacharya (Vice - Chancellor) ” mean, respectively, the Acharya  
(Chancellor) and the Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) of the University;  
(c) “adhyapaka ” includes a Professor, Reader, Lecturer and any other person engaged in 
imparting instruction in relation to any learning process and designated as an adhyapaka  by the 
Ordinances;  
(d) “Alumni Association ” means the Associatio n of the Alumni of the University, constituted 
under the provision s of this Act and the Statutes;  
(e) “approved institution ” means an institution (not being an institution maintained by the 
University) of higher learning or stud ies approved by the University;  
(f) “Bhavana ” means an academic institution maintained by the University and named as such;  
(g) “campus ” means a unit established or constituted by the University for imparting instruction 
or supervising research, or both;  
(h) “Chatravaso ” mean s a unit of residence, or of corporate life, for the students of the University 
provided, maintained o r recognised by the University;  
(i) “Department ” means a Department of Studies and includes a centre of studies establis hed by, 
or under, the Statutes;  
(j) “employee of the University ” means any person appointed by the University or any Institution, 
and inc ludes an employee of a Bhavana;  
(k) “Institute Board ” means a Board constituted by the University for the management of an 
Institute;  
(l) “Institution ” means an institution maintained by  the University;  
                                                           
1. 14th May, 1951, vide Notification No. F. 40 -5/50-G, 3 dated the  10th May, 1951, Gazette of India, 1951, Part I. sec. 1.  
2. Ins. by Act 60 of 1961, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  4 
 (m) “Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) ” means the Karma -Samiti  (Execut ive Council) of the 
University;  
(n) “Patha -Samiti  (Board of Studies) ” means a Board constituted by the University  for the 
regulation of  studies;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by the Statu tes, Ordinances or Regulations;  
(p) “Samsad  (Court) ” means the Samsad (Court) of the University;  
(q) “Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) ” means the Siksha -Samiti  (Acade mic c ouncil) of the 
University;  
(r) “Statutes ”, “Ordinances ” and “Regulations ” mean, respectively, such Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations of the University as a re for the time being in force;  
(s) “University ” means the institution known as Visva - Bharati and incorporated a s a University  
under this Act.]  
THE UNIVERSITY  
4. Incorporation .—The first Acharya (Chancellor) and Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) of the 
University who shall be the persons appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette, and the first members of the Samsad  (Court) and all persons, who may hereafter 
become or be appointed as such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or 
membership, are hereby  constituted a body corporate 1[as a unitary, teaching and residential University] 
by the name of Visva -Bharati, and shall have perpetual succession and a co mmon seal, and shal l sue and 
be sued by that name.  
5. Effect of incorporation of t he University in certain cases .—On and from the commencement of 
this Act, — 
(i) all references in any enactment to the Society of the name of Visva -Bharati  registered on the 
16th May, 1922, under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), shall be construed a s 
references to the University;  
2[(ii) all property, assets, rights and liabilities of the said Society shall be the property, assets, 
rights an d liabilities of the University and any will, deed or other document, whether made or 
executed before or after the commencement of this Act, which contains or purports to contain any 
bequest, gift, trust, payment of money or transfer or assignment of any r ight or property, movable or 
immovable, in favour of the said Society shall be construed as if the University was therein named 
instead of the said Socie ty;] 
(iii) subject to the provisions of this Act, every person employed immediately before the 
commence ment of this Act in the said Society shall hold employment in the University by the same 
tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension 
and gratuity as he would have held under the said Society, i f this Act had not been passed:  
Provided that if the University decides to alter the terms and conditions of service of any such 
employee, a fresh contract shall be executed for the purpose, and if the employee is not agreeable to serve 
under the new terms and co nditions, his services may be terminated in accordance with his original 
contract of employment or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by way of 
compensation of an amount equa l to his salary for six months.  
3[5A. The objects of the University .—(1) The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and 
advance knowledge and understanding by providing instructional, extension and research facilities and by 
the example and influence of its corporate life, and the University shall, in organising its activities, have 
due regard to the following objects for which the Visva -Bharati at Santiniketan was founded by 
Rabindranath Tagore, as expre ssed in his own words, namely: — 
(i) to study the mind of Man in its realisation  of different aspects of tru th from diverse points of view;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 0 of 1961, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  5 
 (ii) to bring into more intimate relations with one another, through patient study and research, the 
different cultures of the East on the b asis of their underlying unity;  
(iii) to approach the We st from the standpoint of such a unity o f the life and thought of Asia;  
(iv) to seek to realise in a common fellowship of study the meeting of the East and the West, and 
thus ultimately to strengthen the fundamental conditions of world peace through the es tablishment of 
free communication of ideas b etween the two hemispheres; and  
(v) with such ideals in view to provide at Santiniketan aforesaid a Centre of Culture where 
research into and study of the religion, literature, history, science and art of Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, 
Islamic, Sikh, Christian and other civilisations may be pursued along with the culture of the West, 
with that simplicity in externals which is necessary for true spiritual realisation in amity, good 
fellowship and co -operation between the t hinkers and scholars of both Eastern and Western countries, 
free from all antagonisms of race, nationality, creed or caste and in the name of the One Supreme 
Being wh o is Shantam, Shivam, Advaitam . 
(2) The objects of the University shall also include harmonising the cultures of India, the East and the 
West by, among other things, the admission of students and appointment of adhyapakas from various 
regions of India and various countries of the world, and by  providing incentives therefor.  
5B. Principles to be followed in organisin g activities of the University .—The University shall, in 
organising its activities and the implementation of its academic programmes, have due regard to the 
pattern of education envisaged by Rabindranath Tagore in his writings. ] 
1[6. Powers of the Universit y.—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(1) to provide facilities for studies, instruction, socially useful productive work and community 
service and research in such branches of learning as may be deemed des irable and found practicable 
by the University and for the promotion of understanding of cultures between the East and the West 
and for the advancement of learning and dissem ination of knowledge generally;  
(2) to undertake educational experiments and evolve contents, systems and methods of education 
for the furtherance of  the objects of the University;  
(3) to make provision for research and advisory services; and for that purpose, to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies as the  University may deem necessary;  
(4) to co -operate, collaborate or associate with any other University, authori ty or institution of 
learning in such manner and for such purposes a s the University may determine;  
(5) to approve any institution of higher learning or studies for such purposes as the University 
may determine,  and to withdraw such approval;  
(6) to establ ish and maintain such Bhavanas , Schools of Studies and Research, Chatravasas, 
Gymnasia  and such other institutions as are deemed necessary, from time to time, for the 
development of a healthy corporate life in the University and to abolish any such Bhavana , School, 
Chatravasa , Gymnasium or other institution;  
(7) to establish, at any place in India, campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories or other 
units for research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furth erance 
of its objects;  
(8) to organise the application of class room, library and laboratory learning to problems of the 
villages as part of the curriculum;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 5, for section 6 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  6 
 (9) to undertake the promotio n of adult education, rural re -construction, co -operative 
organisation s, social welfare, development of cottage industries and all other nation -building 
activities and works  for the benefit of the public;  
(10) to establish such examination centres and to recognise such certificates as may be necessary 
to give effect t o the provisions of section 7A;  
(11) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions (on the basis of examinations, evaluation or 
other  modes of testing) on, per sons;  
(12) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(13) to determine the standards for admission and the methods of admission to courses of the 
University, which methods shall include examinations, evaluat ion and other modes of testing;  
(14) to supervise the residences of students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(15) to make such special arrangements in respect of women students as the Uni versity ma y 
consider desirable;  
(16) to regulate the conduct of students of the University, and to take such disciplinary measures 
in this reg ard as may be deemed necessary;  
(17) to create such teaching and other academic posts as may be required by the University a nd to  
appoint persons to such posts;  
(18) to appoint Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Fellows, Scholars, Resident Artists, 
Resident Writers or such other persons who may contribute to the achievement of  the objects of the 
University;  
(19) to appoi nt or recognise persons as Professors, Readers or Lecturers or otherwise a s 
adhyapakas  of the University;  
(20) to approve persons working in — 
(a) any institution co -operating, collaborating or asso ciating with the University; or  
(b) any  approved institution,  
for imparting instruction or supervising research, or both,  and to withdraw such approval;  
(21) to undertake publication of literary, scientific, educational and scholarly works and books on 
art, aesthetics and other subjects aimed at better understanding of the different cultures of the world 
and furthering thereby th e objectives of the University;  
(22) to appoint persons working in any other University, institution or organisation as adhyapakas  
of the Uni versity for a specified per iod; 
(23) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts in the University an d to make 
appointments thereto;  
(24) to provide for the terms and conditions of service of employees, whether employed by the  
University or any institution;  
(25) to regulat e the conduct and duties of t he employees of the University;  
(26) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees of the University and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may  be deemed necessary;  
(27) to make arrangements for promo ting the health and general welfare of t he employees of the 
University;  
(28) to demand and receive pay ment of fees and other charges;  
(29) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentshi ps, medals and prizes;  7 
 (30) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts, and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the purposes of the 
University;  
(31) to borrow, with the approval of the Central G overnment, whether on the security of the 
property of the University or otherwise, money for the purposes of the University;  
(32) to establish campuses within the territorial limits of the University specified in the Second 
Schedu le; 
(33) to admit students  of any other University or College whether in India or outside to any 
examination of the University subject to such conditions as the Universit y may lay down for the 
purpose;  
(34) to do all such acts and things as may be necessary or incidental to the exe rcise of all or any 
of the powers of the University or as are necessary or conducive to the attainment of all or any of the 
objects of the University. ] 
7. Territorial jurisdiction of the University .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the powers of 
the University conferred by or under this Act shall be restricted to the area sp ecified in the Second 
Schedule.  
1[7A. Maintenance of examination cent res outside territorial limits .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 7, the University may establish and maintain, at any place in India examination 
centres for home study courses conducted by its Loka Shiksha Samsad (People ’s Education Council) and 
recognise, for such purposes as may be provided in the Ordinances, the certificates awarded by the said 
Loka Shiksha Samsad (People's Education Council) on the results of  examinations conducted by it.]  
8. University to be open to  all races, creeds and classes .—The University shall be open to all 
persons irrespective of sex, nationality, race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be 
imposed as to religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, 2[adhyapakas] , 
workers, or in any other connecti on whatsoever, except in respect of any particular benefaction accepted 
by the University of which such test is made a condition by the instrument creating such benefaction:  
Provided that no benefaction shall hereafter be accepted which in the opinion of the authorities of the 
University involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spi rit and object of this section:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent religious instruction being 
given in any manner approved of by t he authorities concerned to those who have g iven their consent 
thereto by 2[adhyapakas] duly and proper ly authorised for that purpose.  
9. Teaching at the University .—All teaching in the University shall be conducted by and in the 
name of the University in accordance with the Statutes and Ordinances made in this behalf.  
THE PARIDARSAKA  (VISITOR ) 
3[10.The Paridarsaka (Visitor). —(1) The President of India shall be the Paridarsa ka (Visitor) of the 
University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the  Paridarsaka  (Visitor) shall have the right 
to cause an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may specify, of the University, its 
buildi ngs, laboratories and equipment, and of any Bhavana  or other Institution, and also of the 
examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University, Bhavana  or other Institution; 
and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the 
administration  or finances of the University.  
(3) The  Paridarsaka  (Visitor) shall give notice to the University of his intention to cause an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such noti ce, have the right to 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 60 of 1961, s. 7 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 2, for “teachers ” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid for section 10 ( w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  8 
 make, within thirty days or such other period as the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) may determine, from the date 
of receipt of the notice, such representations to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor ) as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering th e representations, if any, made by the University, the Paridarsaka (Visitor) 
may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), the 
University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be present and to be 
heard  at such inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Paridarsaka  (Visitor) m ay address the Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) with reference to the 
results of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be 
taken thereon as the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of the address made by 
the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), the Upacharya  (Vice-Chancellor) shall communicate forthwith to the Karma -
Samiti  (Executive Council) the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views of the Paridarsaka  
(Visitor) and the advice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall communicate through the Upacharya  (Vice -
Chancellor) to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken by it 
upon the results  of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Karma -Samiti  (Exec utive Council) does not, within a reasonable time, take action to 
the satisfaction of the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) may, after considering any 
explanation furnished or representation made by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), issu e such 
directions as he may think fit and Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall be bound to comp ly with such 
directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Paridarsaka  (Visitor may, be 
order in writing, annual any proce eding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the 
Statutes or the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order he shall call upon the University to show cause why such 
an order should not be made and, if any cause is shown wit hin a reasonable ti me, he shall consider the 
same.  
(10) The Paridarsaka  (Visitor) shall have such other powers as may be specified in the Statutes. ] 
THE PRADHANA  (RECTOR ) 
11. The Pradhana (Rector). —The Government of West Bengal shall be the Pradh ana (Rector) of the 
University.  
OFFICERS OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1[12. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University, namely: — 
(1) The Acharya (Chancellor);  
(2) The Upacharya (Vice -Chancellor);  
(3) The Director of Studies, Educational Innova tions and Rural Reconstruction;  
(4) The Director of Culture and Cultural Relations;  
(5) The Director of Physical Education, Sports, Nation al Service and Student Welfare;  
(6) The Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar);  
(7) The Vi tta-Adhikari  (Finance Officer);  
(8) Adhyakshas  of Bhavanas ; and  
(9) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 7, for section 12 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  9 
 13. The Acharya  (Chancellor) .—1[(1) The Acharya  (Chancellor) shall, by virtue of his office,  be the 
Head of the University.  
(2) The Acharya  (Chancellor) shall be appointed by the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) from out of a panel of 
persons prepared and recommended by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) under sub -section ( 2A). 
(2A) The Karma -Samiti  (Exec utive Council) shall prepare and recommend a panel of not less than 
three persons each of whom shall be a person of eminence in the academic or public life of the country, 
and is in the opinion of the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) a fit and proper perso n to be appointed as 
the Acharya  (Chancellor) of the University:  
Provided that if the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) does not approve of any of the persons specified in the 
panel prepared and recommended by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Counci l), he may call upon the  
Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) to pr epare a fresh panel of persons.  
(2B) The Acharya  (Chancellor) shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for  
re-appointment:  
Provided that the  Acharya (Chancellor) shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the term of his office, 
continue to hold such office until his successor is appointed and has entered upon his office. ] 
(3) The Acharya (Chancellor), shall, if present, preside at the Convocation of the University and at 
meetings of the Samsad (C ourt) 2[and the Karma Samiti  (Executive Council)].  
(4) Every proposal for the conferment of an honorary degree shall be subject to the confirmati on of 
the Acharya  (Chancellor).  
(5) The Acharya  (Chancellor) shall have such other powers as may be conferred on h im by this Act or 
the Statutes.  
3[14. T he Upacharya (Vice -Chancellor) .—(1) The Upacharya  (Vice - Chancellor) shall be 
appointed by the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) in such manner, for such term and  on such emoluments and other 
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statute s. 
(2) The Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the 
University, and shall exercise general supervision and control over the academic affairs of the University 
and all Bhavanas  and other Institutions and give effect to the decisi ons of all the  authorities of the 
University.  
(3) The Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on 
any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall 
report to such authority the acti on taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) whose decision there on shall be final:  
Provided further that an employee of the University, who is aggrieved by the action taken by the 
Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) under this sub -section, shall have the right to appeal against such action to 
the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) within ninety day s from the date on which such action is 
communicated to him and thereupon the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) may confirm, modify or 
reverse the action taken by t he Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor).  
(4) The Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) shall exercise such other  powers and perform such other 
functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.]  
15. [The Arthasachiva (Treasurer). ]—Omitted by the Visva -Bharati (Amendment) Act, 1984   
(31 of 1984 ), s. 10 (w.e.f . 8-8-1984 ). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 8, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 60 of 1961, s. 8 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 9, for section 14 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  10 
 1[16. The Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar) .—(1) The Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar) shall be appointed in 
such manner, and on such emoluments and other conditions of service, as may be prescribed by t he 
statutes and the Ordinances.  
(2) The Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar) shall have the power to en ter into agreements, sign documents and 
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other functions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other officers .—(1) All officers of the University, oth er than the Acharya  (Chancellor), the 
Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) and the Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar), shall be appointed in such manner, for 
such term and on such emoluments and other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The power s and functions of th e officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes. ] 
AUTHORITIES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
18. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Samsad  (Court);  
(2) the Karma -Samiti (Executive Coun cil); 
(3) the Shiksha Samiti  (Academic Council); 2*** 
3[(4) The Artha-Samiti  (Finance Committee);  
(5) The Institute Board; and]  
4[(6)] such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University.  
5[19. The Samsad  (Court) .—(1) The constitution of the Samsad  (Court) and the term or office of its 
members shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Samsad  (Court) shall have the following  powers 
and functions, namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University, including 
the maintenance of standards and ad herence to the objectives of the University and to suggest 
measures for the development and improvement of the University which shall be considered by the 
appropriate  authorities of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and annual accounts of the University 
and the report of  its auditors on such accounts;  
(c) to advice the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) in respect of any matter which may be  referred to it for 
advice; and  
(d) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes. ] 
6[22. The Karma -Samiti (Executive Council) .—(1) The Karma -Samiti (Executive Council) shall be 
the principal ex ecutive body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) and the term of office of its members 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statut es. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 11, for sections 16 and 17 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. The word “and” omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
4. Clause ( 4) re-numbered as clause ( 6) by s.12, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sections 19, 20 and 21 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sections 22 and 23 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  11 
 (3) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall exercise the following powers and perform th e 
following functions, namely: — 
(a) to manage and administer the revenue and property of the University and to conduct all 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided f or in this act or the Statutes;  
(b) to create teaching and academic posts and to  define the duties and conditions of service of 
Professor, Readers, Lecturers and other adhyapakas  and academic staff employed by the University:  
Provided that before determining the number, qualifications and emoluments of adhyapakas  and 
other academic st aff, the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall consider the recommendations of 
the Siksha-Samiti  (Academic Council);  
(c) to appoint such Professors, readers, Lecturers and other adhyapakas  and academic staff as 
may be necessary on the recommendation of th e Selection Committees constituted for the purpose 
and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(d) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Fellows, Scholars, 
Resident Artists and Resident Writers and to determine the ter ms and conditions of such appointment;  
(e) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose, to appoint s uch agents as it may think 
fit; 
(f) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities as it thinks fit, or in the purchase of immovable property in India;  
(g) to exercise such other powers and perform such other function s as may be conferred or 
specified by this Act or the Statutes. ] 
24. The Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) .—(1) The Siksha-Samiti  (Academic Council) shall be 
1[the principal academic body] of the University, and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,  the 
Statutes and the Ordinances, have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the  
maintenance of standards of 2[learning, education, instruction, evaluation and examination] within the 
University, and shall exercise such other powers an d perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by the Statutes and shall hav e the right to advise the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) 
on all academic matters.  
(2) The constitution of the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) and the terms of office of its members 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
3[25. Other  authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of the  
Artha -Samiti  (Finance Committee), the Institute Board and of such othe r authorities as may be declared 
by the Statutes to be authorities of the University shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. ] 
26. Alumni Association .—The University shall have an Alumni  Association open to past students 
and past workers of the University, including members of the Asramika Sangha of the former Visva -
Bharati Society, on such conditions as ma y be laid down in the Statutes.  
STATU TES, ORDINANCES  AND REGULATIONS  
4[27. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of appoi ntment, of the Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor), the term of his 
appointments, emoluments and o ther conditions of his service;  
(b) the powers that may be exercised and the functions that may be performed by t he Upacharya 
(Vice -Chancellor);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1 984, s. 15, for “the academic body” (w..f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “instruction, education and examination” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for section 25 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for section 27 (w.e.f. 8-8-1984).  12 
 (c) the manner of appointment of the Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar), the emoluments and other 
conditions of his service and the powers that  may be exercised and the function s that may be 
performed by him;  
(d) the manner of appointment of all other officers, the terms of their appointment, emoluments 
and other conditions of their service and the powers and functions of such officers;  
(e) the c onstitution of the Samsad  (Court), the term of office of its member s and its powers and 
functions;  
(f) the constitution of the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), the term of office of its member s 
and its powers and functions;  
(g) the  constitution of other authorities or bodies of the University, the term of office of their 
members and their powers and functions;  
(h) the election and continuance in office of the members the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling up of vacancies of me mbers and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies 
for which it may be nec essary or desirable to provide;  
(i) the appointment of adhyapakas and other academic staff and other employees of the 
University and their emoluments a nd othe r conditions of service : 
Provided that where any person who had held any post and is in receipt of a pension or other form of 
retirement benefits is appointed as an adhyapaka  of the University or to any other academic post, the 
salary of such person togeth er with the pension and other benefits shall not exceed the salary payable to 
him i n accordance with the Statutes;  
(j) the appointment of adhyapakas  and other academic staff working in any other University, 
institution or organisation for a specified perio d for undertaking a joint project;  
(k) the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Fellows, Scholars, Resident Artists 
and Resident Writers, and terms and conditions of such appointment;  
(l) the constitution of a pension or provident fund or the establishment of an insurance scheme for the 
benefit of t he employees of the University;  
(m) the principles governing seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(n) the procedure in relation to any appeal or application for review by any employee or student of the 
University, against the action of any officer or authority of the University, including the time within 
which such appeal or application for r eview may be preferred or made;  
(o) the procedure for the settlement of disputes be tween employees of the University, or students of 
the University, and the University;  
(p) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(q) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(r) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students of the University;  
(s) the establishment and abolition of Bhavanas , Departments, Chatravasas  and other institutions and 
their manageme nt, supervision and inspection;  
(t) the regulation of the cond uct and duties of the employees of the University and the conduct of the 
students of the University;  
(u) the establishment of campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories or other unit s for research 
and instruction;  
(v) the administration and regula tion of the funds received in trust or otherwise by the University;  
(w) the delegation of powers vested in the officers or  authorities of the University;  
(x) the constitution and activiti es of the Alumni Association;  13 
 (y) the categories of misconduct for wh ich any action may be taken under this Act, or the Statutes or 
the Ordinances; and  
(z) all other matters which, by this Act, are to be, or may be, provided for by the Statutes.]  
28. Statutes, how made .—1[(1) On the commencement of the Visva -Bharati  (Amendment) Act, 1984 
(31 of 1984), the Statutes in force immediately before such commencement, as amended by that Act, shall 
be the Statutes of the University. ] 
2[(2) The Statutes may be amended, repealed or added to by Statutes made by the Karma S amiti  
(Executive Council).  
(3) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall not propose the draft of any Statute affecting the 
status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing the opinion upon the proposal and any opinion s o expressed shall be in writing 
and shall be submitte d to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor).  
(4) Every new Statute or addition to a Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall be 
submitted to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) who may assent to it or withhold his  assent therefrom  or remit it to 
the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Coun cil) for further consideration.  
(5) A Statute passed by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall have no validity until it has been 
assented to  by the Paridarsaka  (Visitor).]  
3[29. Matters to be provided for in the Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
Statutes, the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as su ch; 
(b) the pattern of learning process, courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and 
certificates of the University;  
(c) the  degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions to be awarded by the 
University, the qualifications for the same and the means to be adopted relating to the gran ting and 
obtaining of the same;  
(d) the purposes for which certificates awarde d by the Lok Siksha -Samsad  (People's Education 
Council) of the University may b e recognised by the University;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, and processes of evaluation, degrees, di plomas and certificates of  the University;  
(f) the conditions of the award of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of tests, evaluations and examinations, including the terms of office and manner 
of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners, moderators and persons entrusted with th e 
responsibility of evaluation;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University and the special arrangements, if 
any, for t he residence of women students;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the discipline and teaching of women 
students, and prescribing for  them special courses of study;  
(j) the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the University other than those 
prescribed  by the Statutes (including the emolume nts of the non -teaching staff):  
Provided that where any person who had held any post and is in receipt of a pension or other form 
of retirement benefits is appointed to a non -teaching pos t of the University, the salar y of such person 
together with the pension and other benefits shall not exceed the salary payable to him in accordance 
with the Ordinances;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 18, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 57 of 1971, s. 7, for sub -sections ( 2) to ( 8) (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 19, for sections 29 and 30 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  14 
 (k) the terms and conditions of approval of institutions of high er learning and its withdrawal;  
(l) the manner of co -operation or collaboration or association with other Universities, authoriti es 
or institutions of learning;  
(m) the terms and conditions on which persons working in an approved institution, or in any 
institution co -operating, collaborating or associating with the University, may be approved as 
adhyapakas  and for withdrawing such approval;  
(n) the educational experimentation and the creation, composition and functioning of any other 
body which is considered necessary for improving the acade mic life of the U niversity; and  
(o) all other matters which, by this Act or the Statutes, are to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
30. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) The Ordinances in force immediately before the 
commencement of the Visva -Bharati (Amendment) Act, 1984 (31 of 1984), may be amended, repealed or 
added to, at any time by the Karma-Samiti  (Executive Council) : 
Provided that no Ordinance shall be made in respect of matters enumerated in section 29, other than 
those enumerated in clauses ( e), (h), (j), (m) and ( o) thereof, unless a draft of such Ordinance has been 
proposed by the Siksha-Samiti  (Academic Council).  
(2) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall not have power to amend any draft proposed by the 
Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) under the provisions of sub -section ( 1), but may reject the proposal or 
return the draft to the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) for reconsideration either in whole or in part, 
together with any amendments which the Karma -Samiti  (Execut ive Council) may suggest.  
(3) Where the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance 
proposed by the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council), the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) may consider 
the question afresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than one -half of 
the total membership of the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) and by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members of the Siksha -Samiti  (Academic Council) present and voting , the draft may be sent 
back to the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Paridarsaka 
(Visitor) whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
(4) Every Ordinance made by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shal l come in to effect 
immediately.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Karma -Samiti (Executive Council) shall be submitted to the 
Paridarsaka  (Visitor) within four weeks of the date of the meeting of the Karma -Samiti  (Executive 
Council), and the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) shal l have the power to direct the University, within six weeks 
from the date of the receipt of the Ordinance, to suspend the operation of any Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) about his objec tion to the p roposed 
Ordinance.  
(6) The Paridarsaka  (Visitor) may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw 
the order directing the suspension of the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance and his decision thereon 
shall be final. ] 
31. Regulations .—(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with this 
Act, the  Statutes and the Ordinances — 
(a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of mem bers 
required to form a quorum;  
(b) providing  for all matters which by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances are to be pre scribed 
by the Regulations; and  
(c) providing for all other matters solely concerning the authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by this Act, the Stat utes and the Ordina nces.  15 
 (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a rec ord of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may 
specify, of any Regulation made under this section or the amendment of any Regulati on made under  
sub-section ( 1). 
1[(4) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.  
(5) Every Statu te, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which 
may be comprised in  one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no e ffect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.]  
32. Residence .—Every student of the University 2[other than  a student of its Lok S iksha Samsad  
(People ’s Education Council)] shall reside in a 3[Chatravasa ] or under such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes and the Ordinances.  
ADMISSION AND EXAMINATIONS  
33. Admission .—Admission of students to the University shall be made in such manner as may b e 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. Examinations .—Subject to the provisions of the Statutes, all ar rangements for the conduct of 
4[tests, evaluations and examinations] shall be made by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) in such 
manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
ANNUAL REPORTS AND ACCOUNTS  
5[35. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the directions 
of the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the 
University to promote socially relevant research in physical and social sciences, weaker sections ’ need 
oriented extension activities and integration of the community life of the Universit y with that of the wider 
world.  
(2) The annual report so prepared shall be submitted to the Samsad  (Court) on or before such date as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes and shall be considered by the Samsad (Court) in its annual meeting.  
(3) The Samsad  (Court) may communicate its comments on the annual report to the Karma -Samiti  
(Executive Council) and the Paridar saka (Visitor).  
(4) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government which sha ll, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before  both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
36. An nual Accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the direction of the Karma -Samiti (Executive Council) and shall once at least every year 
and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India or by such person or persons as h e may authorise in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by A ct 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
2. Ins. by Act 60 of 1961, s. 13 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961).  
3. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 20, for “Bhavana (College) or Chartavasa (Hostel)” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “examinations” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
5. Subs. by s.22, ibid., for sections 35 and 36 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  16 
 (2) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report  shall be submitted to the Samsad  (Court) and 
the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) along with the observations of the Karma-Samiti  (Executive Council).  
(3) Any observations made by the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) on the annual accounts shall be brought to 
the notice of the  Samsad  (Court) and the observations of the Samsad  (Court), if any, shall, after being 
considered by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), be submitte d to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor).  
(4) A copy of the accounts together with the audit report, as submitted to  the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), 
shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before  both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts, after having been laid before both the Houses of  Parliament, shall be 
published in the Gazette of India. ] 
SUPPLEMENTARY  PROVISIONS  
1[37. Adhyapakas of the University to be appo inted under a written contract .—(1) No 
adhyapaka  of the University shall be appointed to a permanent post, except under a written contract and 
such contract shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, t he Statutes and the Ordinances.  
(2) The contract referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall b e lodged with the University and a copy thereof 
shall be furnis hed to the adhyapaka  concerned.  
(3) In the case of an adhyapaka  appointed by the University before the commencement of the Visva -
Bharati  (Amendment) Act, 1984 (31 of 1984), the contract in force immediately before such 
commencement, in relation to his emoluments, shall, to the extent of any inconsistency with the 
provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances, be deemed to have b een modified by the said 
provisions and where there is no such contract and the adhyapaka  is a salaries adhyapaka  appointed to a 
permanent post, a written contract shall be executed by, and between, such adhyapaka  and the University 
within a period of six months from the commencement of the Visva -Bharati (Amendment) Act, 1984.  
38. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract of employment referred to in 
section 37, including a dispute relating to the non -compliance of the provisions of  this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances, shall, at the request of the adhyapaka , be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration which shall 
consist of one member nominated by the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), one member nominated by 
the adhyapaka  concerned  and one member (who shall act as umpire) nominate d by the Paridarsaka  
(Visitor).  
(2) Every request made under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon 
the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), and all the 
provisions of that Act, with the exception of section 2 th ereof, shall apply accordingly.  
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Tribunal of Arbitration, the 
appropriate body or person concerned shall nominate another person in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal from the 
stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
(4) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be fi nal and binding on the parties.  
(5) The Tribunal of Arb itration shall have the power — 
(a) to regulate its own procedure ; 
(b) to order reinstatement of the adhyapaka  concerned; and  
(c) to award salary to the adhyapaka  concerned, after deducting therefrom such income, not being 
income from property, as such adhyapaka  might have derived during the period of his suspension or 
during the period intervening between the date on which he was removed or dismissed from service 
or, as the case may be, his service was terminated, and the date on which he is reinstated:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 23, for sections 37 and 38 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  17 
 Provided that the income which could have been derived by the adhyapaka  concerned shall not 
be taken into account if, at the time when the income was derived, he co uld have derived such income 
had he not been suspended or removed or dismissed from service or if his s ervice had not been 
terminated.  
(6) No suit or other proceedings shall lie in any court in respect of any matter which is required by 
sub-section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
38A. Power to suspend adhyapaka or other member of academic staff .—(1) The Upacharya  
(Vice -Chancellor) may, by order in writing, place and adhyapaka  or other member of the ac ademic staff 
under suspension — 
(a) where a disciplinary proceeding against such adhyapaka  or other member is contemplated or 
is pending; or  
(b) where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence i s under investigation or trial.  
(2) Where any order of suspension is made under sub -section ( 1), the circumstances in which such 
order has been made shall be reported forthwith to the Karma-Samiti  (Executive Council).  
(3) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) may, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the 
report referred to in sub -section ( 2), revoke the order of suspension if it is of opinion that the 
circumstances of the case  do not warrant the suspension.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of suspension, which has not been revoked under sub -section 
(3), may  prefer an appeal to the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) within thirty days from the date on 
which such order is communicated to him and the Karma -Samiti (Executive Council) may confirm 
modify or reve rse the order appealed against.  
38B. Authorities by whom order for removal or dismissal of adhyapaka , etc., may be m ade and 
the procedure therefor .—(1) No adhyapaka , or other member of the academic staff, appointed by the 
University shall be dismissed or removed from service or punished in any other manner by any authority 
other than the Karma-Samiti  (Executive Council).  
(2) No adhyapaka , or other member of the acade mic staff, appointed by the University shall be 
dismissed or removed from service or punished in any other manner except after an inquiry in which he 
has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being hea rd in 
respect of those charges:  
Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon the adhyapaka  or other member 
of the academic staff any punishment, such punishment may be imposed on the basis of the evidence 
adduced during such inquiry and it shall  not be necessary to give such adhyapaka  or other member of the 
academic staff any opportunity of making representation on the punishment proposed . 
(3) The Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) shall be entitled to dismiss or remove from service, 
without holdin g any such inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2), an adhyapaka , or other member of 
the academic staff, of the University, where the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council), for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, is satisfied that such adhyapaka  or othe r member of the academic staff — 
(a) is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute or suff ers from contagious leprosy; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) has been convicted, by a court of law, of an off ence involving moral turpitude.  
(4) The dismissal or removal from service of, or any other punishment imposed on, an adhyapaka , or 
other member of the academic staff, appointed by the University shall take effect from the date on which 
the order of dismissal or removal from service is made  or other punishment is imposed:  
Provided that, where the adhyapaka  or other member of the academic staff is under suspension at the 
time when the order for his dismissal or removal from service is made or other punishment is imposed, 
such order may, if th e Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) so directs, take effect from the date on which he 
was placed under suspension.  18 
 (5) Notwithstanding the terms of contract between the University and an adhyapaka , or other member 
of the academic staff, appointed by the Uni versity, such adhyapaka  or other member of the academi c staff 
may resign his office — 
(a) where he is permanent, by giving three months ’ notice in writing to the Karma -Samiti 
(Executive Council) or by paying to the University three months ’ salary in lieu of  such notice; or  
(b) where he is not permanent, one month's notice in writing to the Karma -Samiti  (Executive 
Council) or by paying to the University one month's salary in  lieu of such notice:  
Provided that if the Karma -Samiti  (Executive Council) so permits , the period of three months' 
notice or of one month's notice, as the case ma y be, may be reduced or waived:  
Provided further that such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by 
the Karma-Samiti  (Executive Council).  
Explanation .—“Suspension ” shall not be deemed to be a punishment within the meaning of this 
section.]  
39. Pension and provident funds .—(1) The University shall constitute, for the benefit of its officers 
[including the Upacharya (Vice -Chancellor)], 1[adhyapakas ], and other servants, in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes, such pension, insurance and providen t 
funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such pension, insurance or provident fund has been so constituted, the Cen tral 
Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (1 7 of 1925), shall apply to 
such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies .—(1) Subject to any provision in this Act and in the Statute s, the 
Karma Samiti  (Executive Council) shall appoint, with the approval of the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), a person 
to fill a casual vacancy in the office of the Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor), and the person s o appointed 
shall hold office 2[until his suc cessor e nters upon his office].  
(2) All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  members) of any authority or other 
body of the University shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by the person or body who 
appointed, elected or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant, and the person appointed, 
clected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be member of such authority or body for the residue of the 
term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
3[41. Removal fro m membership of the University .—The Karma Samiti  (Executive Council) may, 
on the rec ommendation of not less than two -thirds of its members remove any person from the 
membership of any authority or board of the University if such a person is guilty of a serious offence 
involving moral turpitude, or if he has been guilty of scandalous condu ct and for the same reasons may 
withdraw any degree or diploma conferred on, or granted to , any person by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken under this section against any person except after giving him a 
reasonable opportunity of being  heard with regard to the proposed action.]  
42. Disputes as to constitution of an y University authority or body .—If any question arises 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Paridarsaka  (Visitor), whose d ecision 
thereon shall be final . 
43. Constitution of committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or by the Statutes to appoint committees, such committee shall, unless there is some special provision to 
the contrary, consist of members of the authority c oncerned and of such other persons (if any) as the 
author ity in each case may think fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 2, for “teacher” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 60 of 1961, s. 15, for “till the next meeting of the Samsad (Court)” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1961).  
3. Subs. b y Act 57 of 1971, s. 11, for section 41 (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  19 
 44. Proceedings of the University authoritie s not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or proceeding 
of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of a 
vacancy or vacancies amon g its members.  
1[44A. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the University for anythi ng which is in good faith done or intended to be done, 
in pursuance of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
44B. Mode  of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding or resolution of any a uthority or committee of the University, or other documents in the 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by 
the Karma -Sachiva  (Registrar), shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the  Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), or in any other law for the time being in force, be admitted as evidence of the matters 
and transactions specified therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence. ] 
45. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises with respect to the establishment of the 
University or any authority of the University or in connection with the first meeting of any authority of 
the University, the Paridarsaka  (Visitor) in consultation wi th the Upacharya  (Vice -Chancellor) may, by 
order, make any appointment or do anything which appears to him necessary or expedient for the proper 
establishment of the University or any authority thereof or for the first meeting of any authority of the 
Unive rsity.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
The First Schedule —Omitted by Act 31 of 1984 , s. 25 (w.e.f. 8-8-1984 ). 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 7)  
The territorial limits of the University  
The area known as Sa ntiniketan in the District of B irbhum in West B engal admeasuring  
2[3000 hectares], bounded — 
on the North by the Kopai River — 
on th e west by a line running from Ballavpur and B anuri villages to B andgora.  
on the south by a line running from B andgora via Bolpur Dak B ungalow to the bridge over the 
3[Eastern Railway] cutting, and  
on the east by the  3[Eastern Railway] line.  
________________  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1984, s. 24 (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “11.5 square miles” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “East Indian Railway” (w.e.f. 8 -8-1984).  
