--------------------------The Cinematograph Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952  
______  
ARRANGMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence in the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir.  
PART II  
CERTIFICATION OF  FILMS  FOR PUBLIC  EXHIBITION  
3. Board of film Certification.  
4. Examination of films.  
5. Advisory panels.  
5A. Certification of films.  
5B. Principles of guidance in certifying films.  
5C. Appeals.  
5D. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.  
5DD.Qualification, terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Member.  
5E. Suspension and revocation of certificate.  
5F. Review of orders by Central Government.  
6. Revisonal powers of the Central Government.  
6A. Information and documents to be given to distributors and exhibitors with respect to certified 
films.  
6B. [ Omitte d.]— 
7. Penalties for contraventions of this Part.  
7A. Power of seizure.  
7B. Delegation of powers by Board.  
7C. Power to direct exhibition of f ilms for examination.  
7D. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding.  
7E. Members of the Board and advisory panels to be public servants.  
7F. Bar of legal proceedings.  2 
 SECTIONS  
8. Power to make rules.  
9. Power to exempt.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF  EXHIBITION S BY MEANS OF  CINEMATOGRAPHS  
10. Cinematograph exhibitions to be licensed.  
11. Licensing authority.  
12. Restrictions on powers of licensing authority.  
13. Power of Central Government or local authority to suspend exhibition of films in certain cas es. 
14. Penalties for contravention of this Part.  
15. Power to revoke licence.  
16. Power to make rules.  
17. Power to exempt.  
PART IV  
REPEAL  
18. Repeal.  
 
  3 
 THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 37 OF 19571 
[21st March , 1952 .] 
An Act to make provision for the certification of cinematograph films for exhibition and for 
regulating exhibitions by means of cinematographs.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cinematograph                   
Act, 1952.  
(2) Parts I, II and IV extends to the whole of India  2* * * and Part III extends to  3[the Union 
territories] only.  
(3) This Act shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Gover nment may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint:  
5[Provided that Parts I and II shall come into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir only on such 
date after the commencement of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973 (26 of 1973), as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.]  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
6[(b) “Board ” means the Board of Film Certific ation constituted by the Central Government under 
section 3;]  
7[(bb) “certificate ” means the certificate granted by the Board under section 5A;]  
(c) “cinematograph ” includes any apparatus for the representation of moving pictures or series of 
pictures;  
(d) “district magistrate ”, in relation to a presidency -town, means the Commissioner of Police;  
8[(dd) “film” means a cinematograph film;]  
(e) “place ” includes a house, building, tent and any description of transport, whether by sea, land 
or air;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule , Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 
of 1963, s . 3 and Schedule . 
Parts I and II of the Act shall come into force in the State of Jamm u and Kashmir (w.e.f. 1 -5-1974):  vide notification             
No. G.S.R. 183(E), dated 23 -4-1974.  
Part III of the Act shall come into force in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh on (w.e.f. 1-10-1984 ): vide notification No. 
S.O. 757(E), dated 29 -10-1984.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 25 of 1973, s . 2. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of  1959, s . 2, for “Part C States ”. 
4. 28th July, 1952, Information and Broadcasting Ministry's Notification No. S.R.O. 1066, dated the 10th June, 1952, see Gazette 
of India, 1952, Part II, s . 3. 
5. The proviso added by Act 25 of 1973, s . 2. 
6. Subs . by Act 49 of 1981, s . 2, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
8. Ins. by Act 3 of 1959, s . 3. 4 
 1[(g) “regional officer ” means a regional officer appointed by the Central Government under 
section 5 and includes an additional regional officer and an assistant regional officer;  
(h) “Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 5D.]  
2[2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not in existence in 
the State of  Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any 
functionary not in existence, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in relation to that State, be 
construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the corresponding functionary in 
existence, in that State.]  
PART II  
CERTIFICATION OF  FILMS  FOR PUBLIC  EXHIBITION  
3[3. Board of film Certification .—(1) For the purpose of sanctioning films for public exhibition, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called the  
4[Board of Film Certification]  which shall consist of a Chairman and  5[not less than twelve and not more 
than twenty -five] other members appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Chairman of the Board shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the 
Central Government, and the other members shall receive such allowances or fees for attending the 
meetings of the Board as may be prescribed.  
(3) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board shall be such as may be 
prescribed.]  
4. Examination of films .—(1) Any person desiring to exhibit any film shall in the prescribed manner 
make an application to the Board for a certificate in respect thereof, and the Board may, after examining 
or having the film examined in the prescribed manner ,— 
(i) sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition:  6* * * 
7[Provided that, having regard to any material in the film, if the Board is of the opinion that it is 
necessary to caution that the question as to whether any child below the age of twelve  years may be 
allowed to see such a film should be considered by the parents or guardian of such child, the Board 
may sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition with an endorsement to that effect; or]  
(ii) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to adults; or  
8[(iia) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to members of any profession or any class 
of persons, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film; or]  
9[(iii) direct the applicant to carry out such excisio ns or modifications in the film as it thinks 
necessary before sanctioning the film for public exhibition under any of the foregoing clauses; or]  
(iv) refuse to sanction the film for public exhibition.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
2. Ins. by Act  25 of 1973, s . 3. 
3. Subs . by Act 3 of 1959, s . 4, for sections 3 to 6.  
4. Subs . by Act 49 of 1981, s . 3, for “Board of Film Censors ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
5. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for “not more than nine ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
6. The word “or” omitted by s . 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
7. The proviso added by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
8. Ins. by s. 4,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
9. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  5 
 (2) No action under  1[the proviso to clause ( i), clause  (ii), clause ( iia), clause ( iii) or clause ( iv)] of 
sub-section ( 1) shall be taken by the Board except after giving an opportunity to the applicant for 
representing his views in the matter.  
5. Advisory panels .—(1) For the purpose of enabling the Board to efficiently discharge its functions 
under this Act, the Central Government may establish at such regional centers as it thinks fit, advisory 
panels each of which shall consist of such number of persons, being persons qualified in the opinion of 
the Central  Government to judge the effect of films on the public, as the Central Government may think 
fit to appoint thereto.  
(2) At each regional center there shall be as many regional officers as the Central Government may 
think fit to appoint, and rules made in t his behalf may provide for the association of regional officers in 
the examination of films.  
(3) The Board may consult in such manner as may be prescribed, any advisory panel in respect of any 
film for which an application for a certificate has been made.  
(4) It shall be the duty of every such advisory panel whether acting as a body or in committees as may 
be provided in the rules made in this behalf to examine the film and to make such recommendations to the 
Board as it thinks fit.  
(5) The members of the a dvisory panel shall not be entitled to any salary but shall receive such fees or 
allowances as may be prescribed.  
5A. Certification of films .—2[(1) If, after examining a film or having it examined in the prescribed 
manner, the Board considers that — 
(a) the film is suitable for unrestricted public exhibition, or, as the case may be, for unrestricted 
public exhibition with an endorsement of the nature mentioned in the proviso to clause ( i) of                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 4, it shall grant to th e person applying for a certificate in respect of the film 
a “U” certificate or, as the case may be, a “UA” certificate; or  
(b) the film is not suitable for unrestricted public exhibition, but is suitable for public exhibition 
restricted to adults or, as the case may be, is suitable for public exhibition restricted to members of 
any profession or any class of persons, it shall gr ant to the person applying for a certificate in respect 
of the film an “A” certificate or, as the case may be, a “S” certificate,  
and cause the film to be so marked in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that the applicant for the certificate, any distributor or exhibitor or any other person to 
whom the rights in the film have passed shall not be liable for punishment under any law relating to 
obscenity in respect of any matter contained in the film for which certificate has been granted under 
clause ( a) or cla use ( b).] 
(2) A certificate granted or an order refusing to grant a certificate in respect of any film shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a certificate granted by the Board under this 
section shall be valid throughout India for a period of ten years.  
5B. Principles of guidance in certifying films .—(1) A film shall not be certified for public 
exhibition if, in the opinion of the authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any p art of it is 
against the interests of  3[the sovereignty and integrity of India] the security of the State, friendly relations 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 49 of 1981, s . 4, for “clause ( ii), clause ( iii) or clause ( iv)” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
2. Subs . by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  6 
 with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of court or is 
likely to incite the com mission of any offence.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may issue such 
directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the authority competent to grant 
certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public exhibition.  
1[5C. Appeals .—(1) Any person applying for a certificate in respect of a film who is aggrieved by 
any order of the Board — 
(a) refusing to grant a certificate; or  
(b) granting only an “A” certificate; or  
(c) granting only a “S” certificate; or  
(d) granting only a “UA” certificate; or  
(e) directing the applicant to carry out any excisions or modifications,  
may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the aforesaid period of thirty days, allow such appeal to be admitted within a 
further period of thirty days.  
(2) Every appeal under this se ction shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be accompanied 
by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed against where such statement has been furnished 
to the appellant and by such fees, not exceeding rupees one thousand, as may be  prescribed.]  
2[5D. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) For the purpose of hearing appeals against any order 
of the Board under section 5C, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute an Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) The  head office of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi or at such other place as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(3) Such Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and not more than four other members appointed by the 
Central Government.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman of the Tribunal unless he is a 
retired Judge of a High Court, or is a person who is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court.  
(5) The Central Government may appoint such persons who, in its opinion, are qualified to judge the 
effect of films on the public, to be members of the Tribunal.  
(6) The Chairman of the Tribunal shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by 
the Central Government and the members s hall receive such allowances or fees as may be prescribed.  
(7) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Central Government may appoint a 
Secretary and such other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient performance of the 
funct ions of the Tribunal under this Act.  
(8) The Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal shall exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be prescribed after consultation with the Chairman of the Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 7, for section  5C (w .e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 7 
 (9) The other terms and conditions  of service of the Chairman and members of, and the Secretary to, 
and other employees of, the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(10) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.  
(11) The Tribunal may, after  making such inquiry into the matter as it considers necessary, and after 
giving the appellant and the Board an opportunity of being heard in the matter, make such order in 
relation to a film as it thinks fit and the Board shall dispose of the matter in co nformity with such order.  
1[5DD . Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman and Member. —
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications,  appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the  other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and 
other members of the  Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of 
the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Ac t: 
Provided that the Chairman and member appointed before the commencement of  Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the  provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184  of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into force. ] 
5E. Suspension and revocation of certificate .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 6, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , suspend 
a certificate granted under this Part, for such period as it thinks fit or may revoke such certificate if it is 
satisfied tha t— 
(i) the film in respect of which the certificate was granted, was being exhibited in a form other 
than the one in which  it was certified; or  
(ii) the film or any part thereof is being exhibited in contravention of the provisions of this Part or 
the rules made thereunder.  
(2) Where a notification under sub -section ( 1) has been published, the Central Government may 
require t he applicant for certificate or any other person to whom the rights in the film have passed, or 
both, to deliver up the certificate and all duplicate certificates, if any, granted in respect of the film to the 
Board or to any person or authority specified in the said notification.  
(3) No action under this section shall be taken except after giving an opportunity to the person 
concerned for representing his views in the matter.  
(4) During the period in which a certificate remains suspended under this section, the film shall be 
deemed to be an uncertified film.  
5F. Review of orders by Central Government .—(1) Where an applicant for a certificate or any 
other person to whom the rights in the film have passed, is aggrieved by any order of the Central 
Government under section 5E, he may, within sixty days of the date of publication of the notification in 
the Official Gazette, make an application to the Central Government for review of the order, setting out in 
such application the grounds on which he co nsiders such review to be necessary:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the applicant for a certificate or that 
other person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an application for review within the aforesaid 
period of sixty days, allow such application to be filed within a further period of sixty days.  
(2) On receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, after giving the 
aggrieved person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and aft er making such further inquiry, as it 
may consider necessary, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or reversing its decision 
and the Board shall dispose of the matter in conformity with such order.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 173 (w.e.f. 26 -05-2017).  8 
 6. Revisonal powers of the Central Gov ernment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Part, the Central Government  1[may, of its own motion, at any stage,] call for the record of any 
proceeding in relation to any film which is pending before, or has been decided by, the Board,  2[or, as  the 
case may be, decided by the Tribunal (but not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is 
pending before the Tribunal)] and after such inquiry, into the matter as it considers necessary, make such 
order in relation thereto as it thinks fit, and the Board shall dispose of the matter in conformity with such 
order:  
Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially affecting any person applying for a certificate 
or to whom a certificate has been granted, as the case may be, except afte r giving him an opportunity for 
representing his views in the matter:  
3[Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall require the Central Government to disclose 
any fact which it considers to be against public interest to disclose.]  
(2) Without p rejudice to the powers conferred on it under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that — 
(a) a film which has been granted a certificate shall be deemed to be an uncertified film in the 
whole or any pa rt of India; or  
(b) a film which has been granted a “U” certificate  1[or a “UA” certificate or a “S” certificate] 
shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an “A” certificate has been granted; or  
(c) the exhibition of any film be suspended for such period as may be specified in the direction:  
Provided that no direction issued under clause ( c) shall remain in force for more than two months 
from the date of the notification.  
(3) No action shall be taken und er clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) except after giving an 
opportunity to the person concerned for representing his views in the matter.  
(4) During the period in which a film remains suspended under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the film 
shall be deemed to be an uncertified film.]  
4[6A. Information and documents to be given to distributors and exhibitors with respect to 
certified films .—Any person who delivers any certified film to any distributor or exhibitor shall, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, notify to the distributor or exhibitor, as the case may be, the title, the length 
of the film, the number and the nature of the certificate granted in respect thereof and the conditions, if 
any, subject to which it has been so granted, and any other particulars respecting the film which may be 
prescribed. ] 
6B. [Offences to be cognizable ]—Omitted by the Cinematograph  (Amendment ) Act, 1984 s. 2               
(w.e.f.  27-8-1984).  
7. Penalties for contraventions of this Part .—5[(1) If any person — 
(a) exhibits or permits to be exhibited in any place — 
(i) any film other than a film which has been certified by the board as suitable for unrestricted 
public exhibition or for public exhibition restricted to adults  6[or to members of any profession or 
any c lass of persons] and which, when exhibited, displays the prescribed mark of the Board and 
has not been altered or tampered with in any way since such mark was affixed thereto,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 9, for “may at any stage” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 198 1, s. 9, (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 19 of 1953, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
5 Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1). 
6. Ins. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  9 
 (ii) any  film, which has been certified by the Board as suitable for public exhibition restricted 
to adults, to any person who is not an adult,  1* * *. 
4[(iia) any film which has been certified by the Board as suitable for public exhibition 
restricted to any profe ssion or class of persons, to a person who is not a member of such 
profession or who is not a member of such class, or]  
(b) without lawful authority (the burden of proving which shall be on him), alters or tampers with 
in any way , any film after it has been certified, or  
(c) fails to comply with the provision contained in section 6A or with any order made by the 
Central Government or by the Board in the exercise of any of the powers or functions conferred on it 
by this Act or the r ules made thereunder,  
2[he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further 
fine which may extend to twe nty thousand rupees for each day during which the offence continues:  
Provided that a person who exhibits or permits to be exhibited in any place a video film in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) shall be punishable with impris onment for a 
term which shall not be less than three months, but which may extend to three years and with fine which 
shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees, but which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the case of 
a continuing offence with a furt her fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees for each day during 
which the offence continues:  
Provided further that a court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less t han three months, or a fine of less than twenty 
thousand rupees]:  
1[Provided further that] notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magistrate, or any Judi cial Magistrate 
of the first class specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, to pass a sentence of fine 
exceeding five thousand rupees on any person convicted of any offence punishable under this Part:  
1[Provided also ] that no distributor  or exhibitor or owner or employee of a cinema house shall be 
liable to punishment for contravention of any condition of endorsement of caution on a film certified as 
“UA” under this Part.]  
(2) If any person is convicted of an offence punishable under this  section committed by him in respect 
of any film, the convicting court may further direct that the film shall be forfeited to the Government.  
(3) The exhibition of a film, in respect of which an “A” certificate  3[or a “S” certificate or a “UA” 
certificate] has been granted, to children below the age of three years accompanying their parents or 
guardians shall not be deemed to be an offence within the meaning of this section.  
4[7A. Power of seizure .—(1) Where a film in respect of which no certif icate has been granted under 
this Act is exhibited, or a film certified as suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults is exhibited to 
any person who is not an adult or a film is exhibited in contravention of any of the other provisions 
contained i n this Act or of any order made by the Central Government  5[, the Tribunal] or the Board in the 
the exercise of any of the powers conferred on it, any police officer may,  6* * * enter any place in which 
he has reason to believe that the film has been or is bei ng or is likely to be exhibited, search it and seize 
the film.  
(2) All searches under this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the  7[Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], relating to searches.  
                                                           
1. The word “or” omitted by Act 49 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 1984, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 29 -8-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-6-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1959, s. 5.  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 1981, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
6. Certain words omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
7. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  10 
 7B. Delegation of powers by Board .—1[(1)] The Central Government may, by general or special 
order, direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by the Board under this Act shall,  2[in 
relation to the certification of the films under this Part] and subject to such cond ition, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, be exercisable also by the Chairman or any other member of the Board, and 
anything done or action taken by the Chairman or other member specified in the order shall be deemed to 
be a thing done or action tak en by the Board.  
3[(2) The Central Government may, by order and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
be prescribed, authorise the regional officer s to issue provisional certificates.]  
7C. Power to direct exhibition of films for examination .—For the purpose of exercising any of the 
powers conferred on it by this Act, the Central Government  4[, the Tribunal] or the Board may require any 
any film to be exhibited before it or before  5[any person or authority] specified by it in this behalf.  
7D. Vacan cies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding .—No act or proceeding of  6[the Tribunal,] the 
Board or of any advisory panel shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of a vacancy in, or any defect 
in, the constitution of 6[the Tribunal,] the Board or panel, as the case may be.  
7E. Members o f the Board and advisory panels  to be public servants .—All members of  7[the 
Tribunal,] the Board and of any advisory panel shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any 
of the provisions of this Act, be deemed  to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
7F. Bar of legal proceedings .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against  8[the Central 
Government, the Tribunal, the Board], advisory panel or any offic er or member of  9[the Central 
Government, the Tribunal, the Board or] advisory panel, as the case may be, in respect of anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.]  
8. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Part.  
10[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under 
this section may provide for — 
(a) the allowances or fees payable to the members of the Board;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board;  
(c) the manner of making an application to the Board for a certificate and the manner in which a 
film has to be examined by the B oard and the fees to be levied therefore;  
(d) the association of regional officers in the examination of films, the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which regional officers may be authorised under section 7B to issue provisional certificates 
and the period of validity of such certificates;  
(e) the manner in which the Board may consult any advisory panel in respect of any film;  
(f) the allowances or fees payable to the members of advisory panel;  
                                                           
 1. Section 7B r e-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 49 of 1981, s . 13 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 2. Subs . by s. 13, ibid., for “in relation to such matters” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1983).  
 5. Subs . by s. 14, ibid., for “any person” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 6. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 7. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 8. Subs . by s. 17, ibid., for “the Central Government, the Board” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
 9. Subs . by s. 17, ibid., for “the Central Government, Board or” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
10. Subs . by s. 18, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  11 
 (g) the marking of the films;  
(h) the allowances or fees payable to the members of the Tribunal;  
(i) the powers and duties of the Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal;  
(j) the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of, and the Secretary 
to, and other employees of, the Tri bunal;  
(k) the fees payable by the appellant to the Tribunal in respect of an appeal;  
(l) the conditions (including conditions relating to the length of films in general or any class of 
films, in particular) subject to which any certificate may be granted,  or the circumstances in which 
any certificate shall be refused;  
(m) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.]  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
9. Power to exempt .—The Central Government may, by order in writing exempt,  subject to such 
conditions and restrictions, if any, as i t may impose, the exhibition of any film or class of films from any of 
the provisions of this Part or of any rules  made thereunder.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF  EXHIBITION S BY MEANS OF  CINEMATOGRAPHS  
10. Cinematograph exhibitions to be licensed .—Save  as otherwise provided in this Part, no person 
shall give an exhibition by means of a cinematograph elsewhere than in a place licensed under this Part or 
otherwise than in compliance with any conditions and restrictions imposed by such licence.  
11. Licensi ng authority .—The authority having power to grant licences under this Part (hereinafter 
referred to as the licensing authority) shall be the district magistrate:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, f or the 
whole or any part of a  2[Union territory], such other authority as it may specify in the notification to be 
the licensing authority for the purposes of this Part.  
12. Restrictions on powers of licensing authority .—(1) The licensing authority shall not grant a 
licence under this Part, unless it is satisfied that — 
(a) the rules made under this Part have been substantially complied with, and  
(b) adequate precautions have been taken in the place, in respect of which the l icence is to be 
given, to provide for the safety of persons attending exhibitions therein.  
(2) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section and to the control of the State Government, the 
licensing authority may grant licences under this Part to suc h persons as that authority thinks fit and on 
such terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions as it may determine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1973, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3). 
2. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and Schedule II, for “Part C Sta te”. 12 
 (3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of a licensing authority refusing to grant a licence under this 
Part may, within such tim e as may be prescribed, appeal to the State Government or to such officer as the 
State Government may specify in this behalf and the State Government or the officer, as the case may be, 
may make such order in the case as it or he thinks fit.  
(4) The Centra l Government may, from time to time, issue directions to licensees generally or to any 
licensee in particular for the purpose of regulating the exhibition of any film or class of films, so that 
scientific films, films intended for educational purposes, fil ms dealing with news and current events, 
documentary films or indigenous films secure an adequate opportunity of being exhibited, and where any 
such directions have been issued those directions shall be deemed to be additional conditions and 
restrictions s ubject to which the licence has been granted.  
13. Power of Central Government or local authority to suspend exhibition of films in certain 
cases .—(1) The Lieutenant -Governor or, as the case may be, the Chief Commissioner, in respect of the  
1[whole or any part of a Union territory] , and the District Magistrate in respect of the district within his 
jurisdiction, may, if he is of opinion that any film which is being publicly exhibited is likely to cause a 
breach of the peace, by order, suspend the exhibition of the film and during such suspension the film shall 
be deemed to be an uncertified film in the State, part or district, as the case may be.  
(2) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) has been issued by the Chief Commissioner or a District 
Magistrate, as th e case may be, a copy thereof, together with a statement of reasons therefore, shall 
forthwith be forwarded by the person making the same to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government may either confirm or discharge the order.  
(3) An order made und er this section shall remain in force for a period of two months from the date 
thereof, but the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that the order should continue in force, direct 
that the period of suspension shall be extended by such further peri od as it thinks fit.  
14. Penalties for contravention of this Part .—If the owner or person in charge of a cinematograph 
uses the same or allows it to be used, or if the owner or occupier of any place permits that place to be used 
in contravention of the pro visions of this Part or of the rule made thereunder, or of the conditions and 
restrictions upon or subject to which any licence has been granted under this Part, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and, in the case of a  continuing offence, with a further 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day during which the offence continues.  
15. Power to revoke licence .—Where the holder of a licence has been convicted of an offence under 
section 7 or section 14, the licence may be revoked by the licensing authority.  
16. Power to make rules .—2[(1)] The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules — 
(a) prescribing the terms, conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to which licences ma y be 
granted under this Part;  
(b) providing for the regulation of cinematograph exhibitions for securing the public safety;  
(c) prescribing the time within which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under              
sub-section ( 3) of section 12  may be preferred.  
3[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or mor e successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and Schedule II, for “whole Part C State or any part thereof”.  
2. Section 16 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 49 of 1981, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  13 
 making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
17. Power to exemp t.—The Central Government may, by order in writing exempt, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as it may impose, any cinematograph exhibition or class of cinematograph 
exhibitions from any of the provisions of this Part or of any rules made thereun der. 
PART IV  
REPEAL  
18. Repeal .—The Cinematograph Act, 1918 (2 of 1918) is hereby repealed:  
Provided that in relation to Part A States and Part B States the repeal shall have effect only in so far as 
the said Act relates to the sanctioning of cinematograph  films for exhibition.  
--------------------------The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
2A. Construction of references to laws not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
3. Appointment of Commission.  
4. Powers of Commission.  
5. Additional powers of Commission.  
5A. Power of Commission to utilise the services of certain officers and investigation agencies for 
conducting investigation pertaining to inquiry.  
5B. Power of Commission to appoint assessors.  
6. Statemen ts made by persons to the Commission.  
6A. Persons not obliged to disclose secret process of manufacture of goods in certain cases.  
7. Commission to cease to exist when so notified.  
8. Procedure to be followed by the Commission.  
8A. Inquiry not to be interrupted by reason of vacancy or change in the constitution of the 
Commission.  
8B. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard.  
8C. Right of cross -examination and representation by legal practitioner.  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
10. Members, e tc., to be public servants.  
10A. Penalty for acts calculated to bring the Commission or any member thereof into disrepute . 
11. Act to apply to other inquiring authorities in certain cases . 
12. Power to make rules . 
  2 
  
THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 60 OF 19521 
[14th August, 1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the appointment of Commissions of Inquiry and for vesting such 
Commissions with certain powers.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commissions of 
Inquiry Act, 1952.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir only in so far as it relates to 
inquiries pertaining to matters relatable to any of the entries enumerated i n List I or List III in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as applicable to that State.]  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means— 
(i) the Central Government, in relation to a Commission appointed by it to make an 
inquiry into any matter relatable to any of the entries enumerated in List I or List I I or List III 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; and  
(ii) the State Government, in relation to a Commission appointed by it to make an inquiry 
into any matter relatable to any of the entries enumerated in List II or List III in the Seventh 
Schedu le to the Constitution:  
4[Provided that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, th is clauses shall have 
effect subject to the modification that — 
(a) in sub -clause ( i) thereof, for the words and figures “List I or List II or List III in 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution ”, the words and figures “List I or List III in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” 
shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -clause ( ii) thereof, for the words and figures “List II o r List III in the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution ”, the words and   figures “List III in the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution as applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” shall be 
substituted;]  
(b) “Commission ” means a Commission of Inquiry app ointed under section 3;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to — 
Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule.  
Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I.  
Pondicherry (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963) by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule I.  
2. Subs by Act 79 of 1971, s.  2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971) . 
3.1st October, 1952, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 1670, dated the 30th September, 1952, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, s. 3.  
This Act, as amended by Act 79 of 1971, came into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir on 6 -3-1972 and in the 
districts of Kohima and Mokokchung in the State of Nagaland on 15 -2-1972, vide notification No. 94(E), dated 4 -3-1972 
and 74(E), dated 14 -2-1972, respectively, issued under s. 15 of Act 79 of 1972.  
4. Added by s . 3, ibid. 
 3 
 (c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
1[2A. Construction of references to laws not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir .—
Any reference in this Act to a law, which is not in force in the State of Jammu  and Kashmir, shall, in 
relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that 
State.]  
3. Appointment of Commission .—(1) The  appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it 
is necessary so to do, and shall if a resolution in this behalf is passed by  2[each House of Parliament 
or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State], by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a 
Commission of Inquiry for the purpose of making an inquiry into any defin ite matter of public 
importance and performing such functions and within such time as may be specified in the 
notification, and the Commission so appointed shall make the inquiry and perform the functions 
accordingly : 
Provided that where any such Commissio n has been appointed to inquire into any matter — 
(a) by the Central Government, no State Government shall, except with the approval of the 
Central Government, appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter for so long as 
the Commission appointe d by the Central Government is functioning;  
(b) by a State Government, the Central Government shall not appoint another Commission to 
inquire into the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the State Government is 
functioning, unless the Ce ntral Government is of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be 
extended to two or more States.  
(2) The Commission may consist of one or more members appointed by the appropriate 
Government, and where the Commission consists of more than one member,  one of them may be 
appointed as the Chairman thereof.  
3[(3) The appropriate Government may, at any stage of an inquiry by the Commission fill any 
vacancy which may have arisen in the office of a member of the Commission (whether consisting of 
one or more than one member).  
(4) The appropriate Government shall cause to be laid before  2[each House of Parliament or, as 
the case may be, the Legislature of the State], the report, if any, of the Commission on the inquiry 
made by the Commission under sub -section ( 1) together with a memorandum of the action taken 
thereon, within a period of six months of the submission of the report by the Commission to the 
appropriate Government.]  
4*                                   *                                *                                    *                                    * 
4. Powers of Commission .—The Commission shall have the powers of a civil court, while trying 
a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 
namel y:— 
(a) 5[summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India] and 
examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s.  4 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
2. Subs . by Act 19 of 1990, s . 2, for certain words  (w.e.f. 28 -8-1990) . 
3. Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s . 5 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971) . 
4. Sub-sections ( 5) and ( 6) omitted by Act 19 of 1990, s. 2,  ibid.(w.e.f. 28 -8-1990).  
5. Subs. by Act 79 of 1971, s. 6, for cer tain words  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971 ). 4 
 5. Additional powers of Commission .—(1) Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion 
that, having regard to the nature of the inquiry to be made and other circumstances of the case, all or 
any of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) should 
be made applicable to a Commission, th e appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that all or such of the said provisions as may be specified in the notification shall apply 
to that Commission and on the issue of such a notification, the said provisions shall apply 
accordingly.  
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person, subject to any privilege which may 
be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such 
points or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be u seful for, or relevant to, the              
subject matter of the inquiry  1[and any person so required shall be deemed to be legally bound to 
furnish such information within the meaning of section 176 and section 177 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860)].  
(3) The Commission or any officer, not below the rank of a Gazetted Officer, specially authorised 
in this behalf by the Commission may enter any building or place where the Commission has reason 
to believe that any books of account or other documents rela ting to the subject matter of the inquiry 
may be found, and may seize any books of account or documents or take extracts or copies therefrom, 
subject to the provisions of section 102 and section 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898            
(5 of 1898), in so far as they may be applicable.  
(4) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any offence as is described in 
section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code                   
(45 of 1 860) is committed in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commission may, after 
recording the facts constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as provided for in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), forward the case to a magistrate having jurisdiction to 
try the same and the magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the 
complaint against the accused as if the case had been forwarded to him under section 482 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898.  
(5) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
2[5A. Power of Commission to utilise the services of certain officers and investigation 
agencies for conducting investigation pertaining to inquiry .—(1) The Commission may, for the 
purpose of conducting any investigation pertaining to the inquiry, utilise the services, — 
(a) in the case of a Commission appointed by the Central Government, of any officer or 
investigation agency of the Central Government or any State Government with the concurrence of 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be; or  
(b) in the case of a Commission appointed by the State Government, of any o fficer or 
investigation agency of the State Government or Central Government with the concurrence of the 
State Government or the Central Government, as the case may be.  
(2) For the purpose of investigating into any matter pertaining to the inquiry, any officer or 
agency whose services are utilised under sub -section ( 1) may, subject to the direction and control of 
the Commission, — 
(a) summon and enforce the attendance of any  person and examine him;  
(b) require the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) requisition any public record or copy thereof from any office.  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s.  7 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 30-12-1971).  
 5 
 (3) The provisions of section 6 shall apply in relation to any statement made by a person before 
any o fficer or agency whose services are utilised under sub section ( 1) as they apply in relation to any 
statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the Commission.  
(4) The officer or agency, whose services are utilised under sub -section (1), shall investigate into 
any matter pertaining to the inquiry and submit a report thereon (hereafter in this section referred to as 
the investigation report) to the Commission within such period as may be specified by the 
Commission in this behalf.  
(5) The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of the facts stated and the 
conclusions, if any, arrived at in the investigation report submitted to it under sub -section ( 4), and for 
this purpose the Commission may make such inquiry (including th e examination of the person or 
persons who conducted or assisted in the investigation) as it thinks fit. ] 
1[5B. Power of Commission to appoint assessors .—The Commission may, for the purpose of 
conducting any inquiry, appoint persons having special knowledg e of any matter connected with the 
inquiry as assessors, to assist and advise the Commission in the inquiry and the assessors shall be 
entitled to such travelling and other expenses as may be prescribed.]  
6. Statements made by persons to the Commission .—No statement made by a person in the 
course of giving evidence before the Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any 
civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:  
Provided that the statement — 
(a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by the Commission to answer, or  
(b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.  
2[6A. Persons not obliged to disclose secret process of manufacture of goods in certain 
cases .—Except i n cases where a Commission is expressly required to inquire into the process of 
manufacture of any goods, nothing in this Act shall be deemed to compel any person giving evidence 
before the Commission to disclose any secret process of manufacture thereof.]  
3[7. Commission to cease to exist when so notified .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that — 
(a) a Commission (other than a Commission appointed in pursuance  of a resolution passed by 
4[each House of Parli ament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State] shall cease to 
exist, if it is of opinion that the continued existence of the Commission is unnecessary;  
(b) a Commission appointed in pursuance of a resolution passed by  4[each House of 
Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of the State] shall cease to exist if a resolution 
for the discontinuance of the Commission is passed by  4[each House of Parliament or, as the case 
may be, the Legislature of the State].  
(2) Every notifica tion issued under sub -section ( 1) shall specify the date from which the 
Commission shall cease to exist and on the issue of such notification, the Commission shall cease to 
exist with effect from the date specified therein.]  
8. Procedure to be followed by the Commission .—The Commission shall, subject to any rules 
that may be made in this behalf, have power to regulate its own procedure (including the fixing of 
places and times of its sittings and deciding whether to sit in public or in private)  5* * *.  
6[8A. Inquiry not to be interrupted by reason of vacancy or change in the constitution of the 
Commission .—(1) Where the Commission consists of two or more members, it may act 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1988, s . 2 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1988) . 
2. Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s . 9 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971) . 
3. Subs . by s. 10, ibid., for section 7  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
4. Subs . by Act 19 of 1990, s . 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -8-1990).  
5. Certain words omitted by Act 79 of 1971, s . 11 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
6. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -10-1971).  
 6 
 notwithstanding the absence of the Chairman  or any other member or any vacancy among its 
members.  
(2) Where during the course of an inquiry before a Commission, a change has taken place in the 
constitution of the Commission by reason of any vacancy having  been fi lled or by any other reason, it 
shall not be necessary for the Commission to commence the inquiry a fresh and the inquiry may be 
continued from the stage at which the change took place.  
8B. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard .—If, at any stage of the inquiry, the 
Commission, — 
(a) considers it   necessary to inqui re into the conduct of any person; or  
(b) is of opinion that the reputation of any person is likely to be prejudicially affected by the 
inquiry,  
the Commission shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the inquiry and to 
produce evidence in his defence:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply where the credit of a witness is being impeached.  
8C. Right of cross -examination and representation by legal practitioner .—The appropriate 
Government, every person referred to in se ction 8B and, with the permission of the Commission, any 
other person whose evidence is recorded by the Commission, — 
(a) may cross -examine a witness other than a witness produced by it or him;  
(b) may address the Commission; and  
(c) may be represented befo re the Commission by a legal practitioner or, with the permission 
of the Commission, by any other person.]  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the appropriate Government, the Commission or any me mber thereof, or any person acting under the 
direction either of the appropriate Government or of the Commission in respect of anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
thereunder or  in respect of the publication, by or under the authority of the appropriate Government or 
the Commission, of any report, paper or proceedings.  
10. Members, etc., to be public servants .—Every member of the Commission and every officer 
appointed or authorised by the Commission in exercise of functions under this Act shall be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
1[10A. Penalty for acts calculated to bring the Commission or any member the reof into 
disrepute .—(1) If any person, by words either spoken or intended to be read, makes or publishes any 
statement or does any other act, which is calculated to bring the Commission or any member thereof 
into disrepute, he shall be punishable with sim ple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both.  
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
when an offence under sub -section ( 1) is alleged to have been committed, t he High Court may take 
cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing, made 
by a member of a Commission or an officer of the Commission authorised by it in this behalf.  
(3) Every complaint referred to it in sub-section ( 2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the 
offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to 
give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him.  
(4) No Hi gh Court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub -section ( 1) unless the complaint 
is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s . 13 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
2. Subs . by Act 63 of 1988, s . 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 10 -12-1988).  
 7 
 (5) A High Court taking cognizance of an offence under sub -section ( 1) shall try the case in 
accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant cases instituted otherwise than on a police 
report before a court of a Magistrate:  
Provided that the personal attendance of a member of a Commission as a complainant or 
otherwise i s not required in such trial.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) an 
appeal shall lie as a matter of right from any judgment of the High Court to the Supreme Court, both 
on facts and on law.  
(7) Every appeal to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 6) shall be preferred within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the judgment appealed from:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the period of thirty days.]]  
11. Act to apply to other inquiring authorities in certain cases .—Where any authority (by 
whatever name called), other than a Commissi on appointed under section 3, has been or is set up 
under any resolution or order of the appropriate Government for the purpose of making an inquiry 
into any definite matter of public importance and that Government is of opinion that all or any of the 
provisions of this Act should be made applicable to that authority, that Government may, subject to 
the prohibition contained in the proviso to sub section ( 1) of section 3, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the said provisions of this Act s hall apply to that authority, and on the issue of 
such a notification , that authority shall be deemed to be a Commission appointed under section 3 for 
the purposes of this Act.  
12. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office and the conditions of service of the members of the Commission;  
(b) the manner in which inquiries may be held under this Act and the procedure to be 
followed by the Commission in respect of the proceedings before it;  
(c) the powers of civil court which may be vested in the Commission;  
1[(cc) the travelling and other expenses payable to assessors appointed under section 5B, and 
to person summoned by the Commission to give evidence or to produce documents before it;]  
(d) any  other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
2[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or 3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule o r both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity o f anything previously done under that rule.]  
4[(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature.]  
_____  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1988, s . 4 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 79 of 1971, s . 14 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1971).  
3. Subs . by Act 4 of 1986, s . 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI AND AJMER RENT CONTROL ACT, 1952  
_________  
ARRENGEMENT OF SECTION  
_________  
SECTION S 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act not to apply to certain premises.  
CHAPTER II  
STANDARD  RENT  AND PROVISIONS  RELATING  TO OTHER CHARGES BY THE LANDLORD  
4. Rent in excess of standard rent not recoverable.  
5. Unlawful charges not to be claimed or received.  
6. Lawful increases of standard rent.  
7. Notice of increase of, or addition to, rent.  
8. Cases in which standa rd rent may be fixed by court.  
9. Fixation of interim rent by the court.  
10. Limitation of liability of middleman.  
11. Limitation for applications for fixation of standard rent . 
12. Refund of rent, premium, etc., not recoverable under this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
CONTROL  OF EVICTION  OF TENANTS  
13. Protection of a tenant against eviction.  
14. Recovery of possession for occupation and re -entry . 
15. Recovery of possession for repairs and re -building and re -entry.  
16. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period . 
17. Special provision for recovery of possession in certain cases.  
18. Permission to construct additional structures . 
19. Special provision regarding vacant building sites.  
20. Sub -tenant to become tenant on determination of tenancy.  
21. Va cant possession to the landlord.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
HOTELS AND LODGING  HOUSES  
22. Application of this Chapter .  
23. Appointment of Controller . 
24. Fixing of fair rate.  
25. Revision of fair rate.  2 
 SECTION S 
26. Charges in excess of fair rate not recoverable . 
27. Provisions relating to inquiries by Controller.  
28. Recovery of possession by manager of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house . 
29. Appeals . 
30. Penalty . 
31. Controller to be deemed to be public servant . 
32. Protection of action taken under this Chapter . 
CHAPTER V  
JURISDICTION  OF COURTS  APPEALS , REVIEW  AND REVISION  
33. Jurisdiction of courts . 
34. Appeals . 
35. Revision and review . 
36. Limitation.  
37. Procedure before courts.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
38. Act to over -ride other laws.  
39. Exemption of certain  premises from the operation of the Act.  
40. Landlord ’s duty to keep the premises in good repair . 
41. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service . 
42. Landlord ’s duty to give notice of new constructions to Government .  
43. Leases of vacant premises to Government.  
44. Penalties.  
45. Power to make rules . 
46. Repeals and savings . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .  3 
 THE DELHI AND AJMER RENT CONTROL ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 38 OF 1952  
  
[15th April , 1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the control of rents and evictions, and for the lease of vacant premises to 
Government, in certain areas in the States of Delhi and Ajmer.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi and Ajmer Rent 
Control Act, 1952.  
(2) It extends to the areas specified in the First Schedule and may be extended by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to such other areas in the State of Delhi or Ajmer as 
may, from time to time, be specified in the notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any  time, by a like notification direct that it shall cease 
to be in force in any such area, and with effect from such date, as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “fair rate” means the fair rate fixed under section 24 and includes the rate as revised under 
section 25;  
(b) “hotel or lodging house ” means a building or part of a building where lodging with or without 
board or other services is provided for a monetary consideratio n; 
(c) “landlord” means a person who, for the time being is receiving, or is entitled to receive, the 
rent of any premises, whether on his own account or on account of, or on behalf of, or for the benefit 
of, any other person or as a trustee, guardian or r eceiver for any other person or who would so receive 
the rent or be entitled to receive the rent, if the premises were let to a tenant;  
(d) “lawful increase ” means an increase in rent permitted under the provisions of this Act ; 
(e) “manager of a hotel ” includes any person in charge of the management of the hotel;  
(f) “owner of a lodging house ” means a person who receives or is entitled to receive whether on 
his own account or on behalf of himself and others or as an agent or a trustee for any other person, 
any monetary consideration from any person on account of board, lodging or other services;  
(g) “premises” means any building or part of a building which is, or is intended to be, let 
separately for use as a residence or for commercial use or for any other purpose, and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such building or part of a 
building;  
(ii) any furniture supplied by the landlord for use in such building or part of a building;  
but does not include a room in a hotel or  lodging house;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “standard rent ”, in relation to any premises, means, — 
                                                           
1. 9th June, 195 2, vide Notification No. S. R. O. 1016 , dated 3rd June 1952, see Gazette of India , Part II, s . 3. 
 4 
 (i) where the standard rent has been fixed by the court under section 8, the rent so fixed; or  
(ii) where the standard  rent has not been fixed under section 8, the standard rent of the 
premises as determined in accordance with the provisions of the Second Schedule;  
(j) “tenant” means any person by whom or on whose account rent is payable for any premises and 
includes such  sub-tenants and other persons as have derived title under a tenant under the provisions 
of any law before the commencement of this Act.  
3. Act not to apply to certain premises .—Nothing in this Act shall apply — 
(a) to any premises belonging to the Government; or  
(b) to any tenancy or other like relationsh ip created by a grant from the G overnment in 
respect of the premises taken on lease, or requisitioned, by the Government.  
CHAPTER II  
STANDARD  RENT AND PROVISIONS RELATING TO OTHER CHARGES BY THE  LANDLORD  
4. Rent in excess of standard rent not recoverable .—(1) Except where rent is liable to periodical 
increase by virtue of an agreement entered into before the 1st day of January, 1939 or where rent is 
payab le under a lease entered into before the 1st day of January, 1939, which has not expired before the 
first day of the period for which the rent is claimed, no tenant shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the 
contrary, be liable to pay to his landlord for the occupation of any premises any amount in excess of the 
standard rent of the premises unless such amount is a lawful increase of the standard rent in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), any agree ment for the payment of rent in excess of 
the standard rent shall be null and void and shall be construed as if it were an agreement for the payment 
of the standard rent only.  
5. Unlawful charges not to be claimed or received .—(1) Subject to the provisions  of this Act, no 
person shall claim or receive any rent in excess of the standard rent, notwithstanding any agreement to the 
contrary.  
(2) No person shall, in consideration of the grant, continuance or renewal of a tenancy or sub -tenancy 
of any premises, c laim or receive the payment of any premium, pugree , fine, advance or any other like 
sum in addition to the rent.  
Explanation. —Receipt of rent in advance for a period not exceeding one month shall not be deemed 
to be an advance within the meaning of this section.  
(3) It shall not be lawful for the tenant or any other person acting or purporting to act on behalf of the 
tenant or a sub -tenant to claim or receive any payment in consideration of the relinquishment of his 
tenancy or sub -tenancy, as the case may  be, of any premises.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply — 
(a) to any payment made in pursuance of an agreement entered into before the 1st day of 
November, 1939; or  
(b) to any payment made under an agreement by any person to a landlord for the purpose  of 
financing the construction of the whole or part of any premises on the land belonging to the landlord, 
if one of the conditions of the agreement is that the landlord is to let to such person the whole or part 
of the premises when completed for the use of such person or any member of his family:  
Provided that such payment does not exceed the amount of agreed rent for a period of five years of 
the whole or part of the premises to be let to such person.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( b) of this s ub-section, a “member of the family ” means, in 
the case of an undivided Hindu family, any member of such family and in the case of any other family, 
the husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister or any other person dependent on him.  
6. Lawful increases of standard rent .—(1) Where a landlord has at any  time, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, incurred expenditure for any improvement, addition or structural 5 
 alteration in the premises , not being expenditure on decoration  or tenantable repairs necessary or usual 
for such premises, and the cost of that improvement, addition or alteration has not been taken into account 
in determining the standard rent of the premises, the landlord may lawfully increase the standard rent per  
year by an amount not exceeding seven and a half per cent . of such cost.  
(2) Where a landlord pays in respect of the premises any charge for electricity or water consumed in 
the premises or any other charge levied by a local  authority having jurisdiction in the area which is 
ordinarily payable by the tenant, he may recover from the tenant any amount so paid by him; but no 
landlord shall recover from the tenant whether by means of an increase in rent or otherwise the amount of 
any tax on building or land im posed in respect of the premises occupied by the tenant:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect the liability of any tenant under an agreement 
entered into before the 1st day of January, 1952, whether express or implied, to pay from time to  time the 
amount of any such tax as aforesaid.  
(3) Where a part of the premises let for use to a tenant has been sub -let by him — 
(a) the landlord may lawfully increase the rent payable by the tenant — 
(i) in the case of any premises let for residential purposes, by an amount not exceeding 
twelve and one -half per cent.  of the standard rent of the part sub -let; 
(ii) in the case of any premises let for other purposes, by an amount not exceeding twenty -
five per cent.  of the standard rent of the part sub -let; 
(b) the tenant may lawfully increase the rent payable by the sub -tenant— 
(i) in the case of any premises let for residential purposes, by an amount not exceeding 
twenty -five per cent.  of the standard rent of the part sub -let; and  
(ii) in the case of any p remises let for other purposes, by an amount not exceeding fifty              
per cent.  of the standard rent of the part sub -let; 
(c) the tenant shall, on being so requested in writing by the landlord, supply, within fourteen days 
of such request being made, a statement in writing giving full particulars of any sub -letting including 
the rent charged . 
7. Notice of increase of, or addition to, rent .—(1) Where a landlord wishes to increase the rent of 
any premises, he shall give the tenant notice of his intention to make the increase and in so far as such 
increase is lawful under this Act, it shall be due and recoverable only in respect of the period of the 
tenancy after the end of the month in which the notice is given.  
(2) Every notice under sub -section  (1) shall be in writing signed by or on behalf of the landlord and 
given in the manner provided in section 106 of the T ransfer of Property Act, 1882 ( 4 of 1882).  
(3) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this section app ly equally 
to any increase in rent payable by the sub -tenant.  
8. Cases in which standard rent may be fixed by court .—(1) In any of the following cases, 
namely:— 
(a) where, for any reason whatsoever, any dispute arises between a landlord and the tenant 
regarding the amount of standard rent payable in respect of any premises in accordance with the 
provisions of the Second Schedule; or  
(b) where, at any time on or after the 2nd day of June, 1944, any premises are first let and the  rent 
at which they are le t is, in the opinion of the court, unreasonable ; 
the court may, on an application made to it for the purpose or in any suit or proceeding, fix the standard 
rent at such an amount as, having regard to the provisions of this Act and the circumstances of the case, 
the court deems just.  
(2) Where there is any dispute between the landlord and the tenant regarding the amount which is a 
lawful increase of the standard rent, the court may determine such amount.  6 
 (3) Where for any reason it is not possible to determi ne the standard rent of any premises on the 
principles set forth in the Second Schedule, the court may, on an application made to it for the purpose, 
determine the standard rent, and in so doing, shall have regard to the standard rent of similar premises i n 
the same locality and other circumstances of the case.  
(4) Infixing the standard rent of any premises under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the court shall fix an 
amount which appears to it to be reasonable and no standard rent so fixed shall exceed seven and              
one-half per cent. of the reasonable cost of construction of such premises.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the “cost of construction ”, in respect of any 
premises, includes the market value of the land comprised in the premises at the time of the completion of 
such construction.  
(5) The standard rent shall in all cases be fixed as for a tenancy of twelve mon ths: 
Provided that where any premises are let or re -let for a period of less than twelve  months, the 
standard rent for such tenancy shall bear the same proportion to the annual standard rent as the period of 
tenancy bears to twelve months.  
(6) Where the co urt determines the standard rent of any premises under this section, the court shall 
determine the standard rent of the premises in an unfurnished state, and may also determine an additional 
charge to be payable on account of any fittings or furniture supp lied by the landlord and it shall be lawful 
for the landlord to recover such additional charge from the tenant.  
(7) In every case in which the court determines the standard rent of any premises under this section, it 
shall specify a date from which the sta ndard rent so determined shall be deemed to have effect:  
Provided that in no case, the date so specified shall be earlier than six months prior to the date of 
filing of the application for the determination of the standard rent or, as the case may be, of t he institution 
of the suit or proceeding in which the standard rent is determined.  
9. Fixation of interim rent by the court .—If an application for fixing the standard rent or for 
determining the lawful increase of such rent is made under section 8, the court shall, as expeditiously as 
possible, make an order specifying the amount of the rent or the lawful increase to be paid by the tenant to 
the landlord pending the final decision of the application and shall appoint a date from which the rent or 
lawful increase so specified shall be deemed to have effect.  
10. Limitation of liability of middleman .—No collector of rents or middleman shall be liable to pay 
to his principal, in respect of any premises, any sum by way of rental charges which exceeds the amoun t 
which he is entitled under this Act to realise from the tenant or tenants of the premises.  
11. Limitation for applications for fixation of standard rent .—Any landlord or tenant may file an 
application to the court for  fixing the standard rent of the prem ises or for determining the lawful increase 
of such rent — 
(a) in the case of any premises which were let, or in which the cause of action for lawful increase 
of rent arose, before the commencement of this Act, within six months from such commencement;  
(b) in the case of any premises let after the commencement of this Act, within six months from 
the date on which it is so let; and  
(c) in the case of any premises in which the cause of action for lawful increase of rent arises after 
the commencement of this Ac t, within six months from that date:  
Provided that the court may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of six 
months if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the application 
in time.  
12. Refund of rent, premium, etc., not recoverable under this Act .—Where any amount has been 
paid by any person whether before or after the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) on account of rent, being an amount which is by reason of the provisions of this Act, not  
recoverable, or  7 
 (b) as premium, pugree , fine, advance or other like sum in addition to the rent, the receiving of 
which is prohibited under this Act,  
the court may, on an application made to it in this behalf at any  time within a period of six months from  
the date of such payment, direct the landlord by whom or on whose behalf the amount was received to 
refund the amount to such person or, if such person is a tenant, direct that the amount so paid shall be 
deducted from the rent payable by the tenant to th e landlord.  
CHAPTER III  
CONTROL  OF EVICTION  OF TENANTS  
13. Protection of a tenant against eviction .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law or any contract, no decree or order for the recovery of possession of any 
premises shall be passed by any court in favour of the landlord against any tenant (including a tenant 
whose tenancy is terminated):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any suit or other proceeding for such recovery 
of possession if the court i s satisfied — 
(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of rent due within one 
month of the date on which a notice of demand for the arrears of rent has been served on him by the 
landlord in the manner provided in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 ( 4 of 1882); or  
(b) that the tenant without obtaining the consent of the landlord in writing has, after the 
commencement of this Act, — 
(i) sub -let, assigned or otherwise parted with the possession of, the whole or any part of 
the premises; or  
(ii) used the premises for a purpose other than that for which they were let; or  
(c) that the tenant, without obtaining the consent of the landlord had, before the commencement 
of this Act, — 
(i) sub -let, assigned or otherwise p arted with the possession of, the whole or any part of the 
premises; or  
(ii) used the premises for a purpose other than that for which they were let; or  
(d) that the premises were let for use as a residence and neither the tenant nor any member of his 
family has been residing therein for a period of six months immediately before the date of the 
institution of any suit or proceeding for recovery of possession; or  
(e) that the premises let for residential purposes are required bona fide  by the landlord who is  the 
owner of such premises for occupation as a residence for himself or his family and that he has no 
other suitable accommodation:  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “residential premises ” include any premises which 
having been let for use as a residence are, without the consent of the landlord, used incidentally for 
commercial or other purposes; or  
(f) that the premises have become unsafe or unfit for human habitation and are bona fide  required 
by the landlord for carrying out repairs which ca nnot be carried out without the premises being 
vacated; or  
(g) that the premises are bona fide required by the landlord for the purpose of re -building the 
premises or for the replacement of the premises by any building or for the erection of other buildings 
and that such building or re -building cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated; or  
(h) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, built, acquired 
vacant possession of, or been allotted, a suitable r esidence; or  8 
 (i) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a residence by reason of his being in the 
service or employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has ceased, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, to be in such servic e or employment; or  
(j) that the conduct of the tenant is such that it is a nuisance or that it causes annoyance to the 
occupiers of the neighbouring premises or other occupiers of the same premises; or  
(k) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, caused or permitted 
to be caused substantial damage to the premises, or notwithstanding previous notice has used or dealt 
with the premises in a manner contrary to any condition imposed on the landlord by the Government 
or the Del hi Improvement Trust while giving him a lease of the land on which the premises are 
situated; or  
(l) that the landlord requires the premises in order to carry out any buildi ng work at the instance 
of the G overnment or the Delhi Improvement Trust in pursuan ce of any improvement scheme or 
development scheme.  
(2) No decree or order for recovery of possession shall be passed on the ground specified in clause ( a) 
of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), if, on the first day of the hearing of the suit or within such fu rther time 
as may be allowed by the court, the tenant pays in court the arrears of rent then due together with the 
costs of the suit.  
(3) For the purposes of clause ( b) or clause ( c) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), a court may presume 
that the premises let for use as a residence were or are sub -let by a tenant in whole or in part to another 
person, if it is satisfied that such person not being a servant of the tenant or a member of the family of 
such servant was or has been residing in the premises or an y part thereof for a period exceeding one 
month otherwise than in commonality with the tenant.  
(4) Where a decree for recovery of possession is passed on the grounds specified in clause ( e) of the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1), the landlord shall not be entit led to obtain possession of the premises by an 
order of the court before the expiration of a period of three months from the date of the decree.  
(5) If the tenant contests the suit as regards the claim for ejectment, the plaintiff -landlord may make 
an appl ication at any stage of the suit for an order on the tenant -defendant to deposit month by month rent 
at a rate at which it was last paid and also the arrears of rent, if any, and the court, after giving an 
opportunity to the parties to be heard, may make a n order for the deposit of rent at such rate month by 
month as it thinks fit and the arrears of rent, if any, and on the failure of the tenant to deposit the arrears 
of rent within fifteen days of the date of the order or to deposit the rent at such rate f or any month by the 
15th of the next following month, the court shall order the defence against ejectment to be struck out and 
the tenant to be placed in the same position as if he had not defended the claim to ejectment; and the 
landlord may withdraw the amount of money in deposit without prejudice to his claim to any decree or 
order for recovery of possession of the premises.  
(6) For avoidance of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing in this section shall apply to any decree 
or order for recovery of possession of any premises passed before the commencement of this Act.  
14. Recovery of possession for occupation and re -entry .—Where a landlord recovers possession of 
any premises from the tenant by virtue o f any decree or order made on the grounds specified in clause ( e) 
of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 13 and the premises are not occupied by the landlord as a 
residence for himself or his family within two months of obtaining such possession or th e premises 
having been so occupied, are, at any  time within eight months of such occupation, re -let in whole or in 
part to any person other than the evicted tenant, the court may, on the application of such evicted tenant, 
place him in vacant possession of  the premises and award such damages to him as it thinks fit against the 
landlord.  
15. Recovery of possession for repairs and re -building and re -entry .—(1) The court shall, when 
passing any decree or order on the grounds specified in clause ( f) or clause ( g) of the proviso to                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 13, ascertain from the tenant whether he elects to be placed in occupation of the 
premises or part thereof from which he is to be evicted and if the tenant so elects, shall record the fact of  
the election in the decree or order and specify therein the date on or before which he shall deliver 9 
 possession so as to enable the landlord to commence the work of repairs or building or re -building, as the 
case may be.  
(2) If the tenant delivers possess ion on or before the date specified in the decree or order, the landlord 
shall, on the completion of the work of repairs or building or re -building place the tenant in occupation of 
the premises or part thereof.  
(3) If, after the tenant has delivered posse ssion on or before the date specified in the decree or order, 
the landlord fails to commence the work of repairs or building or re -building within one month of the 
specified date or fails to complete the work in a reasonable time or having completed the wo rk, fails to 
place the tenant in occupation of the premises in accordance with sub -section ( 2), the court may, on the 
application of the tenant made within one year from the specified date, order the landlord to place the 
tenant in occupation of the premises or part thereof on the original terms and conditions or to pay to such 
tenant such compensation as may be fixed by the court.  
16. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period .—Where a landlord does not 
require the whole or any pa rt of any premises for a particular period and he lets the premises or part 
thereof as a residence for such period as may be agreed to in writing between himself and the tenant and 
the tenant does not, on the expiry of the said period, vacate such premises , the court may, on an 
application of such landlord, place him in vacant possession of the premises or part thereof by evicting 
the tenant and every other person who may be in occupation of such premises.  
17. Special provision for recovery of possession in  certain cases .—Where the landlord in respect 
of any premises is any company or other body corporate or any local authority, or any public institution 
and the premises are required for the use of employees of such landlord or in the case of a public 
instit ution, for the furtherance of its activities then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, the 
court may, on an application of such landlord, place him in vacant possession of such premises by 
evicting the tenant and every other person who may be  in occupation thereof, if the court is satisfied — 
(a) that the tenant, to whom such premises were let for use as  a residence at a time when he was 
in the service or employment of the landlord, has ceased to be in such service or employment; or  
(b) that th e tenant has acted in contravention of the terms, express or implied, under which he was 
authorised to occupy such premises; or  
(c) that any person is in unauthorised occupation of such premises; or  
(d) that the premises are bona fide required by the public institution or the furtherance of its 
activities.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, public institution includes any educational institution, 
library, hospital and charitable dispensary.  
18. Permission to construct additional structures .—Where the landlord proposes to make any 
improvement in, or construct any additional structure on, any building which has been let to a tenant and 
the tenant refuses to allow the landlord to make such improvement or construct such additional structure, 
the landlord may apply to the court and the court may, if it is satisfied that the landlord is ready and 
willing to commence the work and that such work will not cause any undue hardship to the tenant, permit 
the landlord to do such work and may make such oth er orders as it thinks fit in the circumstances of the 
case.  
19. Special provision regarding vacant building sites .—(1) The provisions of this section shall 
apply notwithstanding anything contained in section 13, but only in relation to premises in such ar eas as 
the Central Government may, from time to time, specify by notification in the  Official Gazette.  
(2) Where any premises which have been let comprise vacant grounds upon which it is permissible 
under the building regulations or other municipal bye -laws for the time being in force to erect any 
building, whether for use as a residence or any other purpose and the landlord proposing to erect such 
building is unable to obtain possession of these grounds from the tenant by agreement with him, the 
landlord m ay apply to the court, and the court may, if it is satisfied that the landlord is ready and willing 10 
 to commence the work and that the severance of the vacant grounds from the rest of the premises will not 
cause undue hardship to the tenant, — 
(a) direct such severance,  
(b) place the landlord in possession of the vacant grounds,  
(c) determine the rent payable by the tenant thereafter in respect of the rest of the premises, and  
(d) make such other orders as it thinks fit in the circumstances of the case.  
20. Sub-tenant to become tenant on determination of tenancy .—Where the interest of a tenant of 
any premises is determined for any reason, any sub -tenant to whom the whole or any part of such 
premises has been lawfully sub -let whether before or after the comm encement of this Act shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to become the tenant of the landlord on the same terms and 
conditions on which he would have held from the tenant if the tenancy had continued.  
21. Vacant possession to the landlo rd.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, 
where the interest of a tenant in any premises is determined for any reason whatsoever and any decree or 
order is passed by a court under this Act for the recovery of possession of such premises, the  decree or 
order shall, subject to the provisions of section 20, be binding on all persons who may be in occupation of 
the premises and vacant possession thereof shall be given to the landlord by evicting all such persons 
therefrom:  
Provided that nothing i n this section shall apply to any person who has an independent title to such 
premises.  
CHAPTER IV  
HOTELS AND LODGING  HOUSES  
22. Application of this Chapter .—The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all hotels and 
lodging houses within the Municipalities of New Delhi and Delhi and the Notified Area of the Civil 
Station, Delhi and may be applied by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to 
such other areas in the State of Delhi or Ajmer as may be specified in the not ification.  
23. Appointment of Controller .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette,  appoint any person to be a Controller for the purpose of performing the functions assigned to 
him by this Chapter.  
24. Fixing of fair rate .—(1) Where the Controller, on a written complaint or otherwise, has reason to 
believe that the charges made for board or lodging or any other service provide d in any hotel or lodging 
house  are excessive, he may fix a fair rate to be charged for board, lodging o r other services provided in 
the hotel or lodging house and in fixing such fair rate, specify separately the rate for lodging, board or 
other services.  
(2) In determining the fair rate under sub -section ( 1), the Controller shall have regard to the 
circumst ances of the case and to the prevailing rate of charges for the same or similar accommodation, 
board and service, during the twelve months immediately preceding the 1st day of September, 1939 and 
to any general increase in the cost of living after that dat e. 
25. Revision of fair rate .—On a written application from the manager of a hotel or the owner of a 
lodging house or otherwise, the Controller may, from time to time, revise the fair rate to be charged for 
board, lodging or other service, and fix such rat e as he may deem fit having regard to any general rise or 
fall in the cost of living which may have occurred after the fixing of the fair rate.  
26. Charges in excess of fair rate not recoverable .—When the Controller has determined the fair 
rate of charges — 
(a) the manager of the hotel or the owner of the lodging house, as the case may be, shall not 
charge any amount in excess of the fair rate and shall not, except with the previous written consent of 
the Controller, withdraw from the lodgers any concession or service allowed at the time when the 
Controller determined the fair rate;  11 
 (b) any agreement for the payment of any charges in excess of such fair rate shall be void in 
respect of such excess and shall be construed as if it were an agreement for payment of the said fair 
rate; 
(c) any sum paid by a lodger in excess of the fair rate shall be recoverable by him at any  time 
within a period of six months from the date of the payment from the manager of the hotel or the 
owner of the lodging house or his legal re presentatives and may, without prejudice to any other mode 
of recovery, be deducted by such lodger from any amount payable by him to such manager or owner.  
27. Provisions relating to inquiries by Controller .—(1) No fair rate under this Chapter shall be 
fixed by the Controller except after holding an inquiry.  
(2) Every such inquiry shall be made summarily in the prescribed manner.  
(3) For the purposes of holding any inquiry under sub -section ( 1), the Controller may require the 
manager of a hotel or the owner  of a lodging house to produce before him any books of account, 
documents or other information relating to the hotel or lodging house concerned which he may consider 
necessary and may himself enter, or authorise any person subordinate to him to enter, upon  any premises 
to which the inquire relates.  
28. Recovery of possession by manager of a hotel or the owner of a lodging                                     
house .— Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a manager of a hotel or owner of a lodging 
house shall be entitled to recover possession of the accommodation provided by him on obtaining a 
certificate from the Controller certifying — 
(a) that the lodger has been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance or which causes annoyance to 
any adjoining or n eighbouring lodger;  
(b) that the accommodation is reasonably and bona fide  required by the owner of the hotel or 
lodging house, as the case may be, either for his own occupation or for the occupation of any person 
for whose benefit the accommodation is hel d, or any other cause which may be deemed satisfactory 
by the Controller;  
(c) that the lodger has failed to vacate the accommodation on the termination of the period of the 
agreement in respect thereof;  
(d) that the lodger has done any act which is inconsi stent with the purpose for which the 
accommodation was given to him or which is likely to affect adversely or substantially the owner's 
interest therein;  
(e) that the lodger has failed to pay the rent due from him.  
29. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Controller under this Chapter may, 
within fifteen days on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal in writing to the Chief 
Commissioner.  
(2) The Chief C ommissioner shall call for the record of the Controller and after exami ning the record 
and after making such further inquiry as he thinks fit either personally or through the Controller, shall 
decide the appeal.  
(3) The decision of the Chief Commissioner and subject only to such decision, the order of the 
Controller shall, fo r the purposes of this Chapter, be final.  
30. Penalty .—Any manager of a hotel or owner of a lodging house who — 
(i) fails or refuses to produce before the Controller any books of account or document or other 
information which the Controller may require him to produce under sub -section ( 3) of section 27, or 
refuses to allow the Controller or any person authorised by him under the said sub -section access to 
the premises to which the inquiry relates; or  
(ii) charges any amount in excess of the fair rate in cont ravention of section 26,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with 
both.  12 
 31. Controller to be deemed to be public servant .—A controller appointed under this Act shall be 
deemed to be a public serv ant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 
1860).  
32. Protection of action taken under this Chapter .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against a Controller in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER V  
JURISDICTION  OF COURTS  APPEALS , REVIEW  AND REVISION  
33. Jurisdiction of courts .—(1) Any civil court in the State of Delhi or Ajmer which has jurisdiction 
to hear and decide a suit for recovery of possession of any premises shall have jurisdiction to hear and 
decide any case under this Act relating to such premises if it has pecuniary jurisdiction and is otherwise 
competent to hear and decide such a case under any law for the time being in force.  
(2) The value of any case under this Act, for the purposes of the pecuniary jurisdiction of the court, 
shall be determined by the amount of rent which is or would be payable for a period of twelve months, 
calculated according to the highest amount claimed in  the case:  
Provided that in the case of any proceeding based on the certificate of the Controller under section 28, 
such value shall be determined by the amount of rent which is or would be payable for a period of one 
month.  
(3) If any question arises whet her any suit, application or other proceeding is a case under this Act, 
the question shall be determined by the court.  
(4) For the purposes of this Chapter, a case under this Act, includes any suit, application or other 
proceeding under this Act and also i ncludes any claim or question arising out of this Act or any of its 
provisions but does not include any proceeding which a Controller is empowered to decide under           
Chapter IV.  
34. Appeals .—(1) any person aggrieved by any decree or order of a court passed under this Act may, 
in such manner as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal — 
(a) to the court of the senior subordinate judge, if any, where the value of the case does not 
exceed two thousand rupees:  
Provided that here there is no senior subordinate judge, the appeal shall lie to the district judge;  
(b) to the court of the district judge, where the value of the case exceeds two thousand rupees 
but does not exceed ten thousand rupees; and  
(c) to the High Court, where the value of the case exceeds ten t housand rupees.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from any decree or order passed in any case under this Act.  
35. Revision and review .—(1) The High Court may, at any time, call for the record of any case 
under this Act for the purpose of satisfying itself that a decision made therein is according to law and may 
pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit.  
(2) Any court may, after giving notice to the parties, review its own order.  
36. Limitation .—Subject to the provisions of Part II and Part III of  the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 
(IX of 1908), any person aggrieved by a decree or an order passed in any case under this Act may prefer 
an appeal — 
(a) where it lies to any court other than the High Court within thirty days from the date of such 
decree or order; and  
(b) where it lies to the High Court, within sixty days from the date of such decree or order.  
37. Procedure before courts .—Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the court may 
hold a summary inquiry into any case under this Act (other than a suit for eviction under section 13 in 
which the question of title is involved) and the practice and the procedure of a cou rt of small causes shall, 13 
 as far as may be, apply to such cases as if they were suits and other proceedings cognizable by a court of 
small causes.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
38. Act to over -ride other laws .—The provisions of this Act and of the rules made th ereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.  
39. Exemption of certain premises from the operation of the Act .—All premises, the construction 
of which is completed after the 1st day of June, 1951, but before the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act, shall be exempt from the operation of all the provisions of this Act for a 
period of seven years from the date of such completion.  
40. Landlords duty to keep the premises in good repair .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any law for the time being in force, and in the absence of agreement to the contrary by the tenant, every 
landlord shall be bound to keep the premises in good and tenantable repair.  
(2) If the landlord neglects or fails to make within a reasonable time, after notice in writing any 
repairs which he is bound to make under sub -section ( 1), the tenant may make the same himself and 
deduct the expenses of such repairs from the rent or otherwise recover them from the landlord:  
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable in any year shall not exceed one -twelfth of the 
rent payable by the tenant for that year.  
(3) Where any repairs without which the premises are not habitable or useable except with undue 
inconvenience are to be made and the landlord neglects or fails to make them after notice in writing, the 
tenant may apply to the court for permission to make such repairs hi mself, provided that the cost of such 
repairs does not exceed rent for a period of two years payable by that tenant and where such repairs are 
made with the permission of the court, the limitation as to the amount deductible or recoverable as 
provided in s ub-section ( 2) shall not apply.  
41. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service .—(1) No landlord either himself or 
through any person purporting to act on his behalf shall without just or sufficient cause cut off or 
withhold any essential supply  or service enjoyed by the tenant in respect of the premises let to him.  
(2) If a landlord contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the tenant may make an application to 
the court complaining of such contravention.  
(3) If the court is satisfied that the essential supply or service was cut off or withheld by the landlord 
with a view to compel the tenant to vacate the premises or to pay an enhanced rent, the court may pass an 
order directing the landlord to restore the amenities immediately pending the inquiry referred to in        
sub-section ( 4). 
Explanation. —An interim order may be passed under this sub -section without giving notice to the 
landlord.  
(4) If the court on inquiry finds, that the essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant in respect  of 
the premises was cut off or withheld by the landlord without just or sufficient cause, he shall make an 
order directing the landlord to restore such supply or service.  
(5) The court may in its discretion direct that compensation not exceeding fifty rup ees— 
(a) be paid to the landlord by the tenant, if the application under sub -section ( 2) was made 
frivolously or vaxatiously;  
(b) be paid to the tenant by the landlord if the landlord had cut off or withheld the supply or 
service without just or sufficient  cause.  
Explanation .—In this section, “essential supply or service ” includes supply of water, electricity, lights 
in passages and on staircases, conservancy and sanitary services.  14 
 42. Landlords duty to give notice of new constructions to Government .—Whenev er, after the 
commencement of this Act, any premises are constructed, the landlord shall, within thirty days of the 
completion of such construction, give intimation thereof in writing to the Estate Officer to the 
Government of India or to such other office r as may be specified in this behalf by the Government.  
43. Leases of vacant premises to Government .—(1) The provisions of this section shall apply only 
in relation to premises within the Municipality of New Delhi which are, or are intended to be let for use as 
a residence.  
(2) Whenever any premises the standard rent of which is not less than two thousand and four hundred 
rupees per year becomes vacant, either by the landlord ceasing to occupy the premises or by the 
termination of a tenancy or by the evict ion of a tenant or by the release of the premises  from requisition or 
otherwise ,— 
(a) the landlord shall, within seven days of the premises becoming vacant, give intimation thereof 
in writing to the Estate Officer to the Government of India;  
(b) whether or  not such intimation is given, the Estate Officer may serve on the landlord by post 
or otherwise a notice — 
(i) informing him that the premises are required by the Government for such period as may be 
specified in the notice, and  
(ii) requiring him, and every person claiming under him, to deliver possession of the premises 
forthwith to such officer or person as may be specified in the notice:  
Provided that where the landlord has given the intimation required by clause ( a) no notice shall be 
issued by the Estate Officer under clause ( b) more than seven days after the delivery to him of the 
intimation:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in respect of any premises the possession 
of which has been obtained by the landlord on the basi s of any decree or order made on the grounds set 
forth in clause ( e) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 13 or in respect of any premises which have 
been released from requisition for the use and occupation of the landlord himself.  
(3) Upon the se rvice of a notice under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), the premises shall be deemed to 
have been leased to the Government for the period specified in the notice, as from the date of the delivery 
of the intimation under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) or in a  case where no such intimation has been given, 
as from the date on which possession of the premises is delivered in pursuance of the notice, and the other 
terms of the lease shall be such as may be agreed upon between the Government and the landlord or in 
default of agreement, as may be determined by the court, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(4) In every case where the landlord has in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) given 
intimation of any premises becoming vacant and the p remises are not taken on lease by the Government 
under this section, the Government shall pay to the landlord a sum equal to one -fifty-second of the 
standard rent per year of the premises.  
(5) Any premises taken on lease by the Government under this sectio n may be put to any such use as 
the Government thinks fit, and in particular the Government may permit the use of the premises for the 
purposes of any public institution or any foreign embassy, legation or consulate or any High 
Commissioner or Trade Commis sioner, or as a residence by any officer in the service of the Government 
or of a foreign embassy, legation or consulate or of a High Commissioner or Trade Commissioner.  
44. Penalties .—(1) If any person receives any payment in contravention of the provisio ns of                    
section 5, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to an amount exceeding one thousand rupees by the amount of unlawful 
charges so received by him, or with both.  
(2) If any tenant fails to comply with the provisions of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) of section 6, or 
supplies under that clause, a statement which is false in any material particular, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to on e thousand rupees.  15 
 (3) If any tenant sub -lets the whole or part of any premises in contravention of the provisions of 
clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section  (1) of section 13, he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees.  
(4) If any landlord contravenes the provisions of section 41, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months or with fine, or with both.  
(5) If any landlord fails to comply with the provisions of section 42, he shall be pu nishable with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(6) If any person contravenes the provisions of clause  (a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 43, or fails to 
comply with a requirement under clause ( b) thereof, he shall be punishable with simple impri sonment for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
(7) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) unless the 
complaint in respect of the offence has be en made within three months from the date of the commission 
of the offence.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), 
any magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of fine exceeding one thousand  rupees on a person 
convicted of an offence punishable under sub -section ( 1). 
45. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of service of notice under this Act;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by courts for hearing suits, applications or other legal 
proceedings and in executing decrees or order is passed by such courts;  
(c) the manner in which courts may hold summary inquiry under this Act;  
(d) levy of court -fees and other fees for suits, applications and other proceedings under this Act;  
(e) the manner in which a controller may hold enquiry under Chapter IV;  
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
46. Repeals and savings .—(1) The Delhi and Ajmer -Merwar a Rent Control Act, 1947 ( 19 of 1947) 
is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwi thstanding such repeal, all suits and other proceedings pending at the commencement of this 
Act, whether before any court or the Rent Controller appointed under the Fourth Schedule to the said Act, 
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the said Act as if the said Act had continued in 
force and this Act had not been passed:  
Provided that the procedure laid down in this Act shall, as far as may be, apply to suits and other 
proceedings pending before any court.  
(3) Part IV of the Bombay Ren ts, Hotel Rates and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1944 
(Bombay Act VII of 1944) as extended to the Municipality of New Delhi, the Notified Area of the Civil 
Station, Delhi and the Municipality of Delhi by a notification of the Government of India in t he late 
Department of Works, Mines and Power No.1884 -W.II/47, dated the 18th March, 1947 shall cease to 
have effect in the said areas; and for the removal of doubts; it is hereby declared that section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (X of 1897) shall ap ply in relation to such cesser as it applies in relation to the 
repeal of an enactment by a Central Act.  16 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 1( 2)] 
AREAS  TO WHICH  THE ACT EXTENDS  
A. The State of Delhi — 
1. The Municipality of Delhi;  
2. The Municipality of New Delhi;  
3. The Cantonment of Delhi;  
4. The Notified Area of the Civil Station, Delhi;  
5. The Municipality of Shahdara;  
6. The Notified Area, Red Fort;  
7. The West Notified Area, Delhi.  
B. The State of Ajmer — 
1. The Municipality of Ajmer and all land within one mile of the limits of that Municipality;  
2. The Municipality of Beawar and all land within one mile of the limits of that Municipality;  
3. The Cantonment of Nasirabad and all land within one mile of  the limits of that Cantonment.17 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 ( i)] 
PART A  
PROVISIONS  FOR DETERMINING  THE STANDARD  RENT  OF PREMISES  
IN THE STATE  OF DELHI 
1. In this Part of this Schedule, “basic rent ” in relation to any premises means — 
(a) where the fair rent of the p remises has been determined or redetermined under the provisions 
of the New Delhi House Rent Control Order, 1939 the rent as so dete rmined or, as the case may be, 
redetermined;  
(b) where the standard rent of the premises has been fixed by the court under section 7 of the 
Delhi Rent Control Ordinance, 1944 (XXV of 1944), the rent as so fixed;  
(c) in any other case,  
(i) the rent at which the premises were let on the 1st day of November, 1939, or  
(ii) if the premises were not let on that date, the rent at which they were first let at any time 
after that date but before the 2nd day of June, 1944.  
2. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable were let, for whatever purp ose, on or after 
the 2nd day of June, 1944, the standard rent of the premises shall be — 
(a) where the standard rent of the premises has been fixed by the Rent Controller under the 
provisions of the Fourth Schedule to the Delhi and Ajmer -Merwara Rent Control Act, 1947              
(19 of 1947), such standard rent; or  
(b) where the standard rent has been fixed by the court under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8, such standard rent; or  
(c) in any other case, so long as the standard rent is not fixed by the  court, the rent at which the 
premises were first let.  
3. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable not being premises to which paragraph 2 
applies, are let for the purpose of being used as a residence or for any of the purposes of a public ho spital, 
an educational institution, a public library or reading -room or an orphanage, the standard rent of the 
premises shall be the basic rent increased by — 
(a) 12½ per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is not more than Rs.  300; 
(b) 15⅝ per cent. thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  300, but not more than     
Rs. 600; 
(c) 18¾ per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  600, but not more than     
Rs. 1,200; or  
(d) 25 per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  1,200.  
4. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable, not being premises to which paragraph 2 
applies, are let for any purpose other than those mentioned in paragraph 3, the standard rent o f the 
premises shall be the basic rent increased by twice the amount by which it would be increased under 
paragraph 3 if the premises were let for a purpose mentioned in that paragraph.   
5. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable, not being premises to which paragraph 2 
applies, are used mainly as a residence and incidentally for business or profession, the standard rent of the 
premises shall be the mean of the rent as calculated under paragraphs 3 and 4.  18 
 PART B  
PROVISIONS  FOR DETERMINING THE STANDARD  RENT OF PREMISES  IN THE STATE OF AJMER  
1. In this Part of this Schedule, “basic rent ” in relation to any premises means — 
(a) where the fair rent of the premises has been determined or predetermined under the provisions 
of the Ajmer House Rent Control Order, 1943, the rent as so determined or, as the case may be, 
predetermined;  
(b) in any other case, — 
(i) the rent at which the premises were let on the 1st day of September, 1939, or  
(ii) if the premises were not let on that date, the rent at which they were first let at any time 
after that date but before the 2nd day of June, 1944.  
2. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable were let, for whatever purpose on or after 
the 2nd day of June, 1944, the standard rent of the pre mises shall be — 
(a) where the standard rent has been fixed by the court under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8, such standard rent; or  
(b) in any other case, so long as the standard rent is not fixed by the court, the rent at which the 
premises w ere first let.  
3. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable are let for use as a residence, not being 
premises to which paragraph 2 applies, the standard rent of the premises shall be the basic rent increased 
by— 
(a) 8½ per cent . thereof, if t he basic rent per annum is not more than Rs.  300; 
(b) 12½ per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  300 but not more than         
Rs. 600; 
(c) 18¾ per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  600, but not more than     
Rs. 1,200; or  
(d) 25 per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  1,200.  
4. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable are let for any purpose other than use as a 
residence, not being premises to which paragraph 2 applied , the standard rent of the premises shall be the 
basic rent increased by — 
(a) 25 per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is not more than Rs.  600; 
(b) 37½ per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  600, but not more than     
Rs. 1,200; or  
(c) 50 per cent . thereof, if the basic rent per annum is more than Rs.  1,200.  
5. Where the premises in respect of which rent is payable, not being premises to which paragraph 2 
applies, are used mainly as a residence and incidentally for busines s or profession, the standard rent of the 
premises shall be the mean of the rent as calculated under paragraphs 3 and 4.  
 
--------------------------The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS  
PROVISIONS ACT, 1952  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Establishment to include all departments and branches.  
3. Power to apply Act to an establishment which has a common provident fund with another 
establishment . 
4. Power to add to Schedule I . 
5. Employees’ Provident Fund Schemes . 
5A. Central Board . 
5AA. Executive Committee . 
5B. State Board . 
5C. Board of Trustee s to be body corporate . 
5D. Appointment of officers . 
5DD. Acts and proceedings of the Central Board or its Executive Committee or the State Board not to 
be in validated on certain grounds . 
5E. Delegation . 
6. Contributions and matters which may be provided for in Schemes . 
6A. Employees’ Pension Scheme . 
6C. Employees’ Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme . 
6D. Laying of schemes before Parliament . 
7. Modification of Scheme . 
7A. Determina tion of moneys due from employer s. 
7B. Review of orders passed under section 7A . 
7C. Determination of escaped amount . 
7D. Tribunal . 
7E. [Omitted ]. 
7F. [Omitted ]. 
7G. [Omitted ]. 
7H. [Omitted ].  
7-I. Appeals to Tribunal . 
7J. Procedure of Tribunals . 
7K. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to appoint 
presenting officers . 
7L. Orders of Tribunal . 
7M. [Omitted ]. 2 
 SECTIONS  
7N. [Omitted ]. 
7-O. Deposit of amount due, on filing appeal . 
7P. Transfer of certain applications to Tribunals.  
7Q. Interest payable by the employer.  
8. Mode of recovery of moneys due from employers . 
8A. Recovery of moneys by employers and contractors . 
8B. Issue of certificate to the Recovery Officer . 
8C. Recovery Officer to whom  certificate is to be forwarded . 
8D. Validity of certificate and amendment thereof . 
8E. Stay of proceedings under certificate and amendment or withdrawal thereof . 
8F. Other modes of recovery . 
8G. Application of certain provisions of Income -tax Act . 
9. Fund to be recognised under Act 11 of 1922 . 
10. Protection against attachment . 
11. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts . 
12. Employer not to reduce wages, etc . 
13. Inspectors . 
14. Penalties . 
14A. Offences by companies . 
14AA. Enhanced punishment in certain cas es after previous conviction . 
14AB. Certain offences to be cognizable . 
14AC. Cognizance and trial of offences . 
14B. Power to recover damages . 
14C. Power of court to make orders . 
15. Special provisions relating to existing provident funds . 
16. Act not to apply to c ertain establishments . 
16A. Authorising certain employers to maintain provident fund accounts . 
17. Power to exempt . 
17A. Transfer of accounts . 
17AA. Act to have effect notwithstanding anything contained in Act 31 of 1956 . 
17B. Liability in case of transfer of establishment . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
18A. Authorities and inspector to be public servant.  
19. Delegation of powers . 
20. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
21. Power to make rules . 
22. Power to remove difficulties . 
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  
SCHEDULE IV.  
  3 
 THE EMPLOYEES ’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND  
MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 19 OF 19521 
[4th March , 1952.]  
An Act to provide for the i nstitution of provident funds 2[, 3[pension fund ] and deposit -linked 
insurance fund] for employees in factories and other establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and application .—4[(1) This Act may be called the Employees ’ Provident 
Funds and Misce llaneous Provisions Act, 1952.]  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
5[(3) Subject to the provisions contai ned in section 16, it applies — 
(a) to every establishment which is a factory engaged in any industry specifi ed in Schedule I and 
in which 6[twenty] or  more persons are employed, and  
(b) to any other establishment employing 6[twenty] or more persons or class of such 
establishments which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in 
this behalf:  
Provided that t he Central Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its 
intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any 
establishment employing suc h number of persons less than 6[twenty] as may b e specified in the 
notification.]  
7[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) of this section or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 16, where it appears to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, whether on an application 
made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the employer and the majority of employees in relation to 
any establishment have agreed that the provisions of this Act should be made applicable to the 
establishment, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the pro visions of this Act to that 
establishment on and from the date of such agreement or from any subsequent dat e specified in such 
agreement.]  
8[(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be governed by this Act 
notwithstanding that the n umber of persons employed therein at any time  falls below twenty. ]  
9*    *    *    *    * 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
10[(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 19 63, s. 2 and I Schedule;  Pondicherry by Reg.  
7 of 1963, s. 3 and II Schedule and Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 16, for “and family pension fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 2, for “family pension fund” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 17, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3). 
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 2, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 2, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
8. Ins . by Act 46 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
9. The p roviso omitted by Act 16 of 1971, s. 13 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
10. Subs. by Act 22 of 1958, s. 2, for clause ( a). 4 
 (i) in relation to an establishment belonging to, or under the control of, the Central 
Government or in relation to an establishment connected with a railway company,  a major port, a 
mine or an oil field or a controlled industry, 1[or in relation to an establishment having 
departments or branches in more than  one Stat e,] the Central Government; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establ ishment, the State Government;]  
2[(aa) “authorised officer ” means the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, Additional Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner, Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner, Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette;]  
(b) “basic wages ” means all emoluments which are earned by  an employee while on duty or 3[ on 
leave or on holidays with wages in either case] in accordance with the terms of the contract of 
employment and which are paid or payable in cash  to him, but does not include — 
(i) the cas h value of any food concession;  
(ii) any dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash payments by whatever name called paid to 
an employee on account of a rise in the cost of living), house -rent allowance, overtime  allowance, 
bonus commission or any other similar allowance payable to the employee in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment;  
(iii) any  presents made by the employer;  
(c) “contribution ” means a contribution payable in respe ct of a member under a Scheme 4[or the 
contribution payable in respect of an employee to whom  the Insurance Scheme applies];  
(d) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by a Central Act to be expedient i n the public interest;  
5[(e) “employer ” means — 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory, 
including the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or 
occupier and, where a person has been named as a manager of the factory under clause ( f) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so named; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which, has  the 
ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment, and where the said affairs are entrusted to a 
manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager, managi ng director or managing 
agent;]  
(f) “employee ” means any person who is employed for  wages in any kind of work, manual or 
otherwise, in or i n connection with the work of 6[an establishment], and who gets his wages directly 
or indirectly from the employe r, 7[and includes any person — 
(i) employed by or through a contractor in or in connecti on with  the work of the 
establishment;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -11-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e. f. 1-8-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 3 , ibid., for “on leave with wages” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 4, for clause ( e). 
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 3, for “a factory”.  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3, for “and includes any person employed by or through a contractor in or in connection with the 
work of the establishment” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  5 
 (ii) engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 
1961 (52 of 1961), or under the standin g orders of the establishment;]  
1[(ff) “exempted employee ” means  an employee to whom a Scheme 2[or the Insurance Scheme, as 
the case may be,] would, but for the exemption granted under  3*** section 17, have applied;  
(fff) “exempted 4[establishment] ” means 5[an establishment] in respect of which an exemption has 
has been granted under section 17 from the operation of all or any of  the provisions of any Scheme 
2[or the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be], whether such exem ption has been granted to the 
4[establishment] as such or to any person or clas s of persons employed therein;]  
(g) “factory ” means any premises, including the precincts thereof, in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on or is ordinarily so carried on, whether with the aid of pow er 
or without the aid of power;  
6*   *   *  *   * 
(h) “Fund ” means the provident f und established under a Scheme;  
(i) “industry ” means any industry specified in Schedule I, and includes any other industry added 
to the Schedule b y notification under section 4;  
2[(ia) “Insurance Fund ” means the Deposit -linked Insurance Fund established under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 6C;  
(ib) “Insurance Scheme ” means the Employees Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme framed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6C;]  
7[8[(ic)] “manufacture ” or “manufacturing process ” means any process for making, altering, 
repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing or 
otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, tr ansport, delivery 
or disposal;]  
(j) “member ” means a member of the Fund;  
(k) “occupier of a factory ” means the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the 
factory, and, where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be deemed to 
be the occupier of the factory;  
9[(kA) “Pension Fund” means the Employees’ Pension Fund established under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6A;  
(kB) “Pension Scheme” means the Employees’ Pension Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6A;]  
 10[(ka) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 3.  
2. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. The words, brackets a nd figure “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a factory”.  
6. Omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 28 of 196 3, s. 2, for clause ( ia) (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
8. Clause ( ia) re-lettered as clause ( ic) by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Ins. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  6 
 (kb) “Recovery Officer ” means any officer of the Central Government, State Government or the 
Board of Trustees constituted under section 5A, who may be authorised by the Central Government, 
by notification in  the Official Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Recovery Officer under this Act;]  
1[(l) “Scheme ” means the Employees ’ Provident Fun d Scheme framed under section 5; ] 
2[(ll) “Superannuation”, in relation to an employee, who is the  member of the Pension Scheme 
means the attainment, by the said employee, of the age of fifty -eight years;]   
3[(m) “Tribunal ” means the Industrial Tribu nal referred to in section 7 D. ] 
4[2A. Establishment to include all departments and branches .—For the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that where an establishment consists of different departments or has branches, whether 
situate in the same place or in different places, all such depart ments or branches shall be treated as parts 
of the same establishment.]  
5[3. Power to apply Act to an establishment which has a common provident fund with another 
establishment .—Where immediately before this Act becomes applicable to an establishment there  is in 
existence a provident fund which is common to the employees employed in that establishment and 
employees in any other establishment, the Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of this Act shall also a pply to such other establishment.]  
4. Power to add to Schedule I .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to Schedule I any other industry in respect of the employees whereof it is of opinion that a 
provident fund schem e should be framed under this Act, and thereupon the industry so added shall be 
deemed to be an industry specified in Schedule I for the p urposes of this Act.  
(2) All notifications under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before Parliament, as soon as  may be, a fter 
they are issued.  
5. Employees ’ Provident Fund Schemes .—6[(1)] The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, frame a Scheme to be called the Employees ’ Provident Fund Scheme for the 
establishment of provident funds under this Act for employees or for any class  of employees and specify 
the 7[establishments] or class of 7[establishments] to whic h the said Scheme shall apply 8[and there shall 
be established , as soon as may be after the framing of the Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the Scheme].  
9[(1A) The Fund shall vest in, and be administered by, the Central Board constituted under section 
5A. 
(1B) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may provide for all 
or any of the mat ters specified in Schedule II.]  
10[(2) A Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may provide that any of its provisions shall take effect 
either prospectively or retrospectively on such date as may be specified  in this behalf in the Scheme.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 14, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159, for clause ( m) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s . 5, for section 3.  
6. Section 5 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  
7. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factories”.  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  
9. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
10. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  7 
 1[5A. Central Board .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, a Board of Trustees for the territories to 
which this Act extends (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the Central Board ) consisting of the 
following 2[persons as members ] namely: — 
(a) 3[a Chairman and a Vice -Chairman] to be appointed by the Central Government;  
4[(aa) the Central Provident F und Commissioner, ex officio ;] 
(b) not more than five persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst its officials;  
(c) not more than fifteen persons representing Governments of such States as the Central 
Government m ay specify in this behalf, appoi nted by the Central Government;  
(d) 5[ten persons] representing employers of the establishments to which the Scheme applies, 
appointed by the Central Government after consultation with such organisations of employers as may 
be recognised by the Central  Government in this behalf; and  
(e) 5[ten persons] representing employees in the establishments to which the Scheme applies, 
appointed by the Central Government after consultation with such organisations of employees as may 
be recognised by the Cen tral Government in this behalf.  
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of the Central Board may be appointed and 
the time, place and procedure of the meetings of the Central Board shall be such as may be provided for 
in the Scheme.  
(3) The Central Board shall 6[, subject to the provisions of section 6A 7[and section 6C ,]] administer 
the Fund vested in it in such manner as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(4) The Central Board shall perform such other functions as it may b e required to perform by or under 
any provisions of the Sch eme 8[, the 9[Pension ] Scheme and the Insurance Scheme] . 
10[(5) The Central Board shall maintain proper accounts of its income and expenditure in such form 
and in such manner as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor - 
General o f India, specify in the Scheme.  
(6) The accounts of the Central Board shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India and any expenditure incurred by hi m in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Central Board to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(7) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Cent ral Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has, in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the productio n of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of th e offices of the Central Board.  
(8) The accounts of the Central Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in t his behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 4, for “persons” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “a chairman” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “six persons” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 15 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
7. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
8. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 199 6, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  8 
 to the Central Board which shall forward the same to the Central Government along with its comments on 
the report of the C omptroller and Auditor -General.  
(9) It shall be the duty of the C entral Board to submit also to the Central Government an annual report 
of its work and activities and the Central Government shall cause a copy of the annual report, the audited 
accounts together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of In dia and the comments of 
the Central Board thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament. ] 
1[5AA. Executive Committee .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, an Executive Committee to 
assist the Central Board in th e performance of its functions.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall consist of the followin g persons as members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman appointed by the Central Government from amongst th e mem bers of the Central 
Board;  
(b) two persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons re ferred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(c) three  persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons referred to in 
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(d) three persons re presenting the employer s elected by the Central Board from amongst the 
persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(e) three persons representing the employees elected by the Central Board from amongst the 
persons referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(f) the Central Provident  Fund Commissioner, ex officio . 
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of the Central Board may be appointed or 
elected to the Executive Committee and the time, place and procedure of the meetings of the Executive 
Committee shall be such as may be provided for in the Scheme].  
5B. State Board .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Government of any 
State, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for that State a Board of Trustees (hereinafter in 
this Act referred to as the State Board) in such man ner as may be provided for in the  Scheme.  
(2) A State Board shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may 
assign to it from time to time.  
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of a State Board may be appo inted and the 
time, place and procedure of the meetings of a State Board shall be such as may  be provided for in the 
Scheme.  
5C. Board of Trustees to be body corporate .—Every Board of Trustees constituted under section 
5A or section 5B shall be a body corporate under the name specified in the notification constituting it, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by  the said name sue and be sued.  
5D. Appointment of officers .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a Central Provident Fund  
Commissioner who shall be the chief executive officer of the Central Board and shall be subject to the 
general control an d superintendence of that Board.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  9 
 (2) The Centra l Government may also appoint 1[a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer] to 
assist the Central Provident Fund Commissioner in the discharge of his duties.  
(3) The Central Board may appoint 2[, subject to the maximum scale of pay, as may be specified in 
the Scheme, as many Addition al Central Provident Fund Commissioners, Deputy Provident Fund 
Commissioners, Regional Provident Fund Commissioners, Assistant Provident Fund Commissioners and] 
such other officers and employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient  administration  of the 
Scheme 3[, the 4[Pension ] Scheme and the Insura nce Scheme] . 
(4) No appointment to 5[the post of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or an Additional 
Central Pr ovident Fund Commissioner or a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer or any other 
post under the Central Board carrying a scale of pay equivalent to the scale of pay of any Group ‘A’ or 
Group ‘B’ post under the Central Government] shall be made except after consultation with the Union 
Public Service Commission:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in regard to any su ch appointment — 
(a) for a pe riod not exceeding one year; or  
(b) if the person to be appointed is a t the time of his appointment — 
(i) a member of the In dian Administrative Service, or  
(ii) in the service of the Central Government or a State Govern ment or the Central Board in a 
6[Group ‘A’ or Group ‘B’ post].  
(5) A State Board may, with the approval of the State Government concerned, appoint such staf f as it 
may consider necessary.  
(6) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service of 
the Central  Provident Fund Commissioner, 7[and the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer] shall 
be such as may be specified by the Central Government and such salary and allowances  shall be paid out 
of the Fund.  
8[(7) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service 
of the Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioner, Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner, 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner and other officers and 
employees of the Central Board shall be such as may be specified by the Central Board in accordance 
with th e rules and orders applicable to the officers and employees of the Central Government drawing 
corresponding scales of pay:  
Provided that where the Central Board is of the opinion that it is necessary to make a departure from 
the said rules or orders in res pect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall obtain the prior appr oval of the 
Central Government.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under clause ( a), the 
Central Board shall have regard to the educational qualif ications, method of recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central Government and in case of any doubt, 
the Central Board shall refer the matter to the Central Government whose d ecision thereon shall be final. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Ins. by , s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-8-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 20, for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Class I or Class II post” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “,  Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner and Regional Provident Fund Commissioner”  
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
8. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 1-8-1988).  10 
  (8) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service of 
officers and employees of a State Board shall be such as may be specified by that Board, with the 
approval of the State Government concerned.  
1[5DD. Acts and  proceedings of the Central Board or its Executive Committee or the State 
Board not to be in validated on certain grounds .—No act done or proceeding taken by the Central 
Board or the Executive Committee constituted under section 5AA or the State Board shall  be questioned 
on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central 
Board or the Executive Committee or the St ate Board, as the case may be.]  
5E. Delegation .—2[The Central Board may delegate to the Exec utive Committee or to the Chairman 
of the Board or to any of its officers and a State Board may delegate to its Chair man or to any of its 
officers] subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as it may specify, such of its powers and 
functions unde r this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient  administration of the Scheme 3[, the 
4[Pension ] Scheme and the Insurance Scheme].]  
6. Contributions and matters which may be provided for in Schemes .—5*** The contribution 
which shall be paid by the employer to the Fund shall be 6[ten per cent.] of the basic wages, 7[dearness 
allowance and retaining allowance (if any)] for the time being pay able to each of the employees 
8[(whether employed by him directly or by or through a contractor)], and the employees ’ contribution 
shall be equal to the contribution payable by the employ er in respect of him and may, 9[if any employee 
so desires, be an amount exceeding 6[ten per cent.]  of his basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance (if any), sub ject to the condition that the employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any 
contribution over and above his contributi on payable under this section ]: 
10[Provided that in its application to any establishment or class of establishments which the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
specify, this section shall be subject to the modificati on that for the words 6[ten per cent. ], at both the 
places where they occur, the words 11[twelve per cent .] shall be substituted:]  
Provided further that where the amount of any contribution payable under this Act involves a fraction 
of a rupee, the Scheme m ay provide for the rounding off of such fraction to the nearest rupee, half of  a 
rupee or quarter of a rupee.  
12[Explanation 1].—For the purposes of this 13[section], dearness allowance shall be deemed to 
include also the cash value of any food conc ession allowed to the employee.  
14[Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this 13[section], “retaining allowance ” means an allowance 
payable for the time being to an employee of any factory or other establishment during any period in 
which the establishment is not working, for retai ning his services.]  
15*    *    *    *    * 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 7. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 20, for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Fa mily Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1998, s. 2, for “eight and one -third per cent.”  (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 4, for “and the dearness allowance” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
8. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
9. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
10. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for the First Proviso (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
11. Subs. by Act 10 of 1998, s. 2, for “ten per cent.” (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
12. The Explanation re-numbered  as Explanation  1 by Act 46 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
13. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5, for “sub -section” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
14. The Explanation  ins. by Act 4 6 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
15. Omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  11 
 1[6A. Employees ’ Pension Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees ’ Pension Scheme for the purpose of 
providing for— 
(a) superannuation  pension, retiring pension or permanent total disablement pension to the 
employees of any establishment or class of establishments to which this Act applies; and  
(b) widow or widower ’s pension, children pension or orphan pension payable to the beneficiarie s 
of such employees.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, there shall be established, as soon as may be 
after framing of the Pension Scheme, a Pension Fund into which there shall be paid, from time to time, in 
respect of every employee who is a member of the Pension Scheme, — 
(a) such sums from the employer ’s contribution under section 6, not exceeding eight and  
one-third per cent.  of the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance, if any, of the 
concerned employees, as may be specified in the Pension Scheme;  
(b) such sums as are payable by the employers of exempted establishments under sub -section ( 6) 
of section 17;  
(c) the net assets of the Employees' Family Pension Fund as on the date of the establishment of 
the Pension Fund;  
(d) such sums as the Central Government may, after due appropriation by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, specify.  
(3) On the establishment of the Pension Fund, the Family Pension Scheme (hereinafter referred to as 
the ceased scheme) shall cease to operat e and all assets of the ceased scheme shall vest in and shall stand 
transferred to, and all liabilities under the ceased scheme shall be enforceable against , the Pension Fund 
and the beneficiaries under the ceased scheme shall be entitled to draw the benef its, not less than the 
benefits they were entitled to under the ceased scheme, from the Pension Fund.  
(4) The Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered by the Central Board in such manner as may 
be specified in the Pension Scheme.  
(5) Subject to the p rovisions of this Act, the Pension Scheme may provide for all or any of the matters 
specified in Schedule III.  
(6) The Pension Scheme may provide that all or any of its provisions shall take effect either 
prospectively or retrospectively on such date as ma y be specified in that behalf in that Scheme.  
(7) A Pension Scheme, framed under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the s ession 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made, the scheme shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the may be; so , however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that Scheme.]  
 2[6C. Employees ’ Deposit linked Insurance Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees ’ Deposit -linked Insurance 
Scheme for the purpose of providing life insurance benefits to the employees of any establishment or 
class of establishm ents to whi ch this Act applies.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 5, for sections 6A and 6B (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  12 
 (2) There shall be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the Insurance Scheme, a 
Deposit -linked Insurance Fund into which shall be paid by the employer from time to time in respect of 
every such employee in relation to wh om he is the employer, such amount, not being more than one per 
cent. of the aggregate of the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance (if any) for the time 
being payable in relation to such employee as the Central Government may, by notific ation in  the Official 
Gazette, specify.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression s “dearness allowance ” and 
“relating allowance ” have the  same meanings as in section 6.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(4) (a) The employer shall pay into the Insurance Fund such further sums of money, not exceeding 
one-fourth of the contribution which he is required to make under sub -section ( 2), as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, determine to meet all the expenses in connection with the 
administ ration of the Insurance Scheme other than the expenses towards the cost of any benefits pr ovided 
by or under that scheme.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(5) The Insurance Fund shall vest in the Central Board and be administered by it in such manner as 
may be spe cified  in the Insurance Scheme.  
(6) The Insurance Scheme may provide for all or any of the ma tters specified in Schedule IV.  
(7) The Insurance Scheme may provide that any of its provisions shall take effect either prospectively 
or retrospectively on such date as may be specified in this behalf in that Scheme.]  
2[6D. Laying  of schemes before Parliament .—Every scheme framed under se ction 5, section 6A 
and section 6C shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is framed, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the scheme, or both 
Houses agree that the scheme should not be framed, the scheme shall thereaf ter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything prev iously done under that scheme.]  
7. Modification of scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to , 3[amend or vary, either prospectively or retrospectively, the Scheme, the 4[Pension ] 
Scheme or the Insuran ce Scheme, as the case may be].  
5[(2) Every notification issued under s ub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both H ouses agree in making any 
modification in the notification, or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously  done under that notification.]  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s.  6 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 22, for “amend or vary the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, as the case may be”  
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4,  for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Schedule, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  13 
 1[7A. Determination  of moneys due from employer s.—2[(1) The Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner, any Additional Central Prov ident Fund Commissioner, any Deputy Provident Fund 
Commissioner, any Regional Provident Fund Commissioner , or any Assistant Provident Fun d 
Commissioner may, by order, — 
(a) in a case where a dispute arises regarding the applicability of this Act to an estab lishment, 
decide such disput e; and  
(b) determine the amount due from any employer under any provision of this Act, the Scheme or 
the 3[Pension ] Scheme or the Insura nce Scheme, as the case may be,  
and for any of the aforesaid purposes may conduct such inquiry as he may deem necess ary]. 
(2) The officer conducting the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purposes of such inquiry, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civ il Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for 
trying a suit in respect of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any p erson or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavi t; 
(d) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) No order 4*** shall be made under sub -section ( 1), unless 5[the employer concerned] is given a 
reasonable opport unity of representing his case.  
6[(3A) Where the employer, employee or any other person required to attend the inquiry under  
sub-section ( 1) fails to attend such inquiry without assigning any valid reason or fails to produce any 
document or to file any report or return when called upon to do so, the officer conducting the inquiry may 
decide the applicability of the Act or determine the amount d ue from any employer, as the case may be, 
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and other documents available on record.]  
7[(4) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is passed against an employer ex parte , he may, within 
three months from  the date of communication of such order, apply to the officer for setting aside such 
order and if he satisfies the officer that the show cause notice was not duly served or that he was 
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the inquiry was held, the officer shall make an 
order setting aside his earlier order and shall appoint a date f or proceeding with the inquiry:  
Provided that no such order shall be set aside merely on the ground that there has been an irregularity 
in the service of the sh ow cause notice if the officer is satisfied that the employer had notice of the date of 
hearing and had sufficient tim e to appear before the officer.  
Explanation .—Where an appeal has been preferred under this Act against an order passed ex parte  
and such a ppeal has been disposed of otherwise than on the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this sub -section for se tting aside the ex parte  order.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 10, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. The words “determining the amount due from employer” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 10. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “the employer” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  14 
 (5) No order passed under this section shall be set aside on any appl ication under sub -section ( 4) 
unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite pa rty.] 
1[7B. Review of o rders passed under section 7A .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, but from which no appeal has been preferred under this Act, and 
who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was 
made, or on account of some  mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any other sufficient 
reason, desires to obtain a review of such order may apply for a review of that order to th e officer who 
passed the order:  
Provided that such officer may also on his own motio n review his order if he is satisfied that it is 
necessa ry so to do on any such ground.  
(2) Every application for review under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner and 
within such time as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(3) Where it appea rs to the officer receiving an application for review that there is no sufficient 
ground for a review, h e shall reject the application.  
(4) Where the officer is of opinion that the application for review should be granted, he shall g rant the 
same:  
Provided  that,— 
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to all the parties before him to 
enable them to appear and be heard in support of the order in respect of whi ch a review is applied  
for, and  
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence 
which the applicant alleges was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him when the 
order was made, wi thout proof of such allegation.  
(5) No appeal shall lie against the order of the office r rejecting an application for review, but an 
appeal under this Act shall lie against an order passed under review as if the order passed under review 
were the original order passed by him under section 7A.  
7C. De termination of escaped amount .—Where an order determining the amount due from an 
employer under section 7A or section 7B has been passed and if the  officer who passed the order — 
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the employer to 
make any document o r report available, or to disclose, fully and truly, all material facts necessary for 
determining the correct amount due from the employer, any amount so due from such employer for 
any period has escaped his notice;  
(b) has, in consequence of information in his possession, reason to believe that any amount to be 
determined under section 7A or section 7B has escaped from his determination for any period 
notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause ( a) on the part of 
the employer,  
he may, within a period of five years from the date of communication of the order passed under section 
7A or section 7B, re -open the case and pass appropriate orders re -determining the amount due from the 
employer in accordance with the provision s of this Act:  
Provided that no order re -determining the amount due from the employer shall be passed under this 
section unless the employer is given a reasonable opportunity of representing his case.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 33 of 1988, s. 11  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1977 ). 15 
  
 
1[7D. Tribunal .—The Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  shall, on and from the 
commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Tribunal for the 
purposes of this Act and the said Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferr ed 
on it by or under this Act. ] 
7E. [Term of office .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 159 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017) . 
7F. [Resignation .] Omitted by  s.159, ibid. (w.e.f  26-5-2017).  
7G. [Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of or service of Presiding Officer .] 
Omitted by  s. 159, ibid. (w.e.f.  25-5-2017).  
7H. [Staff of Tribunal .] Omitted by s. 159, ibid. (w.e.f  26-5-2017).  
7-I. Appeals to Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued by the Central 
Government, or an order passed by the Central Government or any authority, under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 3), or sub -section ( 4), of section 1, or section 3, or sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, or section   7B 
[except an order rejecting an application for review referred to in sub -section ( 5) thereof], or section 7C, or 
section 14B, may prefer an appeal to a Tribunal agai nst such notifi cation or order.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner, within such time and 
be accompanied by s uch fees, as may be prescribed.  
7J. Procedure of Tribunals .—(1) A Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedur e in all 
matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions including the places at 
which the Tr ibunal shall have its sittings.  
(2) A Tribunal shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all the powers which are vested 
in the officers referred  to in section 7A and any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sectio ns 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 186 0) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the all purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
7K. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., t o 
appoint presenting officers .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to a Tribunal under this Act may either 
appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner o f his choice to presen t his case before the 
Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or any other authority under this Act may 
authorise  one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every 
person so authorised may present the case with respect t o any appeal before a Tribunal.  
7L. Orders of Tribunal .—(1) A Tribunal may after giving the parties to t he appeal , an opportunity 
of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order 
appealed against or may refer the case back to the authority which passed such order with such directions 
as the Tribunal may think fit, for a fresh adjudication or order, as the case may be, after taking add itional 
evidence, if necessary.  
(2) A Tribunal may, at any time within five years from the date of its order, with a view to rectifying 
any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) and shall make 
such amendment in the order if the mistake is brought to its notic e by the parties to the appeal:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.159 , for section 7D  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  16 
 Provided that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing the amount due from, or otherwi se increasing 
the liability of, the employer shall not be made under this sub -section, unless the Tribunal has given notice to him of 
its intention to do so and has allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) A Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to the parties to the appeal.  
(4) Any order made by a Tribunal finally disposing of an appeal shall not be questioned in any court of law.  
7M. [Filling up of vacancies .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 159                         
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
7N. [Finality of orders constituting a Tribunal .] Omitted by  s.159, ibid. (w.e.f  26-5-2017).  
7-O. Deposit of  amount due, on filing appeal .—No appeal by the employer shall be entertained by 
a Tribunal unless he has deposited with it seventy -five per cent. of the amount due from him as 
determined by an off icer referred to in section 7A:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded  in writing, waive or reduce the amount to 
be deposited under this section.  
7P. Transfer of cert ain applications to Tribunals .—All applications which are pending before the 
Central Government under section 19A before its repeal, shall stand transferred to a Tribunal exercising 
jurisdiction in respect of establishments in relation to which such applications had been made as if such 
applications were app eals preferred to the Tribunal.  
7Q. Interest pa yable by the employer .—The employer shall be liable to pay simple interest at the 
rate of twelve per cent. per annum or at such higher rate as may be specified in the Scheme on any 
amount du e from him under this Act from the date on which the amount has become so due till the date of 
its actual payment:  
Provided that higher rate of interest specified in the Scheme shall not exceed the lending rate of 
interest charged by any scheduled bank.]  
1[8. Mode of recovery  of moneys due from employers .—Any amount due — 
(a) from the employer in relation to 2[an establishment] to which any 3[Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] applies in respect of any contribution paya ble to 4[the Fund or, as the case may be, the 
Insurance Fund], damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations required to be transferred 
under s ub-section ( 2) of section 15 5[or under sub -section ( 5) of section 17] or any charges payable by 
him under any other provision of this A ct or of any  provision of the 3[Sche me or the Insurance 
Scheme]; or  
(b) from the employ er in relation to an exempted 6[establishment] in res pect of any damages 
recoverable under section 14B or any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 
any provision of this Act or under an y of the conditions specified 7[under section 17 or in respect of 
the contribution payable by him towards the 8[Pension ] Scheme under the said sect ion 17],  
may,  if the amount i s in arrear, 9[be recovered 10[in the manner specified in sections 8B to 8G ].]  
11[8A. Recovery of moneys  by employers and contractors .—(1) 12[The amount of contribution 
(that is to say the employer ’s contribution as well as the employee ’s contribution in pursuance of any 
Scheme and the employer ’s contribution in pursuance of the Insur ance Scheme)], and any charges 13*** 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 195 3, s. 6, for section 8 . 
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 24, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “the Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 7 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 21, for “under section 17” (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
10. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-1990).  
11. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 8 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
12. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
13. The words “on the basis of such contribution” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 13. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  17 
 for meeting the cost of administering the Fund paid or payable by an employer in respect of an employee 
employed by or through a contractor may be recovered by such employer from the  contractor, either by 
deduction from any amount payable to the contractor, under any contract or as a debt payable by the 
contract or. 
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) may be recovered in respect of 
any employee employed by or through him, may recover from such employee the employee ’s 
contribution 1[under any Scheme] by deduction from the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance (if  any) payable to such employee.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, no contractor shall be entitled to deduct the 
employer ’s contribution or the charges referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the basic wages, dearness 
allowance, and retaining allowance (if any) payable to an employee employed by or through him or 
otherwise to recover such contribution  or charges from such employee.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expressions, “dearness allowance ” and “retaining allowance ” shall 
have the same meanings as in section 6.]  
2[8B. Issue of certi ficate to the Recovery Offi cer.—(1) Where any amount is in arrear under section 
section 8, the authorised officer may issue, to the Recovery Officer, a certificate under his signature 
specifying the amount of arrea rs and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to 
recover the amount specified therein from the establishment or, as the case may be, the employer by one 
or more of the modes mentioned below: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the movab le or immovable property of the establishment or, as  the case 
may be, the employer;  
(b) arrest of the employ er and his detention in prison;  
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable properties of the 
establishment or, as  the case may be, the employer:  
Provided that the attachment and sale of any property under this section shall fir st be  effected against 
the properties  of the establishment and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for recovering the 
whole of the amoun t of arrears specified in the certificate, the Recovery Officer may take such 
proceedings against the property of the employer for recovery of the whole or any  part of such arrears.  
(2) The authorised officer may  issue a certificate under sub -section ( 1), notwithstanding that 
proceedings for recovery of the arrears by any other mode have been taken.  
8C. Recovery Officer to whom certificate is to be forwarded .—(1) The authorised  officer may 
forward the certificate referred to in section 8B to the Recovery Officer within wh ose jurisdiction the 
employer — 
(a) carries on his business or profession or within whose jurisdiction the principal place of his 
establishment is situate; or  
(b) resides or any movable or immovable property of the establishment or the employer is situate.  
(2) Where an establishment or the employer has property within the jurisdiction of more than one 
Recovery Officers and the Recovery Officer to whom a certifica te is s ent by the authorised officer — 
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable or immovab le, 
within his jurisdiction; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 14 ( w.e.f. 1-7-1990).  18 
 (b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting or securing the recovery of the whole or 
any part of the am ount, it is necessary so to do,  
he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of the certificate 
certified in the prescribed manner and specifying the amount to be recovered to the Rec overy Officer 
within whose jurisdiction the establishment or the employer has property or the employer resides, and 
thereupon that Recovery Officer shall also proceed to recover the amount due under this section as if the 
certificate or the copy thereof ha d been the certificate sent to him by the authorised officer.  
8D. Validity of cer tificate and amendment thereof .—(1) When the authorised  officer issues a 
certificate to a Recovery Officer under section 8B, it shall not be open to the employer to dispute before 
the Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount, and no objection to the certificate on any other 
ground shall also be enter tained by the Recovery Officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery Officer, the authorised officer shall have 
power to withdraw the certificate or correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the certificate by 
sending an inti matio n to the Recovery Officer.  
(3) The authorised officer shall intimate to the Recovery Officer any order withdrawing or cancelling 
a certificate or any correction made by him under sub -section ( 2) or any amendment made under  
sub-section ( 4) of sectio n 8E.  
8E. Stay of proceedings under certificate and am endment or withdrawal thereof .—(1) 
Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer for the recovery of any amount, 
the authorised officer may grant time for the payment of the amount , and thereupon the Recovery Officer 
shall stay the proceedings until the  expiry of the time so granted.  
(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the authorised  officer shall keep 
the Recovery Officer informed of any amount paid or time granted for payment, subsequent to  the issue 
of such certificate.  
(3) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for which a certificate for recovery has been 
issued has be en modified in appeal or other proceeding under this Act, and, as a consequence thereof, the 
demand is reduced but the order is the subject -matter of a further proceeding under this Act, the 
authorised officer shall stay the recovery of such part of the am ount of the certificate as pertains to the 
said reduction for the period for which the appeal or ot her proceeding remains pending.  
(4) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued and subsequently the amount of the 
outstanding demand is r educed as a result of an appeal or other proceeding under this Act, the authorised 
officer shall, when t he order which was the subject -matter of such appeal or other proceeding has become 
final and conclusive, amend the certificate or wit hdraw it, as the c ase may be.  
8F. Other modes of recovery .—(1) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to the Recovery 
Officer under section 8B, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the 
Central Board may recover the amount by any one  or more of the modes provided in this section.  
(2) If any amount is due from any person to any employer who is in arrears, the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the Central Board in this behalf may require such 
person to deduct from the said amount the arrears due from such employer under this Act and such person 
shall comply with any such requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the credit of the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so authorised,  as the case may be:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any part of the amount exempt from 
attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 
(5 of 1908).  19 
 (3) (i) The Central Pro vident Fund Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the Central Board 
in this behalf may, at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing, require any person from whom 
money is due or may become due to the employer or, as the case may be, th e establishment or any person 
who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the employer or as the case may be, the 
establishment, to pay to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner either forthwith upon the money 
becoming due or being held or at or within the time specified in the notice (not being before the money 
becomes due or is held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from the employer in 
respect of arrears or the whole of the money when it is equ al to or less t han that amount.  
(ii) A notice under this sub -section may be issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold 
any money for or  an account of the employer jointly with any other person and for the purposes of this 
sub-section, the shares of the joint -holders in such account shall be presumed, until the c ontrary is proved, 
to be equal.  
(iii) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the employer at his last address known to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or, as the case may be, the officer so  authorised and in the case of a joint 
account to all the joint -holders at their last addresses known to the Central Provident Fund Commissione r 
or the officer so authorised.  
(iv) Save as otherwise provided in this sub -section, every person to whom a notic e is issued under this 
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where any such notice is issued 
to a post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or 
any other docume nt to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made 
before payment is made notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(v) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this sub -section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the notice.  
(vi) Where a person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by a statement on 
oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the employer or that he does not hold any 
money for or on account of the employer, then, nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to 
require such person to pay any such sum or part thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that 
such statement was false in any material particular, such person shall be personally liable to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so  authorised to the extent of his own liability to the 
employer on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the employer ’s liability for any sum due und er this 
Act, whichever is less.  
(vii) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so author ised may, at any time or from 
time to time, amend or revoke any notice issued under this sub -section or extend the time for making any 
payme nt in pursuance of such notice.  
(viii) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so authorised shall gr ant a receipt for 
any amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under this sub -section, and the person so paying shall 
be fully discharged from his liability to the employer to th e extent of the amount so paid.  
(ix) Any person discharging any liabilit y to the employer after the receipt of a notice under this  
sub-section shall be personally liable to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so 
authorised to the extent of his own liability to the employer so discharged or to the extent of the 
employer ’s liability for any sum due und er this Act, whichever is less.  
(x) If the person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance 
thereof to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so authorised  he shall be deemed to be 
an employer in default in respect of the amount specified in the notice and further proceedings may be 
taken against him for the realisation of the amount as if it were an arrear due from him, in the manner 20 
 provided in sections 8B  to 8E and the notice shall have the same effect as an attachment of a debt by the 
Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under section 8B.  
(4) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer authorised  by the Central Board in this 
behalf may apply to the court in whose custody there is money belonging to the employer for payment to 
him of the entire amount of such money, or if it is more than the amount due, an amount sufficie nt to 
discharge the amount due. 
(5) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or any officer not below the rank of Assistant 
Provident Fund Commissioner may, if so authorised by the Central Government by general or special 
order, recover any arrears of amount due from an employer or, as the case may be, from the establishment 
by distraint and sale of his or its movable property in the manner laid down in the Third Schedule to the 
Income- tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).  
8G. Application of certain  provisions of Income -tax Act .—The provisions  of the Second and Third 
Schedules to the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and 
the rules referred t o the arrears of the amount mentioned i n section 8 of this Act instead of to the  
income -tax: 
Provided that any reference in the said provisions and the rules to the “assessee ” shall be construed as 
a reference to an em ployer as defined in this Act.]  
9. Fund to be r ecognised under Act 11 of 1922 .—For the purposes of the Indian Income -tax Act, 
1922, the Fund shall be deemed to be a recognised provident fund within the meaning of Chapter IXA of 
that Act : 
1[Provided that nothing contained in the said Chap ter shall operate to render ineffective any provision 
of the Scheme (under which the Fund is established) which is repugnant to any of the provisions of that 
Chapter or  of the rules made thereunder.]  
10. Protection against attachment .—(1) The amount standing to the cre dit of any member in the 
Fund 2[or of any exempted employee in a provident fund] shall not in any way be capable of being 
assigned or charged and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect 
of any debt or lia bility incurred by the member 2[or the exempted employee], and neither the official 
assignee appointed under the Presidency -towns Insolvency Act, 1909 (3 of 1909), nor any receiver 
appointed under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920),  shall be entitled to, or have  any claim 
on, any such amount.  
3[(2) Any amount standing to the credit of a member in the Fund or of an exempted employee in a 
provident fund at the time of his death and payable to his nominee under the Scheme or the rules o f the 
provident fund shall, subject to any deduction authorised by the said Scheme or rules, vest in the nominee 
and shall be free from any debt or other liability incurred by the deceased or the nominee before the death 
of the me mber of the exempted emplo yee 4[and shall also not be liable to attachment under a ny decree or 
order of any court ].  
5[(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
the family pension or any other amount payable un der the 6[Pension ] Scheme 7[and also in relation to any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 7.  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 2). 
4. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 22 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f.16 -11-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  21 
 amount payable under the Insurance Scheme] as they apply in relation to any a mount payable out of the 
Fund.]  
11. Priority of payment of c ontributions over other debts .—1[(1)] 2[Where any employer is 
adjudicated  insolvent or, being a company, an order for windi ng up is made, the amount due — 
(a) from the employer in relation to 3[an establishment] to which any 4[Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] applies in respect of any cont ribution payable to the Fund 5[or, as the  case may be, the 
Insurance Fund], damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations required to be transferred 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15 or a ny charges payable by him under any other provision of this 
Act or of any provision of the 6[Sche me o r the Insurance Scheme]; or  
(b) from the employ er in relation to an exempted 7[establishment] in r espect of any contribution 
to 8[the Provident Fund or any Insurance Fund] (in so far it relates to exempted e mployees), under the 
the rules of 8[the Provident  Fund or any Insurance Fund], 9[any contribution payable by him towards 
the Family Pension Fund under sub -section ( 6) of section 17,] damages recoverable under section 
14B or any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under any provision of t his Act or 
under any of the condit ions specified under section 17,  
shall, wh ere the liability thereof  has accrued before the order of adjudication or winding up is made, be 
deemed to be included] among the debts which under section 49 of the Presidency -towns Insolvency Act, 
1909 (3 of 1909), or under section 61 of the Provincial In solvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), or under 
10[section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)] , are to be paid in priority to all other debts in the 
distribution of the property of the insolvent or the assets of the company bein g wound up, as the case may 
be. 
11[Explanation .—In this sub -section and in section 17, “insurance fund ” means any fund established 
by an employer under any scheme for providing benefits in the nature of life insurance to employees, 
whether linked to their deposits in provident fund or not, without payment by the employees of any 
separate contribution or  premium in that behalf.]  
12[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if any amou nt is due from an employer 
13[whether in respect of the employee ’s contribution (deducted from the wages of the employee) or the 
employer ’s contribution], the amount so due shall be deemed to be the first charge on the assets of the 
establishment, and shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
be paid i n priority to all other debts.]  
14[12. Empl oyer not to reduce wages , etc.—No employ er in relation to 15[an establishment] to which 
any 16[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the pa yment of 
                                                           
1. Section 11 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 9, for certain words.  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
4. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
7 Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “Factory” . 
8. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “the provident fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 23 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
10. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
11. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
12. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
13. Subs. by Act 33 of 1 988, s. 16, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
14. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 10, for section 12.  
15. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
16. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 28, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  22 
 any contribution to 1[the Fund or the Insurance Fund] or any c harges under this Act or the 2[Scheme or the 
the Insurance  Scheme], reduce, whether directly or indirectly, the wage s of any employee to whom the 
2[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] applies or the total quantum of benefits in the nature of  old age 
pension, grat uity 3[Provident Fund or Life Insurance] to which the employee is entitled under the terms of 
of his employment, expres s or implied.]  
13. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the p urposes of this Act 4[, the Scheme] 5[, the 
6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], and  may define their jurisdiction.  
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of inquiring into the 
correctness of any information furnished in connect ion with this Act or with any 7[Scheme or the 
Insurance Scheme] or for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the pro visions of this Act or of any 
7[Scheme or the Insurance Sc heme] have been complied with 8[in respect of  9[an estab lishment] to which 
which any 7[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] applies or for the purpose of ascertaining whether the 
provisions of this Act or any 1[Scheme or the Insurance  Scheme] are applicable to any 10[establishment] 
to which the 7[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] has not been applied or for the purpose of determining 
whether the conditions subject to which exemption was granted under section 17 are being complied with 
by the employer in relation to a n exempted 10[establishment]] — 
(a) require  an employer 11[or any contractor from whom any amount is recoverable under section 
8A] to furnish such information as he may consider necessary 12***; 
(b) at any reasonable time 13[and with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter and 
search] an y 10[establishment] or any premises connected therewith and require any one found in 
charge thereof to produce before him for examination any accounts, books, registers and other 
documents relating to the employment  of persons or the payment of wages in th e 10[establishment];  
(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to any of the pur poses aforesaid, the employer 
11[or any contractor from whom any amount is recoverable under section 8A], his agent or servant o r 
any other person found in charge of the 10[establishment] of any premises connected therewith or 
whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been, an emp loyee in the 
10[establishment];  
14[(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register or other document maintained in 
relation to the establishment and, where he has reason to believe that any offence under this Act has 
been committed by an employer, seize with such assistance as he may think fit, such book, register or 
other document or portions thereof as he may consider releva nt in respect of that offence;]  
(e) exer cise such other powers as the 7[Scheme or the  Insurance Scheme] may provide.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 28, for “the Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., “or provident Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 24, for “or of any Scheme” (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 99 of  1976, s. 29, for “or the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 29, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 11.  
9. Subs. by  Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
10. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “factory”.  
11. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
12. The words “in relation to the Scheme” omitted by Act 37 of 1953, s. 11.  
13. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 9, for “enter ” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
14. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  23 
 1[(2A) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of inq uiring into the 
correctness of any information furnished in connection with the 2[Pension ] Scheme or for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act or of the 2[Pension ] Scheme have been complied 
with in respect of an es tablishmen t to which the 2[Pension ] Scheme applies, exercise all or any of the 
powers conferred, on him under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2).] 
 3[ 4[(2B)] The provisions of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ) shall, so far as may be, 
be, apply to any search or seizure under sub -section ( 2), 5[or under sub -section ( 2A), as the case may be,] 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the 
said Code.]  
6*    *    *    *    * 
14. Penalties .—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be m ade by himself under 
this Act 7[, the  Scheme 8[, the  9[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] or of enabling any other 
person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made any false statement or false 
representation shall be punishable with imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to 10[one year, or wi th 
fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.]  
 11[(1A) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, the provisions of section 
6 or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 17 in so far as it relates to the payment of inspection charges, 
or paragraph 38 of the Scheme in so far as it relates to the payment of administrative charges, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 12[three years ] but— 
(a) which shall not be less than 13[one year and a fine of ten thousand rupees] in case of default in 
payment of the employees ’ contribution which has been deducted by the employer from the 
employees ’ wages; 
14[(b) which  shall not be less than six months and a fine of five thous and rupees, in any other 
case;]  
15*    *    *    *    * 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a  lesser term 16***.]  
17[(1B) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, the provisions of section 
6C, or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3A) of section 17 in so far as it relates to the payment of inspection 
charges, shall be punishable with  imprisonment f or a term which may extend to 18[one year] but  which 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 24.  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
4. Sub -section ( 2A) re-numbered as sub -section ( 2B) by Act 16 of 1971 , s. 24 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
5. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
6. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 25, for “or under any  Scheme”.  
8. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 30, for “or the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
10. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”  
 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
11. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
12. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
13. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
14. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988,  s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
15. The words “and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two thousand rupees” omitted by s. 18, ibid.                          
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
16. The words “or of fine only in lieu of imp risonment” omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
17. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
18. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  24 
 shall not be less than 1[six months] and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to 2[five thousand 
rupees] : 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be re corded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of impri sonment for a lesser term 3***.] 
(2) 4[Subject to the provis ions of this Act, the Scheme] 5[, the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] may provide that any person who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the 
provisions thereof shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a term which may extend 7[one year, or with 
with fine which may extend to f our thousand rupees, or with both].  
8[(2A) Whoever contravenes or makes default in complying with any provision of this Act or of any 
condition subject to which exemption was granted under section 17 shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere 
provided by or under this Act  for such contravention or non -compliance, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to 7[six months, but which shall not be less than one month, and shall 
also be liable to fine which may e xtend to five thousand rupees.] ] 
9*     *    *   *   *  
10[14A. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act 11[, the 
Scheme or 12[the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] is a company, every person, who at the 
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guil ty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowl edge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), wh ere an offence under this Act 12[, the 
Scheme  or 13[the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any 
neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer  of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any b ody corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “one month” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. The words “or of fine only in lieu of imprisonment” omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4, for “the scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
5. Subs. by Act 9 9 of 1976, s. 30, “or the family pension” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”  
 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 12.  
9. Omitted by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
10. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 13.  
11. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 26, for “or the scheme made thereunder”.  
12. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 31, fo r “the family pension scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  25 
 1[14AA. Enhanced punishment in certain c ases after previous conviction .—Whoever, having 
been convicted by a Court of an offence punishable under this Act, the Scheme or 2[the 3[Pension ] 
Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], commits the same offence shall be subject for every such subsequent 
offence to imprisonment for a term which may extend  to 4[five years, but which shall not be less than two 
two years, and shall also be liable to a fine of twenty -five thousand rupees ]. 
14AB. Cer tain offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Crim inal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ) an offence relating to default in payment of contribution by the 
employer punishable unde r this Act shall be cognizable.  
14AC. Co gnizance and trial of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act, the Sc heme  or 2[the 3[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] except on a 
report in writing  of the facts constituting such offence made with the previous sanction of the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised  by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf, by an Inspector appo inted under section 13.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Ac t or the Sch eme or 2[the 3[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme].  
14B. Power to recover damages .—Where an employer makes default in the payment of  any 
contribution to the Fund 5[, the 3[Pension ] Fund or the Insurance Fund] or in the transfer of accumulations 
accumulations required to be transferred by him under sub -section ( 2) of section 15  6[or sub -section ( 5) of 
of section 17] or in the payment of any charges payable under any othe r provision of this Act or of 7[any 
Scheme or Insurance Scheme] or under any of the condition s specified under section 17, 8[the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , in this behalf] may recover 9[from the employer  by way of pe nalty 
such damages, not exceeding  the amount of arrears, as may be specified in the Scheme :]]  
10[Provided that before levying and recovering such damages, the employer shall be given a 
reasonab le opportunity of being heard]:  
11[Provided further that the Central Board may reduce or waive the damages levied under this section 
in relation to an establishment which is a sick industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for 
rehabilitation has been sanctioned by the Board for Industrial and Financial Rec onstruction established 
under section 4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special P rovisions) Act, 1985  (1 of 1986) , subject to 
such terms and conditions as m ay be specified in the Scheme.]  
12[14C. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence of 
making default in the payment of any contribution to the Fund 13[, the 3[Pension ] Fund or the Insurance 
Fund] or in the transfer of accumulations required to be transferred by him under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 15 or sub -section ( 5) of section 17, the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 3 2, for “the family pension scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 19, for “one year but which shall not be less than three months and shall also be liable to fine 
which may extend to four thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 32, for “or the family pension fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
6. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 10 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
7. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 32, for “any scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
8. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 6, for “the appropriate Government” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
9. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 19, for “from the employer such damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears as it may think fit to 
impose” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1991).  
10. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
11. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 20 ( w.e.f. 1 -9-1991) . 
12. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973,  s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
13. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 33, for “or the Family Pension Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  26 
 order in writing require him within a period specified in the order (which the court may, if it thinks fit and 
on application in that behalf, from time t o time, extend), to pay the amount of contribution or transfer the 
accumulations, as the case may be, in respect of w hich the offence was committed.  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the employer shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuation of the offence during the period or extended period, if any, allowed by the 
court, but if, on the expiry of such period or extended period, as the case may be, the order of t he court 
has not been fully complied with, the employer shall be deemed to have committed a further offence and 
shall be punished with imprisonment in respect thereof under section 14 and shall also be liable to pay 
fine which may extend to one hundred rup ees for every day after such expiry on which the ord er has not 
been complied with.]  
15. Special provisions relating to existing p rovident funds .—(1) 1[Subject to the provisions of 
section 17, every employee who is a subscr iber to any provident fund of 2[an establishment] to which this 
act applies shall, pending the application of a Scheme to] the 3[establishment] in which he is employed, 
continue to be entitled to the benefits accruing to him under the provident fund, and the provident fund 
shall continue to be maintained in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as it would have 
been i f this Act had not been passed.  
(2) 4[On the  application of any Scheme to 2[an establishment], the accumulations  in any provident 
fund of the 3[establishment] sta nding to the credit of the employees who become members of the Fund 
established under the Scheme] shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the 
time being in force or in any deed or other instrument establishing the provident  fund but subject to the 
provisions, if any, contained in the Scheme, be transferred to the Fund established under the Scheme, and 
shall be credited to the accounts of the employee s entitled thereto in the Fund.  
16. Act not to ap ply to certain establishments .— 5[ 6[(1)] This Act shall not apply — 
(a) to any establishment registered under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or 
under any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co -operative societies, 
employing l ess than fifty persons and worki ng without the aid of power; or  
7[(b) to any other establishment belonging to or under the control of the Central Government or a 
State Government and whose employees are entitled to the benefit of contributory provident fund or 
old age pension in accordance with any scheme or rule framed by the Central Government or the 
State Governm ent governing such benefits; or  
(c) to any other establishment set up under any Central, Provincial or State Act and whose 
employees are enti tled to the benefits of contributory provident fund or old age pension in accordance 
with any scheme or rule framed under that Act governing such benefits; 8*** 
9*   *   *  *   *]] 
 10[(2) If the Central Government is of opinion that having regard to the finan cial position of any class 
of 11[establishments] or other circumstances of the case, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 14, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
3. Subs. s. 3, ibid., for “factory”.  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 14, for certain words.  
5. Section 16 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by ibid., s. 15. 
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 21, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1-8-1988).  
8. The word “or” omitted by Act 10 of 1998, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
9. Clause ( d) and the Explanation omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
10. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 15.  
11. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factories”.  27 
 notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specifie d in the notification, 
exempt 1[whether prospectively or r etrospectively] that class of 2[establishments] from the operation of 
this Act for such period as may be specified in the notification.]  
3[16A. Authorising certain employers to ma intain provident fund accounts .—(1) The Central 
Government may, on an application made to it in this behalf by the employer and the majority of 
employees in relation to an establishment employing one hundred or more persons, authorise the 
employer, by an order in writing, to maintain a pro vident fund account in relation to the establishment, 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme:  
Provided that no authorisation  shall be made under this sub -section if the employer of such 
establishment had committed any defaul t in the payment of provident fund contribution or had committed 
any other offence under this Act during the three years immediately preceding the date of such 
authorisation.  
(2) Where an establishment is authorised to maintain a provident fund account und er sub -section ( 1), 
the employer in relation to such establishment shall maintain such account, submit such return, deposit 
the contribution in such manner, provide for such facilities for inspection, pay such administrative 
charges, and abide by such othe r terms and conditions, as may be specifi ed in the Scheme.  
(3) Any authorisation made under this section may be cancelled by the Central Government by order 
in writing if the employer fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the authorisatio n or 
where he commits any offence under a ny provision of this Act:  
Provided that before cancelling the authorisation, the Central Government shall give the employer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. ] 
4[17. Power to exempt .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to such conditions as may be s pecified in the notification, 5[exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, from the operation] of all or any of  the provisions of any Scheme — 
(a) any [establishment] to which this Act applies if, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, 
the rules of its provident fund with respect to the rates of contribution are not less favourable than 
those specified in section 6 and the employees are also in enj oyment of other provident fund benefits 
which on the whole are not less favourable to the employees than the benefits provided under this Act 
or any Scheme in relation to the employees in any other 3[establishm ent] of a similar character; or  
(b) and 3[establishm ent] if the employees of such 3[establishment] are in enjoyment of benefits in 
the nature of provident fund, pension or gratuity and the appropriate Government is of opinion that 
such benefits, separately or jointly, are on the whole not less fa vourable to such employees than the 
benefits provided under this Act or any Scheme in relat ion to employees in any other 3[establi shment] 
of a similar character:  
6[Provided that no such exemption shall be made except after consultation with the Central Boa rd 
which on such consultation shall forward its views on exemption to the appropriate Government within 
such time limit as may be specified in the Scheme.]  
7*    *    *    *    *  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “ factories ”. 
3. Section 16 A by Act 33 of 1988, s. 22 (date to be notified).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 16, for section 17.  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
6. Ins. by s. 23 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
7. The Explanation omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  28 
 1[(1A) Where an exemption has been granted to an establishment under c lause ( a) of sub -section 
(1),— 
(a) the provisions of sections 6, 7A, 8 and 14B shall, so far as may be, apply to the employer of 
the exempted establishment in addition to such other conditions as may be specified in the 
notification granting such exemption , and where such employer contravenes, or makes default in 
complying with any of the said provisions or conditions o r any other provision  of this Act, he shall be 
punishable under section 14 as if the said establishment had not been exem pted under the said  clause 
(a); 
(b) the employer shall establish a Board of Trustees for the administration of the provident fund 
consisting of such number of members as may be specified in the Scheme;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of members of the Board of Trustees shall be such as may 
be specified in the Sc heme;  
(d) the Board of Trustees const ituted under clause ( b) shall — 
(i) maintain detailed accounts to show the contributions credited, withdrawa ls made and 
interest accrued in respect of each employee;  
(ii) submit such returns to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner or any other officer as 
the Central Governmen t may direct from time to time;  
(iii) invest the provident fund monies in accordanc e with the directions issued by the Centra l 
Government from time to time;  
(iv) transfer, where necessary, the provident fu nd account of any employee; and  
(v) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(1B) Where the Board of Trustees established under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1A) contravenes, or 
makes default in complying with, any provisions of clause ( d) of that sub -section, the Trustees of the said 
Board shall be deemed to have committed an offence under sub -section ( 2A) of sectio n 14 and shall be 
punishable with the penaltie s provided in that sub -section.  
2[(1C)The appropriate Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to the 
condition on the pattern of investment of pension fund and such other conditions  as may be specified 
therein, exempt any establishment or class of establishments from the operation of the Pension Scheme if 
the employees of such establishment or class of establishments are either members of any other pension 
scheme  or propose  to be members of such pension scheme, where the pensionary benefits are at par or 
more favourable than the Pension Scheme under this Act. ]] 
(2) Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any person or cla ss of persons employed in 
any 3[establishment] t o which the Scheme applies from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the 
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in the nature of provident fund, gratuity 
or old age pension and such benefits, separately or jointly, a re on the whole not less favourable than the 
benefits provide d under this Act or the Scheme:  
Provided that no such exemption shall be granted in respect of a class of persons unless the 
appropriate Government is of opinion that the majority of persons cons tituting such class desire to 
continue t o be entitled to such benefits.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for sub -section ( IA) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 7, for  sub-section ( IC) (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995). 
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  29 
 1[(2A) 2[The Central Provident Fund Commissioner may, if requested so to do by the employer, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, 
exempt, whether prospectively or retrospectively, any esta blishment from the operation of all or any of 
the provisions of the Insurance Scheme, if he is satisfied] that the employees of such establishment are, 
without making any separate contribution or payment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits in the nature 
of life insurance, whether linked to their deposits in provident fund or not, and such benefits are more 
favourable to such employees than the benefits admissible under the Insurance Scheme.  
(2B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2A), the Insurance Scheme may provide for 
the exemption of any person or class of persons employed in any establishment and covered by that 
Scheme from the operation of all or any of the provisions thereof, if the benefits in the nature of life 
insurance adm issible to such person or class of persons are more favourable than the benefits provided 
unde r the Insurance Scheme.]  
3[(3) Where in respect of any person or class of persons employed in an establishment an exemption 
is granted under this section from the  operation of all or any of the provisions of any Scheme (whether 
such exemption has been granted to the establishment wherein such person or class of persons is 
employed or to the perso n or class of persons as such), the employer in relation to such estab lishment — 
(a) shall, in relation to the provident fund, pension and gratuity to which any such person or class 
of persons is entitled, maintain such accounts, submit such returns, make such investment, provide for 
such facilities for inspection and pay suc h inspection charges, as the Central Government may direct;  
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption, without the leave of the Central Government, 
reduce the total quantum of benefits in the nature of pension, gratuity or provident fund to which any 
such person or class of persons was entitled at  the time of the exemption; and  
(c) shall, where any such person leaves his employment and obtains re -employment in another 
establishment to which this Act applies, transfer within such time as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government, the amount of accumulations to the credit of that person in the provident 
fund of the establishment left by him to the credit of that person ’s account in the provident fund of the 
establishment in which h e is re -employed or, as the case may be, in the Fund established under the 
Scheme a pplicable to the establishment.  
4[(3A) Where, in respect of any person or class of persons employed in any establishment, an 
exemption is granted under sub -section ( 2A) or s ub-section ( 2B) from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of the Insurance Scheme (whether such exemption is granted to the establishment wherein 
such person or class of persons is employed or to the person or class of persons as such), the employ er in 
relation to such establishment — 
(a) shall, in relation to the benefits in the nature of life insurance, to which any such person or 
class of persons is entitled, or any insurance fund, maintain such accounts, submit such returns, make 
such investment s, provide for such facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charges, as the 
Central Government may direct;  
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption without the leave of the Central Government, reduce 
the total quantum of benefits in the nat ure of life insurance to which any such person or class of 
persons was entitled immediately be fore the date of the exemption;  5*** 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 11, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
4. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. The word “and” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  30 
 1*    *    *    *   * 
(4) Any exemption granted under this section may be cancelled by the authority which granted it, by 
order in writing, if  an employer fails to comply, — 
(a) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 1), with any of the conditions im posed 
under that sub -section 2[or sub-section ( 1A)] or with any of the provisions o f sub -section ( 3); 3*** 
4[(aa) in the case of an exempti on granted under sub -section 5[(1C)], with any of the conditions 
impos ed under that sub -section; and]  
(b) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2), with any of the  provisions of  
sub-section ( 3); 
6[(c) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2A), with any of the conditions 
imposed under that sub -section or with any of the pro visions of sub -section ( 3A); 
(d) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2B), with any of the p rovision s of  
sub-section ( 3A).] 
7[(5) Where any exemption gran ted under sub -section ( 1), sub -section 5[(1C)] 8[, sub -section ( 2),  
sub-section ( 2A) or sub -section ( 2B)] is cancelled, the amount of accumulations to the credit of every 
employee to whom such exemption applied, in the provide nt fund 9[, the 10[pension ] fund or the insurance 
insurance fund] of the establis hment in which he is employed 11[together with any amount forfeited from 
the employer ’s share of contribution to the credit of the employee who leaves the  employment before the 
completion of the full period of service] shall be transferred within such time and in such manner as may 
be specified in the Scheme or the 10[Pension ] Scheme 12[or the Insurance Scheme] to the credit of his 
account in the Fund or the 10[Pension ] Fund 12[or the Insur ance Fund], as the case may be.  
(6) Subject to the prov isions of sub -section 5[(1C)] the employer of an exempted establishment or of 
an exempted employee of an establishment to which the provisions of the 10[Pension ] Scheme apply, 
shall, notwithstanding any exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), pay to the 
10[Pension ] Fund such portion of the employer ’s contribution 13*** to its provident fund within such time 
and in such manner as may be specified i n the 10[Pension ] Scheme.]]]  
14[17A. Transfer of accounts .—(1) Where an employee employed in an establishment to which this 
Act applies leaves his employment and obtains re-employment in another establishment to which this Act 
does not apply, the amount of accumulations to the credit of such employee in the Fund, or as the case 
may be, in the provident fund of the establishment left by him shall be transferred, within such  time as 
may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf, to the credit of his account in the provident 
fund of the establishment in which he is re -employed, if the employee so desires and the rules in relation 
to that provi dent fund permit such transfer.  
(2) Where an employee employed in an establishment to which this Act does not apply leaves his 
employment and obtains re -employment in another establishment to which this Act applies, the amount of 
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 23 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 16 of 1971, s. 27 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
4. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for “( 1A)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1985).  
6. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 27, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
8. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
10. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16-11-1995).  
11. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
12. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
13. The words “as well as the employees’ Contribution” omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
14. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 12 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  31 
 accumulations to the credit of such employee in the provident fund of the establishment left by him may, 
if the employee so desires and the rules in relation to such provident fund permit, be transferred to the 
credit of his account in the Fund or as the case may be, in the provident fund of the establi shme nt in 
which he is re -employed.]  
1[17AA. Act to have effect notwithstanding anythin g contained in Act 31 of 1956 .—The 
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Life Insurance Corporatio n Ac t, 1956.]  
2[17B. Liability in case  of transfer of establishment .—Where an employer, in relation to an 
establishment, transfers that establishment in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease or licence  or in any other 
manner whatsoever, the employer and the person to whom the establishment is so transferred shall jointly 
and severally be liable to pay the contribution and other sums due from the employer under any provision 
of this Act or the Scheme or 3[, the 4[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], as the case may be, in 
respect of the period u p to the date of such transfer:  
Provided that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the value of the assets obtained by him 
by such transfer .] 
5[18. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, a State Government, the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal, any 
authority referred to in section 7A, an Inspector or any ot her person for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, the Scheme, the  4[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme.  
6[18A. Authorities and inspector to be public servant .—The authorities referred to in section 7A  
and every inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of sectio n 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code , 1860  (45 of 1860) .]] 
7[19. Delegation of powers .—The appropriate Government may direct that any power or authority or  
or jurisdiction exe rcisable by it under this Act 8[, the Scheme 3[, the 4[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme]] shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the d irection, be exercisable also — 
(a) where the appropriate  Government is the Central Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be spe cified in the notification; and  
(b) where  the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be  specified in the notification. ] 
9[20. Power of Central Government to give d irections .—The Central Government may, from time 
to time, give such directions to the Central Board as it may think fit for the efficient administration of this 
Act and when any such direction is given, the Central Board sh all comply with such direction.  
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government m ay, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 31, for “the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 24, for section 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.  159, for section 18A (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
7. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 17, for section 19.  
8. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971,  s. 29, for “or any scheme”.  
9. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 25, for section 19A (w.e.f. 1 -7-1997).  32 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
 (b) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, an appeal shall be filed before 
a Tribunal and the fees payable for filing such appeal;  
(c) the manner of certifying the copy of the certificate, to be forwarded to the Recovery Officer 
under s ub-section ( 2) of section 8C; and  
(d) any other matter, which has to be, or may be, pres cribed by rules under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in se ssion, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
22. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, as amended by the Employees ’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) 
Act, 1988 (33 of 1988), the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary  or 
expedient for  the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on 
which the said amendment Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this secti on shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid be fore each 
House of Par liament.]  
  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  33 
  
SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( i) and 4]  
Any indus try engaged in the manufacture 1*** of any of the following, namely: — 
Cement.  
Cigarettes.  
Electrical, mechanical or gen eral engineering products.  
Iron and steel.  
Paper.  
Textiles (made wholly or in part of cotton or wool or jute or silk, whether natural or artificial).  
2[1. Matches.  
2. Edible oils and fats.  
3. Sugar.  
4. Rubber and rubber products.  
5. Electricity including t he generation, transmi ssion and distribution thereof.  
6. Tea.  
7. Printing [other than printing industry relating to newspaper establishments as defined in the 
Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955), 
including the process of composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, 
photogravure or other si milar process or book -binding.]  
8. Glass.  
9. Stone -ware pipes.  
10. Sanitary wares.  
11. Electrical porcelain insulators of high and low te nsion.  
12. Refractories.  
13. Tiles.]  
3[1. Heavy and fine chemicals, including — 
(i) Fertilizers,  
(ii) Turpentine,  
(iii) Rosin,  
(iv) Medical a nd pharmaceutical preparations,  
(v) Toilet preparations,  
(vi) Soaps,  
                                                           
1. The words “or production” omitted by Act 37 of 1953, s. 18.  
2. Ins. by Notification No.  S.R.O. 1566, dated the 4th July, 1956, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -7-1956).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.R.O. 2026, dated the 3rd September, 1956, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -9-1956).  34 
 (vii) Inks,  
(viii) Intermediates  dyes, colour lakhs and toners,  
(ix) Fatty acids, and  
1[(x) Oxygen, acetylene, and carbon -dioxide gases ind ustry.]  
2. Indigo.  
3. Lac including shellac.  
4. Non -edible veget able and animal oils and fats.]  
2[Mineral oil refining industry.]  
3[(i) Industrial and Power Alcohol industry; and  
(ii) Asbestos Cement Sheets industry.]  
4[Biscuit making industry including composite units making biscuits and products such as bread, 
confectio nery and milk and milk powder.]  
5[Mica industry.]  
6[Plywood industry.]  
7[Automobile rep airing and servicing industry.]  
8[1. Rice milling.  
2. Flour milling.  
3. Dal milling.]  
9[Starch  industry.]  
10[1. Petroleum or natural gas exploration, prosp ecting, drilling or production.  
2. Petr oleum or natural gas refining.]  
11[Leather and leather products industry.]  
12[1. Stone -ware jars.  
2. Crocker y.] 
13[The fruit and vegetable preservation industry, that is to say, any industry which is engaged in the 
preparation or production of any of th e following articles, namely: — 
(i) canned and bo ttled fruits, juices and pulps,  
(ii) canned and bottled vegeta bles, 
(iii) frozen fruits and vegetables,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.R.O. 1976, dated the 8th June, 1957, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -7-1957).  
2. Ins by Notification No. S.R.O. 218, dated the 12th January, 1957, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1957).  
3. Ins.  by Notification No. S.R.O. 3067, dated the 19th September, 1957, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1957).  
4. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 170, dated the 12th March, 1958, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -4-1958).  
5. Ins .by Notification No. G.S.R. 312, dated the 5th March, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1960).  
6. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 632, dated the 30th May, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1960).  
7. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 683, dated the 9th May, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1960).  
8. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1443, dated the 24th November, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -12-1960) . 
9. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 535, dated the 10th April, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1961).  
10. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 705, dated the 30th May, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30-6-1961).  
11. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 993, dated the 29th July, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1961).  
12. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1382, dated the 4th November, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1961).  
13. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 786, dated the 6th June, 1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1962)  as 
amended by Notification No. G.S.R. 1461, dated the 29th August, 1963.  35 
 (iv) jams, jellies and marmalades,  
(v) tomato  products, ketchups and sauces,  
(vi) squashes, crushes, cordials and ready -to-serve beverages or any other beverages contain ing 
fruit juice or fruit pulp,  
(vii) preserved, candied and  crystallised fruits and peals,  
(viii) chutneys,  
(ix) any other unspecified item relating to the preservation or canning of fruits and vegetables.]  
1[Cashewnut Industry.]  
2[Confectionery Industry.]  
3[1. Buttons.  
2. Brushes.  
3. Plastic and  Plastic products.  
4. Stationery products.]  
4[The aerated water industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of aerated water, 
water, soft drinks  or carbonated water.]  
5[The distilling and rectifying of spirits (not falling under industrial and power alcohol) and  blending 
of spirits industry.]  
6[The Paint and Varnish Industry.]  
7[Bone Cru shing Industry.]  
8[Pickers Industry.]  
9[Milk and milk products Industry.]  
10[Non -ferrous metals and alloys i n the form o f ingots industry.]  
11[Bread Industry.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1 125, dated the 18th August, 1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f 30 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 424, dated the 28th February, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -3-1963).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 591, dated the 27th March, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -4-1963).  
4. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1432, dated the 3rd August, 1963, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary  Part II, sec. 3(i)         
(w.e.f. 31 -8-1963).  
5. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1605, dated the 26th September, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
 (w.e.f. 31 -10-1963).  
6. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1983, dated the 21st December, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -1-1964).  
7. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 67, dated the 31st December, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -1-1964).  
8. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 822, dated the 22nd May, 1964, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -6-1964).  
9. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1723, dated the 27th November, 1964,  see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -12-1964).  
10. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1795, dated the 9th December, 1964, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -1-1965).  
11. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 402, dated the 2nd March, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -3-1965).  36 
 1[Stemming or redrying of tobacco leaf industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the stemming, 
stemming, redrying, handling, sorting, gradi ng or packing of tobacco leaf].  
2[Agarbatee (including d hoop and dhoopbatee) industry.]  
3[Coir (excluding the spinning sector) Industry.]  
4[Tobacco industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of Cigars, Zarda, snuff, 
qivam and guraku from tobacco.]  
5[Paper products Industry.]  
6[Any industry engaged in manufact ure of salt for which a licence is necessary a nd which has land not 
not less than  7[4.05 hectares].  
8[Linoleum I ndustry and Indoleum Industry.]  
9[Explosive In dustry.]  
10[Jute  bailing or pressing Industry.]  
11[Fire works and percussion cap works Industry.]  
12[Tent  making Industry.]  
13[Ferro -manganese Industry.]  
14[Ice of ice -cream Industry.]  
15[Winding of thr ead and yarn reeling Industry.]  
16[Cotton Ginning, Ba iling and Pressing Industry.]  
17[Katha making Industry.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 768, dated the 18th May, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1965).  
2. Ins.  by Notification No. G.S.R. 910, dated the 23rd June, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1965).  
3. Ins.  by Notification No. G.S.R. 952, dated the 3rd July, 1965,  see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -9-1965).  
4. Ins.  by Notification No. G.S.R. 895, dated the 1st June, 1966, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1966).  
5. Ins.  by Notification No. G.S.R. 1119, dated the 11th July, 196 6, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1966).  
6. Ins.  by Notification No. G.S.R. 1362, dated the 30th August, 1966, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -9-1966).  
7. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1945, dated the 16th December, 1966, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i) for  
“ten acres”.  
8. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 437, dated the 27th March, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1966, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -4-1967).  
9. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1019, dated the 1st July, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -7-1967).  
10. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1226, dated the 5th August, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -8-1967).  
11. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1530, dated the 5th October, 1967, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-1967).  
12. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1716, dated the 3rd November, 1967, see Gazette of India, 19 67, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1967).  
13. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1018, dated the 22nd April, 1969, see Gazette of India, 1969, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -4-1969).  
14. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1506, dated the 11th June, 1969, see Gazette of India, 1969, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -6-1969).  
15. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1988, dated the 22nd November, 1971, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1971).  
16. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1251, dated the 23rd September, 1972, see Gazette of India, 1972 Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -9-1972).  
17. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 503, dated the 12th May, 1973, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -5-1973).  37 
 1[Beer manufacturing Industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of the product 
of alcoholic fermentation of a mash in potable water of malted barley and hops, or of hops concentrate d 
with or without the addition on other malted or unmalted cereals or oth er carbohyd rate preparations.]  
2[Beedi industry.]  
3[Ferro Chrome Industry.]  
4[Diamond Cutting Industry.]  
5[Industries engaged in the manufacture of Myrobalan Extract Power, Myrobalan Extracts Solid and 
Vegetable Tanin Blended Extract.]  
6[Brick Industry.]  
7[Industries  based on asbestos as principal raw material.  
8[Exaplanation .—In this Schedule, without prejudice to the ordinary meaning of the experssions used 
used therein ,— 
(a) the expression “Electrical, mechanical or general engineering products ” includes — 
(1) machinery  and equipment for the generation, transmission, distribution or measurement of 
electrical energy and mot ors including cables and wires,  
(2) telephones, telegraph and wi reless communication apparatus,  
(3) electric lam ps (not including glass bulbs).  
(4) ele ctric fans and electrical domestic appliances,  
(5) Storage and dry batteries,  
(6) radio receivers and  sound reproducing instruments,  
(7) machinery used in industry (including textile machinery) other than electric al machinery 
and machine tools,  
(8) boilers  and prime movers, including internal combustion engines, marine engines and 
locomotives,  
(9) machine tools, that is to say, me tal and wood working machinery,  
(10) grinding wheels,  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 428, dated the 15th April, 1974, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -4-1974).  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 660, dated the 17th May, 1977, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1977).  
3. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 938, dated the 25th June, 1979, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1979).  
4. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 564, dated the 5th May, 1980, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1980).  
5. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 613(E), dated the 30th October, 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1980, Part II,  
sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -10-1980).  
6. Ins. by Notification No. G.S.R. 662(E), dated the 27th November, 1980, see Gazette of India, 1980, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1980).  
7. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 2459, dated the 29th May, 1983, see Gazette of I ndia, 1980, Part II, sec. 3(ii)  
(w.e.f.  1-6-1983).  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 18.  
 
 38 
 (11) ships,  
(12) automobiles and tractors,  
(13) bolts, nuts and rivet s, 
(14) power dr iven pumps,  
(15) bicycles,  
(16) hurricane lanterns,  
(17) sewing and knitting machine s, 
(18) mathemati cal and scientific instruments,  
(19) products o f metal rolling and re -rolling.  
(20) wi res, pipes, tub es and fittings,  
(21) ferrous  and non -ferrous castings,  
(22) safes, vaults and furniture made of  iron or steel or steel alloys,  
(23) cu tlery and surgical instruments,  
(24) drums and containers,  
(25) parts and accessories of produ cts specified in items 1 to 24;  
(b) the expression “Iron and Steel ” includes pig iron, ingots, blooms, billets and rolled or re -rolled 
products into basic forms and toll and alloy s teel; 
(c) the expression “paper ” includes p ulp, paperboard and starawboard;  
(d) the expression “textiles ” includes the products of carding, spin ning, weaving, finishing and 
dyeing yarn and fabrics, printing, knitting and embroidering.]  
_____________  
SCHEDULE I I 
1[[See section 5( 1B)]] 
MATTERS FOR WHICH PROVISION MAY BE MADE IN A SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees who shall join the Fund, and the conditions under which 
employees may be exempted from joining the Fund o r from making any contribution.  
2. The time and manner in which contributions shall be made to the Fund by employers and by,  or on 
behalf of, employees 2[(whethe r employed by him directly or by or through a contractor)], the 
contributions which an employee may, if he so desires, make under 3*** section 6, and the manner in 
which such contributions may be recovered.  
 2[2A. The manner in which employees ’ contributions may be r ecovered by contractors from 
employees employed b y or through such contractors.]  
3. The payment by the employer of such sums of money as may be necessary to meet the cost of 
administering the Fund and the rate at which and the manner  in which the payment shall be made.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 13, for “[ see section 6( 2)]” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  39 
 1[4. The constitution of any committee for a ssisting any Board of Trustees.  
5. The opening of regional and other off ices of any Board of Trustees.]  
6. The manner in which accounts shall be kept, the investment of moneys  belonging to the Fund in 
accordance with any directions issued or conditions specified by the Central Government, the preparation 
of the budget, the audit of accounts and the submission of reports to the Central Government or to any 
specified State Govern ment.  
7. The conditions under which withdrawals from the Fund may be permitted and any deduction or 
forfeiture may be made and the maximum amount o f such deduction or forfeiture.  
8. The fixation by the Central Government in consultation with the boards of trustees concerned of 
the rate of interest payable to members.  
9. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself an d his family whenever 
required.  
10. The nomination of a person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a membe r after his 
death and the cancellation o r variation of such nomination.  
11. The registers and records to be maintained with respect to employees and the returns to be 
furnished b y employers 2[or contractors].  
12. The form or design of any identity card, to ken or disc for the purpose of identifying any 
employee, and for the issue, c ustody and replacement thereof.  
13. The fees to be levied for any of the purpo ses specified in this Schedule.  
14. The contraventions of defaults which shall be punishable under su b-section ( 2) of section 14.  
15. The further powers, if any, which may be exercised by Inspectors.  
16. The manner in which accumulations in any existing provident fund shall be transferred to the 
Fund under section 15, and the mode of valuation of any assets which may be transferred b y the 
employers in this behalf.  
17. The conditions under which a member may be permitted to pay premia on  life insurance, from the 
Fund.  
18. Any other matter 2[which is to be provided for in the Scheme or] which may be necessary or 
proper for the purpose  of implementing the Scheme.  
________________  
3[SCHEDULE III  
[See section 6A( 5)] 
MATTERS FOR WHICH PRO VISION MAY BE MADE IN THE PENSION  SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Pension Scheme shall apply.  
2. The time within which the employees who are not members of the Family Pension Scheme under 
section 6A as it stood before the commencement of the Employees ’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1996 (hereafter in this Schedule r eferred to as the amending Act) shall opt 
for the Pension Scheme.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 13, for items 4 and 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 8, for the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  40 
 3. The portion of employers' contribution to the Provident Fund which shall be credited to the Pension 
Fund and the manner in which it is credited.  
4. The minimum qualifying service for bei ng eligible for pension and the manner in which the 
employees may be granted the benefits of their past service under section 6A as it stood before the 
commencement of the amending Act.  
5. The regulation of the manner in which and the period of service for  which, no contribution is 
received.  
6. The manner in which employees' interest will be protected against default in payment of 
contribution by the employer.  
7. The manner in which the accounts of the Pension Fund shall be kept and investment of moneys 
belonging to Pension Fund to be made subject to such pattern of investment as may be determined by the 
Central Government.  
8. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the members of his 
family whenever required.  
9. The forms, registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees, required for the 
administration of the Pension Scheme.  
10. The scale of pension and pensionary benefits and the conditions relating to grant of such benefits 
to the employees.  
11. The manner i n which the exempted establishments have to pay contribution towards the Pension 
Scheme and the submission of returns relating thereto.  
12. The mode of disbursement of pension and arrangements to be entered into with such disbursing 
agencies as may be spec ified for the purpose.  
13. The manner in which the expenses for administering the Pension Scheme will be met from the 
income of the Pension Fund.  
14. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Pension Scheme or which may be necessary or 
proper for  the purpose of implementation of the Pension Scheme.]  
____________  
1[SCHEDULE IV  
(See section 6C)  
MATTERS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE EMPLOYEES ’ DEPOSIT -LINKED INSURANCE  SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees who shall be c overed by the Insurance Scheme.  
2. The manner in which the accounts of the Insurance Fund shall be kept and the investment of 
moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund subject to such pattern of investment as may be determined, by 
order, by the Centr al Government.  
3. The form in whi ch an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the members o f his 
family whenever required.  
4. The nomination of a person to receive the insurance amount due to the employee after his death 
and the cancellation o r variation of such nomination.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1-8-1976).  41 
 5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees; the form or design of any 
identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying any employee or his nominee or member of his 
family entitled to re ceive the insurance amount.  
1[6. The scales of insurance benefits and conditions relating to the grant of s uch benefits to the 
employees.]  
7. The manner in which the amount due to the nominee or the member of the family of the employee 
under the scheme is to be paid including a provision that the amount shall not be paid otherwise than in 
the form of a deposit in a savings bank account, in the name of such nominee or member of family, in any 
corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Under takings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
8. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Employees ’ Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme 
or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing that Scheme.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 26, for items 6 and 7 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
--------------------------The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE FORWARD  CONTRACTS  (REGULATION)  ACT,  1952  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____  
CHAPTER I  
PPRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE FORWARD  MARKETS  COMMISSION  
3. Establishment and constitution of the Forward Markets Commission.  
4. Functions of the Commission . 
4A. Powers of the Commission . 
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNISED ASSOCIATIO NS 
5. Application for recognition of associations . 
6. Grant of recognition to association . 
7. Withdrawal of recognition . 
8. Power of Central Government to call for periodical returns or direct inquiries to be                
made.  
9. Furnishing of annual reports to the Central Government by recognised associations . 
9A. Power of recognised association to make rules respecting groupi ng of members, restricting voting 
rights, etc., in special cases . 
10. Power of Central Government to direct rules  to be made or to make rules.  
11. Power of recognised association to make bye -laws.  
12. Power of Central Government to make or amend bye -laws of recognised  associations.  
12A. Application of amendment of bye -laws to existing forward contracts.  
12B. Power of Commission to suspend member of recognised association or to prohibit him from 
trading.  
13. Power of Central Government to supersede governing body of recognised association.  
14. Power to suspend business of recognised association.  
CHAPTER IIIA  
REGISTERED ASSOCIATION S 
14A. Certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations.  
14B. Grant or refusal of certificate of registration.  
14C. Application of  section s 8 and 12B to registered association s. 
CHAPTER IV  
FORWARD CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN GOODS  
15. Forward contracts in notified goods illegal or void in certain circumstances.  
16. Consequences of notification under section 15.  
17. Power to prohibit forward contrac ts in certain cases.  2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Special provisions respecting certain kinds of forward contracts.  
19. Prohibition of options in goods.  
CHAPTER V  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
20. Penalties.  
21. Penalty for owning or keeping place used for entering into forward contracts in                     
goods.  
21A. Power of court to order forfeiture of property.  
22. Offences by companies.  
22A. Power to se arch and seize books of account  or other documents.  
22B. Presumptions to be drawn in certain cases.   
23. Certain offences to be cognizable.  
24. Jurisdiction to try offences under this Act . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Advisory committee.  
26. Power to delegate.  
27. Power to exempt.  
27A. Protection of action taken in good faith  . 
28. Power to make rules.  
28A. Savings of recognised associations.  
29. Repeals and savings . 
29A. Repeal and savings . 
29B. Transfer and vesting of undertaking of Commission.  
 
  3 
 THE FORWARD  CONTRACTS  (REGULATION)  ACT,  1952  
ACT NO. 74 OF 1952  
[26th December,  1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the regulation of certain matters relating to forward contracts, the 
prohibition of options in goods  and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may he called The Forward Contracts  
(Regulation) Act, 19521. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India;  2*** 
(3) Chapter I shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions shall come into force on 
such date3 or dates as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may he appointed for different provisions of this Act, for different States or areas, and for 
different goods or classes of good . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “association ” means any body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, constituted for the 
purpose of regulating and controlling the business of the sale or purchase of any goods;  
(b) “Commission ” means the Forward Markets Commission established under section 3;  
(c) “forward contract ” means a contract for the delivery of goods  4*** and which i s not a ready 
delivery contract ; 
(d) “goods ” means every kind of movable property other than actionable claims, money and 
securities;  
(e) “Government security ” means a Government security as defined in the Public Debt Act, 1944  
(18 of 1944) ; 
(f) “non-transferable specific delivery contract ” means a specific delivery contract, the rights or 
liabilities under which or under any delivery order, railway receipt, bill of lading, warehouse receipt 
or any other document of title relating thereto are not transferable;  
(g) “option in goods ” means an agreement , by whatever name called, for the purchase or sale of a 
right to buy or sell, or a right to buy and sell, goods in future, and includes a teji, a mandi , a                    
teji-mandi , a galli, a put, a call or a put and call in goods;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “ready delivery contract ” means a contract which provides for the delivery of goods and the 
payment of a price therefor , either immediately or within such period not exceeding eleven  days after 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to: — 
(i) Pondicherry (with modification), vide notification No. S.O. 3865, dated 29 -12-1962, see Gazette of India, Part II,             
sec. 3( ii). 
(ii) Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule: and  
(iii) Goa, Daman and Diu (with modification), vide notification No. G.S.R. 962, dated 24 -6-1967, see Gazette of India, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 62 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3.  Chapters II and VI were brought into force in the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir on the 24th August , 
1953, vide notification No. S. R.O. 1618, dated the 24th August, 1953; see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3.  
Provisions of this Act except Chapter I came into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir on the  22nd  September, 1962, 
vide notification No. S.O. 2895, dated the  15th September, 1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
4.  The words “at a future date” omitted by Act  53 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -10-1971).  4 
 the date o f the contract and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in respect of any goods, the period under such contract not being 
capable of extension by the mutual consent of the parties theret o or otherwise;  
1[Provided that where any such contract is perfor med either wholly, or in part, — 
(1) by tendering of the documents of title to the goods covered by the contract by any party thereto 
(not being a commission agent or a bank) who has acquired ownership of the said documents by purchase, 
exchange or otherwise, to any other person (including a co mmission agent but not including a bank); or  
(2) by the realisation of any sum of money, being the difference between the contract rate and the 
settlement rate or clearing rate or the rate of any offsetting contract; or  
(3) by any other means whatsoever,  
and as a result of which the actual tendering of the goods covered by the contract or the pay ment of the 
full price therefor  is dispensed with, then, such contract shall not be deemed to be a ready delivery 
contract.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this cla use,— 
(i) “bank ” includes any banking company as defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949              
(10 of 1949) , a co -operative bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) , the 
Slate Bank of India and any of its subsidiaries and any corresponding new bank constituted under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970                  
(5 of 1970) ; 
(ii) “commission agent ” means a per son who, in the ordinary course of business, makes contract 
for the sale or purchase of goods for others for a remuneration (whether known as commission or 
otherwise) which is determined in the contract itself or determinate from the terms of the contract,  in 
either case, only with reference to the quantity of  goods or to the price therefor  as stipulated in the 
contract.]  
2[(j) “recognised association ” means an association to which recognition for the time being has 
been granted by the Central Government  under section 6 in respect of goods or classes of goods 
specified in such recognition;  
(jj) “registered association ” means an association to which for the time being a certificate of 
registration has been granted by the Commission under section 14B; ] 
(k) “rules ”, with reference to the rules relating in general to the constitution and management of 
an association, includes in the case of an incorporated association its memorandum and articles of 
association;  
(l) “securities ” includes shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture -stocks or other 
marketable securities of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate and 
also Government securities;  
(m) “specific delivery contract ” means a forw ard contract which provides for  the a ctual delivery 
of specific qualities or types of goods during a specified future period at a price fixed thereby or to be 
fixed in the manner thereby agreed and in which the names of both the buyer and the seller are 
mentioned;  
(n) “transferable specific d elivery contract ” means a specific delivery contract which is not a  
non-transferable specific delivery contract,  3[and which is subject to such conditions relating to its 
transferability as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazet te, specify in this 
behalf.]  
  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 53 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -10-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 3, for Clause ( j) (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3. Added by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  5 
 CHAPTER II  
THE FORWARD  MARKETS  COMMISSION  
3. Establishment  and constitution of the Forward Markets Commission .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette establish a Commission to be called the Forward 
Markets Commission for the purpose of exercising such functions and discharging such duties as may be 
assigned to the Commission by or under this Act.  
(2) The Commission shall consist of not less than two,  1[but not exceeding four ], members appoint ed 
by the Central Government  2[one of them being nominated by the Central Government to be the 
Chairman thereof; and the Chairman and the other member or members shall be either whole -time or  
part-time as the Central Government may direct]:  
3[Provided tha t the members to be so appointed shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing who 
have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to commerce or commodity markets, or in 
administration or who have special knowledge or practical experience in a ny matter  which renders them 
suitable for appointment on the Commission.]  
(3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as, or for continuing to be, a member of the 
Commission if he has, directly or indirectly, any such financial or other interest as is  likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a member of the Commission, and every member shall, whenever required 
by the Central Government so to do, furnish to it such information as it may require for the purpose of 
securing compliance with the prov isions of this sub -section.  
(4) No member of the Commission shall hold office for a period of more than three years from the 
date of his appointment, and a member relinquishing his office on the expiry of his term shall be eligible 
for reappointment.  
(5) The other terms and conditions of service of members of the Commission shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
 4. Functions of the Commission .—The funct ions of the Commission shall be — 
(a) to advise the Central Government in respect of the recognition of, or the withdrawal of 
recognition from, any association or in respect of any other matter arising out of the administration of 
this Act;  
4[(b) to keep forward markets under observation and to take such action in relation to them as it 
may consider necessary, i n exercise of the powers assigned to it by or under this Act;]  
(c) to collect and whenever the Commission thinks it necessary publish information regarding the 
trading conditions in respect of goods to which any of the provisions of this Act is made applic able, 
including information regarding supply, demand and prices, and to submit to the Central Government 
periodical reports on the operation of this Act and on the working of forward markets relating to such 
goods;  
(d) to make recommendations generally wit h a view to improving the organisation and working 
of forward markets;  
(e) to undertake the inspection of the accounts and other  documents of  5[any recognised  
association or registered association or any member of such association] whenever it considers it 
necessary; and  
(f) to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be assigned to the 
Commission by or under this Act, or as may be prescr ibed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960 , s. 4, for “but not exceeding three” (w.e.f. 28-12-1960 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1953, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-12-1953).  
3. The proviso subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “any recognised association” (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  6 
 1[4A. Powers of the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall in the performance of its functions, 
have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a 
suit in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery  and production of any document ; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any office;  
(e) any matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person, subject to any privilege which may 
be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such points 
or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the 
consideration of the Commission and any person so required shall be deemed to be legally bound to 
furnish such information within the meaning of section 176 of the In dian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a Civil Court and when any offence described in             
section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  is 
committed in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commission may, after recording the facts 
constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , forward the case to a magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the 
magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as 
if the case has been forwarded to him under section 482 of the said Code.  
(4) Any proceeding befo re the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of enforcing attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
Commission ’s jurisdi ction shall be the limits of the territory of India.]  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNISED ASSOCIATIONS  
5. Application for recognition of associations .—(1) Any association concerned with  the regulation 
and control of forward contracts  which is desirous of being recognised for the purposes of this Act may 
make an application in the prescribed manner to the Central Government.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed 
and shall be accompanied by a copy of t he bye -laws for  the regulation and control of forward contracts  
and also a copy of the rules relating in general to the constitution of the asso ciation, and in particular, to — 
(a) the governing body of such association, its constitution and powers of manag ement and the 
manner in which its business is to be transacted;  
(b) the powers and duties of the office -bearers of the association;  
(c) the admission into the association of various classes of members, the qualifications of 
members, and the exclusion, susp ension, expulsion and readmission of members therefrom or there  
into; 
(d) the procedure for registration of partnerships as members of the association and the 
nomination and appointment of authorised representatives and clerks.  
6. Grant of recognition to association .—(1) If the Central Government, after ma king such inquiry as 
may be necessary in this behalf and a fter obtaining such further information, if any, as it may require, is 
satisfied that it would be in the interest of the trade and also in the pub lic interest to grant recognition to 
the association which has made an application under section 5, it may grant recognition to the association 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by  Act 62 of 1960 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  7 
 in such form and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed or specified, and shall specify in such 
recogni tion the goods or classes  of goods with respect to which forward contracts may be entered into 
between members of such association or through or with any such member.  
(2) Before granting recognition under sub -section ( 1), the Central Go vernment may, by ord er 
direct, — 
(a) that there shall be no limitation on the number of members of the association or that there 
shall be such limitation on the number of members as may be specified;  
(b) that the association shall provide for the appointment by the Central Government of a person, 
whether a member of the association or not, as its representative on, and of not more than three 
persons representing interests not directly represented through membership of the association as 
member or members of, the governing bo dy of such association, and may require the association to 
incorporate in its rules any such direction and the conditions, if any, accompanying it.  
(3) No rules of a recognised association shall be amended except with the approval of the Central 
Government.  
(4) Every grant of recognition  under this section shall be published in the Gazette of India and also in 
the Official Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the recognised ass ociation is situate , and 
such recognition shall have e ffect as from the date of its publication in the Gazette of India.  
7. Withdrawal of recognition .—If the Central Government is of opinion that any recognition 
granted to an association under the provisions of this Act should , in the interest of the trade or in the 
public interest, be withdrawn, the Central Government may, a fter giving a reasonable opportunity to the 
association to be heard in the matter withdraw, by notification in the Official Gazette, the recognition 
granted  to the said association : 
Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect the validity of any contract entered into or made before 
the date of the notification, and the Central Government may make such provision as it deems fit in the 
notification of withdra wal or in any subsequent notification similarly published for the due performance 
of any contracts outstanding on that date.  
8. Power of Central Government to call for periodical returns or direct inquiries to be                
made .—1[(1) Every recognised  association and every member thereof shall furnish to the Central 
Government such periodical returns relating to its affairs, or the affairs of its members, as the case may 
be, as may be prescribed.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in su b-section ( 1), where the Central Government 
considers it expedient so to do , it may, by order in writing, — 
(a) call upon a recognised association  2[or a member thereof] to furnish in writing such 
information or explanation relating to its affairs or the af fairs of any of its members  2[or his affairs, as 
the case may be] as the Central Government may require, or  
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of such association or 
the affairs of any of its members and submit a report of the result of such inquiry to the Central 
Government within such time as may be specified in the order or, in the alternative, direct the inquiry 
to be made, and the report to be submitted, by the governing body of such association acting jointly  
with one or more representa tives of the Central Government;  and 
(c) direct the Commission to inspect the accounts and other documents of any recognised 
association or of any of its members and submit its report thereon to the Central Government.  
(3) Where  an inquiry in relation to the affairs of a recognised association or the affairs of any of its 
members has been undertaken under sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) every director, manager, secretary or other officer of such association,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  8 
 (b) every  member of such association,  
(c) if the member of the association is a firm, every partner, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the firm, and  
(d) every other person or body of persons who ha d dealings in the course of business with any of 
the persons me ntioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c), 
shall be bound to produce before the authority making the inquiry, all such books, accounts, 
correspondence and other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a bearing on the 
subject -matter of, such inquiry and also to furnish the authority with any such statement or information 
relating thereto as may be required of him , within such time as may be specified.  
1[(4) Every recognised association and every member thereof shall maintain such books of acco unt 
and other documents as the Commission may specify and the books of account and other documents so 
specified shall be preserved for such period not exceeding three years as the Commission may specify and 
shall be subject to inspection at all reasonable times by the Commission.]  
 9. Furnishing of annual reports to the Central Government by recognised associations .—2[(1) 
Every recognised association shall furnish to the Commission three copies of its annual report.]  
(2) Such annual report shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
3[9A. Power of recognised association to make rules respecting grouping of members, 
restricting voting rights, etc., in special cases .—(1) A recognised  association may make rules or amend 
any rules made by it to provide for all or any of the following matters  namely, — 
4[(a) the admission of a firm or a Hindu undivided family as a member,]  
5[(b)] the grouping of the members of the association according to  functional or local interests, 
the reservation of seats on its governing body for members belonging to each group and appointment 
of members to such reserved seats — 
(i) by election exclusively by the members of the association from among persons chosen by  
the members belonging to the group concerned;  
(ii) by election by all the members of the association;  
(iii) by election by all the members belonging to the group concerned for the purpose;  
5[(c)] the restriction of voting rights in respect of any matter placed before the association at any 
meeting to those members only who, by reason of their func tional or local interests, are actually 
interested in such matter,  
5[(d)] the regulation of voting rights in respect of any matter placed before the associati on at any 
meeting so that each member may be entitled to have one vote only, irrespective of his share of the 
paid-up equity capital of the association;  
5[(e)] the restriction on the right of a member to appoint another person as his proxy to attend and 
vote at a meeting of the association;  
6[(f)] the retirement at every annual general meeting of all directors or such number or proportion 
of their total number as may be specified in the rules;]  
5[(g)] such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as may be necessary to give 
effect to any of the matters specified in  7[clauses ( a) to ( f).] 
(2) No rules of a recognised association made or amended in rela tion to any matter referred to in 
8[clauses  (a) to ( g)] of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect until they have been approved by the Central 
Government and published by that Government in the Official Gazette and, in approving the rules so 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1 960, s. 7 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1957, s. 2, for section 9A (w.e.f. 17-9-1957)  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  
5. Clauses ( a), (b), (c), (d) and  ( e) re-lettered as clauses ( b), (c), (d), (e) and ( g) Act by 62 of 1960, s. 9 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
6.  Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (we.f. 28 -12-1960).  
7. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d)” (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
8. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “clauses ( a) to (e)” (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  9 
 made or amended, the Central Government may make such modifications therein as it thinks fit, and on 
such publication, the rules as approved by the Central Government shall be deemed to have been validly 
made, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Compa nies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(3) Where, before the commencement of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1957  
(3 of 1957) , any rules have been made or amended in relation to any matter referred to in  1[clauses ( b) to 
(e) and ( g)] of sub -section (1), the rules so made or amended shall not be deemed to be invalid or ever to 
have been invalid merely by reason of the fact that the rules so made or amended are repugnant to any of 
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) .] 
10. Power of Cen tral Government to direct rules to be made or to make rules .—(1) Whenever 
the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct any recognised 
association to make any rules or to amend any rules made by the recognised association within such 
period as it may specify in this behalf.  
(2) If any recognised association, against whom an order is issued by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 1), fails or neglects to comply with such order within the specified period, the Central 
Government may make the rules or amend the rules made by the recognised association, as the case may 
be, either in the form specified in the order or with such modifica tion thereof as the Central Government 
may think fit.  
2[(3) Where, in pursuance of sub -section ( 2), any rules have been made or amended, the rules so made 
or amended shall be published in the Gazette of India, and shall, thereupon, have effect notwithstand ing 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or any other law for the time being in 
force, as if they had been made or amended by the recognised association concerned.]  
11. Power of recognised association to make bye -laws .—(1) Any recognised association may, 
subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make bye -laws for  the regulation and control 
of forward contracts . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such bye -laws m ay 
provide for — 
(a) the opening and closing of markets and the regulation of the hours of trade;  
(b) a clearing house for the periodical settlement of contracts and differences thereunder, the 
delivery of, and payment for , goods, the passing on of delivery or ders and for the regulation and 
maintenance of such clearing house;  
(c) the number and classes of contracts in respect of which settlements shall be made or 
differences paid through the clearing house;  
(d) fixing, altering or postponing days for settlement ; 
(e) determining and declaring market rates, including opening, closing, highest and lowest rates 
for goods;  
(f) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts including the prescription of margin 
requirements, if any, and conditions relating thereto, a nd the forms of contracts in writing;  
(g) regulating the entering into, making, performance, rescission and termination of contracts, 
including contracts between members or between a commission agent and his constituent, or between 
a broker and his constit uent, or between a member of the recognised association and a person who is 
not a member, and the consequences of default or insolvency on the part of a seller or buyer or 
intermediary, the consequences of a breach or omission by a seller or buyer and the responsibility of 
commission agents and brokers who are not parties to such contracts;  
(h) the admission and prohibition of spec ified classes or types of goods or of dealings in goods by 
a member of the recognised association;  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 9, for “clauses ( a) to ( e)” (w.e.f. 281 -12-1960).  
2.  Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  10 
 (i) the  method and procedure for the settlement of claims or disputes including the settlement 
thereof by arbitration;  
(j) the levy and recovery of fees, fines and penalties;  
(k) the regulation of the course of business between parties to contracts in any capacit y; 
(l) the fixing of a scale of brokerage and other charges;  
(m) the making, comparing, settling and closing of bargains;  
(n) the regulation of fluctuations in rates and prices;  
(o) the emergencies in trade which may arise and the exercise of powers in suc h emergencies 
including the power to fix maximum and minimum prices;  
(p) the regulation of dealings by members for their own account;  
(q) the limitations on the volume of trade done by any individual member;  
(r) the  obligation of members to supply such information or explanation and to produce such 
books relating to their business as the governing body may require.  
(3) The bye -laws made under this section may — 
(a) specify the bye -laws the contravention of any of whic h shall make a contract entered into 
otherwise than in accordance with the bye -laws void under sub -section ( 2) of section 15 ; 
1[(aa) specify the bye -laws the contravention of any of which shall make a forward contract 
entered into otherwise than in accordance with bye -laws illegal under sub -section ( 3A) of section 15 ;] 
(b) provide that the contraventio n of any of the bye -laws shall — 
(i) render the member concerned liable to fine; or  
(ii) render the member concerned liable to expulsion or suspension f rom the recognised 
association or to any other penalty of a like nature not involving the payment of money.  
(4) Any bye -laws made under this section shall be subject to such conditions in regard to previous 
publication as may be prescribed, and when approv ed by the Central Government, shall be published in 
the Gazette of India  2***: 
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the trade or in the public interest, by 
order in writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication, in any case.  
12. Power of Central Government to make or amend bye -laws of recognised associations .—(1) 
The Central Government may, either on a request in writing received by it in this behalf from the 
governing body of a recognised association, or if in its o pinion it is expedient so to do, make bye -laws for 
all or any of the matters specified in section 11 or amend any bye -laws made by such association under 
that section.  
(2) Where, in pursuance of this section, any bye -laws have been made or amended, the bye -laws so 
made or amended shall be published in the Gazette of India  3[and shall thereupon have effect].  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the governing body of a recognised  
association objects to any bye -laws made or amended under this section by the Central Government on its 
own motion, it may, within six months of the publication thereof under sub -section ( 2), apply to the 
Central Government for a revision thereof, and the  Central Government may, after giving a reasonable 
opportunity to the governing body of the association to be heard in the matter, revise the bye -laws so 
made or amended, and where any bye -laws so made or amended are revised as a result of any action taken  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 11 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Th e words “and also in the Official Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the recognised association is situate ”  
omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “subject to the condition of previous publication” (w .e.f. 28 -12-1960).  11 
 under this sub -section the bye -laws so revised shall be published and shall become effective as provided 
in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The making or the amendment or revision of any bye -laws under this section shall in all cases be 
1[subject to such conditions in regard to  previous publication  as may be prescribed.]  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the interest of the trade or in the public interest, by 
order in writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication  in any case . 
2[12A. Application of amendment of bye -laws to e xisting forward contracts. —Any amendment of 
a bye -law under section 11 other than  an amendment made in pursuance of clause ( a) or clause ( aa) of              
sub-section ( 3) of that section or under section 12 also apply to all forward contracts entered into before 
the date of its approval by the Central Government or before the date of its publication in the Gazette of 
India, as the case may be, and remaining to be performed on or after the said date.  
12B. Power of Commission to suspend member of recognised association or to prohibit him 
from trading .—(1) If, in the interest of trade or in the public interest, the Commission considers it 
necessary to suspend a member from his membership of any recognised association or to prohibit such 
member s from entering into any forward contract for the sale or purchase in his own name or through 
another member of a recognised association of any goods or class of goods, then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the t ime being in force or in the rules or bye -laws of a recognised 
association, the Commission may, a fter giving an opportunity of being heard, by order suspend his 
membership of any association or prohibit him from entering into any such contract.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) shall specify the period for which the suspension or prohibition is 
to have effect and such period may be extended from time to time but so as not to exceed three years in 
the aggregate.  
(3) No order made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any member of a recognised association shall 
affect the validity of anyforward contract entered into or made by, with or through such member on or 
before the date of such order and remaining to be performed on or after the said date; but the C ommission 
may make such provision as it deems fit in such order or in any subsequent order for the closing out of 
any such forward contract. ] 
 13. Power of Central Government to supersede governing body of recognised association .—(1) 
Without prejudice to any other powers vested in the Central Government under this Act, where the 
Central Government is of opinion that the governing body of any recognised association should be 
superseded, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this  Act or in any other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the governing body of the 
recognised association concerned to show cause why it should not be superseded, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare the governing body of such association to be superseded for such period not 
exceeding six months as may be specified in the notification, and may appoint any person or persons to 
exercise and perform  all the powers and duties of the g overning body, and where more persons than one 
are appointed may appoint one of such persons to be the chairman and another of such persons to be the 
vice-chairman.  
(2) On the publication of a notification in the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 1), the  following 
consequences shall ensue, namely: — 
(a) the members of the governing body which has been superseded shall, as from the date of the 
notification of supersession cease to hold office as such members;  
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub -section ( 1) may exercise and perform all the 
powers and duties of the governing body which has been superseded;  
(c) all such property of the recognised association as the person or persons appointed under             
sub-section ( 1) may, by order in writing,  specify in this behalf as being necessary for the purpose of 
enabling him or them to carry out the purposes of this Act, shall vest in such person or persons.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 12, for “subject to the condition of previous publication” (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  12 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or the rules or bye -laws of th e 
association whose governing body is superseded under sub -section ( 1), the person or persons appointed 
under that sub -section shall hold office for such period as may be specified in the notification published 
under that sub -section, and the Central Gover nment may, from time to time, by like notification vary such 
period.  
(4) On the determination of the period of office of any person or persons appointed under this section 
the recognised association shall forthwith reconstitute a governing body in accordan ce with its rules:  
Provided that until a governing body is so reconstituted, the person or persons appointed under                  
sub-section ( 1) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), continue to exercise and 
perform their powers and duties.  
(5) On the reconstitution of a governing body under sub -section ( 4), all the property of the recognised 
association which ha d vested in, or was in the possession of, the person or persons appointed under              
sub-section ( 1) shall vest or revest, as the case may be, in the governing body so reconstituted.  
14. Power to suspend business of recognised association s.—If in the interest of the trade or in the 
public interest the Central Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by no tification in the 
Offic ial Gazette, direct a recognise  association to suspend such of its business for such period not 
exceeding seven days and subject to such conditions as may be specifi ed in the notification, and may  if, in 
the opinion of the Central Go vernment, the interest of the trade or the public interest to requires by like 
notification  extend the said period from time to time:  
Provided that where the period of suspension is likely to exceed one month, no notification extending 
the suspension beyon d such period shall be issued , unless the governing body of the recognised 
association has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
1[CHAPTER IIIA  
REGISTERED ASSOCIATION S 
14A. Certificate of registration to be obtained by all associations .—(1) No association concerned 
with regulation and control of business relating to forward contracts shall, after the commencement of the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1960 (62 of 1960)  (hereinafter referred to as such 
commencement)  carry on s uch business except under, and in accordance  with, the conditions of a 
certificate of registration granted under this Act by the Commission.  
(2) Every association referred to in sub -section ( 1) which is in existence at such commencement, 
before the expiry of six months from such commencement, and every association referred to in                  
sub-section (1) which is not in existence at such commencement, before commencing such business, sha ll 
make an application for a certificate of registration to the Commission in such form and containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Commission may in its discretion extend from time to time the period of six months 
aforesaid up to one year in the aggregate.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed — 
(a) to prohibit an association in existence at such commencement from carrying on its business 
until the disposal of the application made by it under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) to requ ire a recognised association in existence at such commencement to make an application 
under sub -section ( 2); and every such association shall, as soon as may he after such commencement, 
be granted free of cost by the Commission a certificate of registratio n. 
14B. Grant or refusal of certificate of registration .—On receipt of an application under section  
14A, the Commission, after making such inquiry as it considers necessary in this behalf, may by order in 
writing grant a certificate of registration or refuse to grant it:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 14 (w.e.f. 281 -12-1960).  13 
 Provided that before refusing to grant such certificate, the association shall be given an opportunity of 
being heard in the matter.  
14C. Application of section 8 and 12 B to registered association .—The provisions of section s 8 and 
12B shall apply in relation to a registered association as they apply in relation to a recognised assoc iation 
with the substitution of — 
(i) references to the registered association, for references to the recognised association; and  
(ii) the words “two years ” for the words “three years ” in su b-section ( 2) of section 12 B.] 
CHAPTER IV  
FORWARD CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN GOODS  
15. Forward contracts in notified goods illegal or void in certain circumstances .—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare this section to apply to such 
goods or class of goods and in such areas as may be specified in the notification, and thereupon, subject to 
the provisions contained in section 18 , every forward contract for the sale or purchase of any goods 
specified in the notification which is entered into in the area specified therein otherwise than between 
members of a recognised association or through or with any such member shall be illegal.  
(2) Any forward contract in goods entered into in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) which is in 
contravention of any of the bye -laws specified in this behalf under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 
11 shall be void — 
(i) as respects the rights of any mem ber of the recognised association who has entered into such 
contract in contravention of any, such bye -law, and also  
(ii) as respects the rights of any other person who has knowingly participated in the transaction 
entailing such contravention.  
(3) Nothing  in sub -section ( 2) shall affect the right of any person other than a member of the 
recognised association to enforce any such contract or to recover any sum under or in respect of such 
contract:  
Provided that such person had no knowledge that such transac tion was in contravention of any of the 
bye-laws specified under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 11.  
1[(3A) Any forward contract in goods entered into in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) which at the date of 
the contract is in contravention of any of the bye -laws specified in this behalf under clause ( aa) of           
sub-section ( 3) of section 11 shall be illegal.]  
(4) No member of a recognised association shall, in respect of any goods specified in the notification 
under sub -section ( 1), enter into a ny contract on his own account with any person other than a member of 
the recognised association, unless he has secured the consent or authority of such person and discloses in 
the note, memorandum o r agreement of sale or purchase that he has bought or sol d the goods, as the case 
may be, on his own account : 
Provided that where the member has secured the consent or authority of such person otherwise than in 
writing he shall secure a written confirmation by such person of such consent or authority within three 
days from the date of such contract :  
Provided furt her that in respect of any outstanding contract entered into by a member with a person 
other than a member of the recognised association, no consent or authority of such person shall be 
necessary for closing out in accordance with the bye -laws the outstand ing contract, if the member 
discloses in the note, memorandum o r agreement of sale or purchase in respect of such closing out that he 
has bought or sold the goods, as the case may be, on his own account.  
16. Consequences of notification under section 15 .—Where a notification has been issued under 
section 15, then notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1960,  s. 15 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  14 
 custom, usage or practice of the trade or the terms of any contract or the bye -laws of any association 
concerned relating to any cont ract,— 
(a) every forward contract for the sale or purchase of any goods specified in the notification,  
1[entered into on or before the date of the notification] and remaining to be performed after the said 
date and which is not i n conformity with the provisions of section 15, shall be deemed to be closed 
out at such rate as the Central Government may fix in this behalf, and different rates may be fixed for 
different classes of such contracts;  
(b) all differences arising out of any  contract so deemed to be closed out shall be payable on the 
basis of the rate fixed under clause ( a) and the seller shall not be bound to give and the buyer shall not 
be bound to take delivery of the goods.  
17. Power to prohibit forward contracts in certa in cases .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that no person shall, save with the permission of the Central 
Government, enter into any forward contract for the sale or purchase of any goods or class of goods 
specified in the notification and to which the provisions of section 15 have not been made applicable, 
except to the extent and in the manner, if any, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) All forward contracts in contravention of the provisions of sub-section ( 1) entered into after the 
date of publication of the notification thereunder shall be illegal.  
(3) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1), the provisions of Section 16 shall, in 
the absence of anything to the contrary in th e notification, apply to all forward contracts for the sale or 
purchase of any goods specified in the notification  1[entered into on or before the date of the  notification] 
and remaining to be performed after the said date as they apply to all forward contracts for the sal e: or 
purchase of any goods specified in the notification under section 15.  
18. Special provisions respecting certain kinds of forward contracts .—(1) Nothing contained in 
Chapter III or Chapter IV shall apply to non -transferable specific delivery contracts for the sale or 
purchase of any goods : 
Provided that no person shall organise or assist in organising or be a member of any associatio n in 
any area to which the provisions of section 15 have been made applicable (other than a recognised 
association) which provides facilities for the performance of any non -transferable specific delivery 
contract by any party thereto without having to make  or to receive actual delivery to or from the other 
party to the contract or to or from any other party named in the contract.  
(2) Where in respect of any area the provisions of section 15 have been made applicable in relation to 
forward contracts for the sale or purchase of any goods or class of goods, the Central Government may, 
by a like notification, declare that in the said area or any part thereof as may be specified in the 
notification all or any of the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV shall n ot apply to transferable 
specific delivery contracts for the sale or purchase of the said goods or class of goods either generally, or 
to any class of such contracts in particular.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Central G overnment is of opinion 
that in the interest of the trade or in the public interest it is expedient to regulate and control non -
transferable specific delivery contracts in any area, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
that all or any o f the provisions of Chapters III and IV shall apply to such class or classes of non -
transferable specific delivery contracts in such area and in respect of such goods or class of goods as may 
be specified in the notification, and may also specify the manne r in which and the extent to which all or 
any of the said provisions shall so apply.  
19. Prohibition of options in goods .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any 
other law for the time being in force, all options in goods entered into after the date on which this section 
comes into force shall be illegal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 16, for “entered into before the date of the notification” (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  15 
 (2) Any option in goods which has been entered into before the date on which this section comes into 
force and which remains to be performed, whether wholly or in part, after the said date, shal l, to that 
extent, become void.  
CHAPTER V  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
1[20. Penalties .—Any person who — 
(a) (i) in any return, statement or other document required by or under this Act, makes a 
statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or willfully omits to make a 
material statement; or  
(ii) without reasonable excuse (the burden of proving which shall be on him) fails to furnish any 
return, statement or other document or any information or to answer any question or to comply with 
any requisition made under this Act or any rules made thereunder; or  
(iii) enters into any forward con tract during the period of suspension of business of a recognised 
association in pursuance of a notification under section 14; or  
(b) is a member of any association, other than a recognised association, to which a certificate of 
registration has not been g ranted under this Act; or  
(c) publishes or circulates information relating to the rate at which any forward contract has been 
entered into in contravention of any of the bye -laws of a recognised association; or  
(d) organises, or assists in organising, or i s a member of, any association in contravention of the 
provisions contained in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 18; or  
(e) enters into any forward contract or any option in goods in contravention of any of the 
provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3A) or sub -section ( 4) of section 15, section 17 
or section 19,  
shall, on conviction , be punishable — 
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with a fine of not less 
than one thousand rupees, or with b oth; 
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence under clause ( d), or under  clause ( e) [other than an offence 
in respect of a contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 15 ], with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year and also with fine: Provided that in the absence of special and adequate 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, the imprisonment shall not be 
less than one month and the fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees.]  
 21. Penalty for owning or keeping place used for entering into forward contracts in                     
goods .—Any person who — 
(a) owns or keeps a place other man that of a recognised  association, which is used for the 
purpose of entering into or making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and knowingly permits such place to be used for 
such purposes, or  
(b) without the permission of Central Government, organises, or assists in organising, or becomes 
a member of, any association, other than a recognised association, for the purpose of assisting in 
entering into or making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or  
(c) manages, controls or assists in keeping any place other man that of a recognised association, 
which is used for the purpose of entering into or making or performing, whether wholly or in part, 
any forward contracts in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or at which such forward 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 17, for section 20 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  16 
 contracts are recorded or adjusted, or rights or liabilities arising out of such forward contracts are 
adjusted, regulated or en forced in any manner whatsoever, or  
(d) not being a member of a recognised association, willfully represents to, or induces, any person 
to believe that he is a member of a recognised association or that forward contracts can be entered 
into or made or perf ormed, whether wholly or in part, under this Act through him, or  
(e) not being a member of a recognised association or his agent authorised as such under the rules 
or by -laws of such association, canvasses, advertises or touts in any manner, either for him self or on 
behalf of any other person, for any business connected with forward contracts in contravention of any 
of the provisions of this Act, or  
(f) joins, gathers, or assists in gathering at any place, other than the place of business specified in 
the bye -laws of a recognised association, any person or persons for making bids or offers or for 
entering into or making or performing, whether wholly or in part, any forward contracts in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or  
(g) makes, publishes or circulates any statement or information which is false and which he either 
knows or believes to be false, affecting or tending to affect the co urse of business in forward contracts  
in respect of goods to which the provisions of section 15 have been made applicable,   1[or] 
1[(h) manipulates or attempts to manipulate prices in respect of forward contracts for the sale or 
purchase of any goods speci fied in any notification  under section 15 , in any area specified in that 
notification, ] 
2[shall , on conviction, be punishable — 
(i) for a first offence, with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine of not less 
than one thousand rupees, or with both;  
(ii) for a second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment which may extend to two years and 
also with fi ne: provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be 
entioned in the judgment of the court, the imprisonme nt shall not be less than one month and the fine 
shall not be less than one thousand rupees .] 
3[21A. Power of court to order forfeiture of property .—Any court trying an offence punishable 
under section 20 or section 21 may, if it thinks fit and in addition  to any sentence which it may impose for 
such offence, direct that any money, goods or other property in respect of which the offence has been 
committed, shall be forfeited to the Central Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, property in respect of which an offence has been 
committed, shall include deposits in a bank where the said property is converted into such deposits.]  
22. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence has been committed by a co mpany, every person 
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the 
conduct of the business of the company, as well  as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exer cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the cons ent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shal l be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 18 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  17 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
1[22A. Power to sea rch and seize books of account or other documents .—(1) Any presidency 
magistrate or a magistrate of the first class may, by warrant, authorise  any police officer not below the 
rank of sub -inspector to enter upon and search a ny place where books of account  or other documents 
relating to forward contracts or options in goods entered into contravention of the provisions of this Act, 
may be or may b e reasonably suspected to be, and such police officer may seize any such book or 
document, if in his opinion, it relates to any such forward contract or option in goods.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898  (5 of 1898) , shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure made under sub -section ( 1) as they apply  to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.  
22B. Presumptions to be drawn in certain cases .—(1) Where any books of account or other 
documents are seized from any place and there are entries therein making reference to quantity, 
quotations, rates, months of delivery, receipt or payment of differences or sale or purchase of goods or 
option in goods, such books of acco unt or other documents shall be admitted in evidence without 
witnesses having to appear to prove the same ; and such entries shall be prima facie  evidence of the 
matters, transactions and accounts purported to be therein recorded.  
(2) In any trial for an offence punishable under section 21, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is 
proved, that the plac e in which the books of account  or other documents referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
were seized, was used, and that the persons found therein were present, for the purpose of committing the 
said offence.]  
23. Certain offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , 2[the following offences shall be deemed to be cognizable within 
the meaning of that Code, namely: — 
(a) an offence falling under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of section 20 in so far as it relates to the 
failure to comply with any requisition made under sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(b) an offence falling under clause ( d) of section 20;  
(c) an offence falling under clause ( e) of section 20 other than a contravention of the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3A) or sub -section ( 4) of section 15;  
(d) an offence falling under section 21.]  
24. Jurisdiction to try offences under this Act .—No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate 
or a magistrate of the first class shall take cognizance of or try any offence punishable under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Advisory committee .—For the purpose of advising the Central Government in relation to any 
matter concerning the operation of this Act, the Central Government may establish an advisory committee 
consisting of such number of persons as may be prescribed.  
26. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that any power exercisable by it under this Act may , in such circumstances and subject to such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified, be exercised by such officer or authority, i ncluding any State Government or 
officers or authorities thereof as may be specified in the direction.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1960, s. 20 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  18 
 27. Power to exempt .—The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt, subject to such conditions and in such circumstances an d in such areas as may be specified in the 
notification, any contract or class of contracts from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act. 
1[27A. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No  suit or other legal proceeding  shall lie in 
any court against the Central Government or any member, officer or servant of the Commission for 
anything which is in good faith done or intende d to be done under this Act, or  any rule or bye -law made 
thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal pr oceeding shall lie in any court against the government body o r any 
member, office -bearer or servant of any recognised association or against any person appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13 for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  done with the 
approval, or at the instance, of the Commission and in pursuance of this Act, or of any rule or bye -law 
made thereunder. ] 
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect , the objects of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the terms and conditions of servic e of members of the Commission;  
(b) the manner in which applications for recognition may be made under section 5 and the levy of 
fees in respect thereof;  
(c) the manner in which any inquiry for the purpose of recognising any association may be made 
and the form in which recognition shall be gra nted;  
2[(cc) the manner in which applications for certificates of registration may be made under           
section 14A and the levy of fees in respect of such applications; ] 
(d) the particulars to be contained in the annual reports of recognised associatio ns; 
(e) the manner in which the bye -laws to be made, am ended or revised under this Act  shall, before 
being so made, amended or revised be published for criticism;  
(f) the constitution of the advisory committee established under section 25, the terms of office of 
and the manner of filling vacancies among members of the committee; the interval within which 
meetings of the advisory committee may be held and the procedure  to be followed at such meetings; 
and the matters which may be referred by the Central Government to the advisory committee for 
advice;  
(g) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as  may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case ma y be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
4[28A. Savin gs of recognised associations. —(1) All recognised  associations under the Forward 
Contracts Regulation Act, shall be deemed to be recognised stock exchanges under the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) (herein referred to as the Securities Contracts Act):  
                                                           
1. Ins. by act 62 of 1960, s. 22 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -12-1960).  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 131 (w.e.f. 28 -9-2015 ). 19 
 Provided that such deemed re cogni sed stock exchanges shall not carry out any activity other than the 
activities of assisting, regulating or controlling the business of buying, selling or dealing in commodity 
derivatives till the said deemed recogni sed stock exchanges are specifically  permitted by the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India:  
Provided further that a person buying or selling or otherwise dealing in commodity derivatives as a 
commodity derivatives broker, or such other intermediary who may be associated with the commodity 
derivatives market, immediately before the transfer and vesting of rights and assets to the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India for which no registration certificate was necessary prior to such transfer, may 
continue to do so for a period of three month s from such transfer or, if he has made an application for 
such registration within the said period of three months, till the disposal of such application.  
(2) The Securities and Exchange Board of India (herein referred to as the Security Board) may 
provid e such deemed exchanges, adequate time to comply with the Securities Contracts Act and any 
regulations, rules, guidelines or like instruments made under the said Act.  
(3) The bye -laws, circulars, or any like instrument made by a recognised association unde r the 
Forward Contracts Act shall continue to be applicable for a period of one year from the date on which that 
Act is repealed, or till such time as notified by the Security Board, as if the Forward Contracts Act had not 
been repealed, whichever is earli er. 
(4) All rules, directions, guidelines, instructions, circulars, or any like instruments, made by the 
Commission or the Central Government applicable to recognised associations under the Forward 
Contracts Act shall continue to remain in force for a peri od of one year from the date on which that Act is 
repealed, or till such time as notified by the Security Board, whichever is earlier, as if the Forward 
Contracts Act had not been repealed.  
(5) In addition to the powers under the Securities Contracts Regul ation Act, the Security Board and 
the Central Government shall exercise all powers of the Commission and the Central Government with 
respect to recognised associations, respectively, on such deemed exchanges, for a period of one year as if 
the Forward Cont racts Act had not been repealed.]  
1[29. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the date on which this Act or any provision 
contained therein is made applicable to any goods or classes of goods in any State, there is in force in that 
State any law corresponding to this Act or, as the case may be, to any provision  contained therein which 
is applicable to those goods or classes of goods, that law shall stand repealed on the said date : 
Provided th at the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereu nder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture  or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed; or  
(d) any  investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeit ure or punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced : and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken (including 
any appointment made, notification or order issued, rule, regulation, form or bye -law framed , or 
recognition granted) under any such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provision of this Act, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until 
superseded by anything d one or any action taken under this Act.]  
2[29A. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952) is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) On and from the date of repeal of Forward Contracts Act — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1953, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1953).  
2.  Sections 29A or 29B shall stand by i ns. (date to be notified) by Act 20 of 2015, s. 132  20 
 (a) the rules and regulations framed by the Central Government and the Commission under the 
Forward Contracts Act, shall stand repealed;  
(b) all authorities and entities established by the Central Government under the Forward 
Contracts Act, including the Commission and the Advisory Council establish ed under section 25 of 
that Act, shall stand dissolved;  
(c) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any 
inspection, order, penalty, proceeding or notice made, initiated or issued or any confirmation or 
declaratio n made or any licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted, modified or 
revoked, or any document or instrument executed, or any direction given under the Act repealed in 
sub-section ( 1), shall be continued or enforced by the Security Board, as i f that Act had not been 
repealed;  
(d) all offences committed, and existing proceedings with respect to offences which may have 
been committed under the Forward Contracts Act, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of 
that Act, as if that Act had n ot been repealed;  
(e) a fresh proceeding related to an offence under the Forward Contracts Act, may be initiated by 
the Security Board under that Act within a period of three years from the date on which that Act is 
repealed and be proceeded with as if that Act had not been repealed;  
(f) no court shall take cognizance of any offence under the Forward Contracts Act from the date 
on which that Act is repealed, except as provided in clauses ( d) and ( e); 
(g) clauses ( d), (e) and ( f) shall not be held to or affect the general application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal to matters not covered 
under these sub -sections.]  
29B. Transfer and vesting  of undertaking of Commission. —(1) On the date on which  the Forward 
Contracts Act is repealed, the undertaking shall be transferred, and vest with the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India.  
(2) If there is any existing proceeding or cause of action against the Commission in relation to the 
undertaking on the date on which the Forward Contracts Act is repealed, such proceeding or cause of 
action may be continued and enforced by or against the Security Board.  
(3) The concessions, privileges, benefits and exemptions including any benefits and exemptions with 
regard to the payment of any tax, duty and cess granted to the Commission with respect to its undertaking 
shall be transferred to the Security Board on the date on which the Forward Contracts Act is repealed.  
(4) Every employee holding any office (excluding me mbers of the Commission) under the 
Commission immediately before the date on which the Forward Contracts Act is repealed, will hold office 
in the Central Government or the Security Board, as the Central Government may notify in the Official 
Gazette, for th e same tenure and on the same terms and conditions of service as such employee would 
have held such office if the Commission had not been dissolved:  
Provided that where the Central Government notifies that an employee of the Commission shall 
continue as an  employee of the Central Government under the foregoing provision, the Central 
Government may, at the request of the Security Board, depute such employee to the Security Board, for a 
period not exceeding two years from the date on which the Forward Contrac ts Act is repealed.  
(5) Within six months from the date on which the Forward Contracts Act is repealed, an employee of 
the Commission opting not to be an employee of the Central Government or the Security Board, as the 
case may be, shall communicate such d ecision to the Central Government or Security Board, as 
applicable.  
(6) Nothing contained in any other law in force shall entitle any employee to any compensation for 
the loss of office due to the repeal of the Forward Contracts Act and the consequent diss olution of the 
Commission, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  21 
 (7) The members of the Commission appointed by the Central Government under section 3 of the 
Forward Contracts Act, shall cease to hold office from  the date the Forward Contracts Act is repealed.  
(8) The members of the Commission shall not be entitled to any compensation for the loss of office 
due to the repeal of the Forward Contracts Act and the consequent dissolution of the Commission or for 
the p remature termination of any contract of management entered into by such member with the 
Commission, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(9) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking shall not be liable to the  payment of any stamp duty 
under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) or any applicable stamp duties under state laws.]  
 
--------------------------The Inflammable Substances Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE INFLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES ACT, 1952  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Declaration of certain substances to be dangerously inflammable . 
4. Power to apply Petroleum Act to dangerously inflammable substances.  
5. Operation of certain notifications and rules . 
6. Validation of certain acts and indemnity in respect thereof . 
7. [Repealed .] 
 
  2 
 THE INFLAMMABLE SUBSTANCES ACT, 1952  
ACT No. 20 OF 1952  
[6th March , 1952 .] 
An Act to declare certain substances to be dangerously inflammable and to provide for the 
regulation of their import, transport, storage and production by applying thereto the 
Petroleum Act, 1934, and the rules thereunder, and for certain matters connected with such 
regulation.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Inflammable Substances Act, 1952.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “dangerously inflammable substance ” means any liquid or other substance declared to be 
dangerously inflammable by this Act;  
(b) “Petroleum Act ” means the Petroleum Act, 1934 ( 30 of 1934).  
3. Declaration of certain substances to be dangerously inflammable .—The liquids and other 
substances he reinafter mentioned, namely: — 
(1) acetone,  
(2) calcium phosphide,  
(3) carbide of calcium,  
(4) cinematograph films having a nitro -cellulose base,  
(5) ethyl alcohol,  
(6) methyl alcohol,  
(7) wood naphtha,  
are hereby declared to be dangerously inflammable.  
4. Power to apply Petroleum Act to dangerously inflammable substances .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply any or all of the provisions of the 
Petroleum Act and of the rules made thereunder, with such modifications a s it may specify, to any 
dangerously inflammable substance, and thereupon the provisions so applied shall have effect as if such 
substance had been included in the definition of “petroleum ” under that Act.  
(2) The Central Government may make rules providing specially for the testing of any dangerously 
inflammable substance to which any of the provisions of the Petroleum Act have been applied by 
notification under sub -section (1), and such rules may supplement any of the provisions of Chapter II of 
that Act in order to adapt them to the special needs of such tests.  
5. Operation of certain notifications and rules .—Notifications or rules issued or purporting to have 
been issued under section 30 of the Petroleum Act between the 1st day of April, 1937, and the date of 
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been issued or made under this Act, and continue in 
force accordingly.  
6. Validation of certain acts and indemnity in respect thereof .—All acts of exec utive authority, 
proceedings and sentences which have been done, taken or passed with respect to, or on account of, any 3 
 inflammable substance since the 1st day of April,  1937, and before the commencement of this Act by any 
officer of Government or by any p erson acting under his authority or otherwise in pursuance of an order 
of the Government in the belief or purported belief that the acts, proceedings or sentences were being 
done, taken or passed under the Petroleum Act shall be as valid and operative as i f they had been done, 
taken or passed in accordance with law; and no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or 
continued against any person whatever on the ground that any such acts, proceedings or sentences were 
not done, taken or passed in ac cordance with law.  
7. [Repeal of section  30, Act 30 of 1934 .] Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 1957                  
(36 of 1957 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 17-9-1957 .) 
 
--------------------------The Mines Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE MINES ACT, 1952  
——  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
——  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
4. References to time of day.  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTORS AND CERTIFYING SURGEONS  
5. Chief Inspector and Inspectors . 
6. Functions of Inspectors . 
7. Powers of Inspectors of Mines . 
8. Powers of special officer to enter, measure, etc.  
9. Facilities to be afforded to Inspectors . 
9A. Facilities to be provided for occupational health survey . 
10. Secrecy of information obtained . 
11. Certifying surgeons . 
CHAPTER III  
COMMITTEES  
12. Committees.  
13. Functions of the Committee . 
14. Powers , etc., of the Committee s. 
15. Recovery of expenses . 
CHAPTER IV  
MINING OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT OF MINES  
16. Notice  to be given of mining operations.  
17. Managers  
18. Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH AND SAFETY  
19. Drinking water. 2 
 SECTIONS  
 20. Conservancy . 
21. Medical appliances . 
22. Powers of Inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or when 
employment of persons is dangerous . 
22A. Power to prohibit employment in certain cases . 
23. Notice to be given of accidents . 
24. Power of Government to appoint Court of inquiry in cases of accidents . 
25. Notice of certain diseases . 
26. Power to direct investigation of causes of disease . 
27. Publication of reports . 
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
28. Weekly day of rest.  
29. Compensatory days of rest . 
30. Hours of work above grou nd. 
31. Hours of work below ground.  
32. Night shift . 
33. Extra wages for overtime . 
34. Prohibition of employment of certain persons . 
35. Limitation of daily hours of work including overtime work . 
36. Notices regarding hours of work . 
37. Supervising Staff. 
38. Exemption from provisions regarding employment . 
39. Power to make exempting rules . 
40. Employment of persons below eighteen years of age . 
41. [Omitted. ] 
42. [Omitted. ] 
43. Power to require medical examination . 
44. [Omitted. ] 
45. Prohibition of the pres ence of persons below eighteen years of age in a mine . 
46. Employment of women.  
47. [Omitted. ] 
 3 
 SECTIONS  
48. Registers of persons employed . 
CHAPTER VII  
LEAVE  WITH WAGES  
49. Application of Chapter . 
50. Leave defined  
51. Calendar year defined . 
52. Annual leave with wages . 
53. Wages during leave period . 
54. Payment in advance in certain cases . 
55. Mode of recovery of unpaid wages . 
56. Power to exempt mines . 
CHAPTER VIII  
REGULATIONS, RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
57. Power of Central Government to make regulations.  
58. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
59. Prior publication of regulation and rules.  
60. Power to make regulation s without previous publication . 
61. Bye -laws. 
61A. Laying  of regulations, rules and bye -laws before Parliament . 
62. Posting up of abstrac ts from Act, regulations, etc . 
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
63. Obstruction.  
64. Falsification of records, etc . 
65. Use of false certificates of fitness . 
66. Omission to furnish plans, etc . 
67. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour . 
68. Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of age . 
69. Failure to appoint manager . 
70. Notice of accidents . 
71. Owner, etc., to report to Chief Inspector in certain cases . 
72. Obligation of pers ons employed in a mine . 
72A. Special Provision for contravention of certain regulations . 4 
 SECTIONS  
72B. Special provision for contravention of orders under section 22 . 
72C. Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous results . 
73. General provision for disobedience of orders . 
74. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction . 
75. Prosecution of owner, agent or manager . 
76. Determination of owner in certain cases . 
77. Exemption of owner, agent or manager from liability in certain cases.  
78. Power of court to make orders . 
79. Limitation  of prosecutions . 
80. Cognizance of offences . 
80A.  [Omitted. ] 
81. Reference to Committee in lieu of prosecution in certain cases.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
82. Decision of question whether a mine is under this Act . 
83. Power to exempt from operation of Act, regulations, etc. , 
84. Power to alter or rescind orders . 
85. Application of Act to mines belonging to Government . 
85A. Persons required to give notice, etc., legally bound to do so.  
85B. S igning of returns, notices, etc.  
 85C. No fee or charge to be realised for facilities and conveniences . 
86. Application of certain provisions of Act 63 of 1948 to mines . 
87. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
88. [Repealed .] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 THE MINES ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 35 OF 19521 
[15th March , 1952.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of labour and safety in 
mines.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Mines Act, 1952.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2* * *  
(3) It shall come into force on suc h date3 or dates as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and for different States but not later than 3lst December, 1953.  
2. Definitions. —4[(1)] In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
5*   *   *   *  * 
(b) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
6[(c) “agent ”, when used in relation to a mine, means every person, whether appointed as such 
or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the management, 
control, supervision or direction of t he mine or of any part thereof; ]  
(d) Chief Inspector means the Chief Inspector of  Mines appointed under this Act;   
7[(e) “Committee ” means a committee constituted under section 12; ]  
(f) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours  beginning at midnight ;  
(g) “district magistrate ” means, in a presidency -town, the person appointed by the Central 
Government to perform the duties of a distri ct magistrate under this Act in that town;  
8[(h) a person is said to be “employed ” in a mine who works as the manager or who works 
under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or with the knowledge of the 
manager, whether for wages or not — 
 (i) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of handling and 
transport o f minerals up to the point of de spatch and of gathering sand and transport thereof to 
the mine);  
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development of th e mine including 
construction of plan therein but excluding construction of build ings, roads, wells and any 
building work not directly connected with any existing or future mining operations;  
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s.  3 and The Schedule and to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and The Schedule .  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and The Schedule.  
 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
3. 1st July, 1952, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 967 , dated 27th May, 1952, Gazette of India 1952, Part. II, sec. 3. 
4. Section 2 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f.  16-1-1960).  
5. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
6. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for clause (c) (w.e.f .  31-5-1984).  
7. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f .  31-5-1984).  
8. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for cl ause (h) (w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  6 
 (iii) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part  of any machinery used in or 
about the mine;  
(iv) in operations, within the premises of the  mine, of loading for despatch of minerals;  
(v) in any office of the mine;  
(vi) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy, services required to be provided 
under this Act, or watch and ward, within the premises of the mine excluding residential area; 
or 
(vii) in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory or incidental to , or connected 
with, mining operations; ] 
(i) “Inspector ” means an Inspector of Mines  appointed under this Act, and includes a district 
magistrate when exercising any power or performing any duty of an Inspector which he is 
empowered by this Act to exercise or perform;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2[(j) “mine ” means any excavation where any operation  for the purpose of searching for or 
obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on and includes — 
(i) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and accessory crude conditioning plants, including the 
pipe conveying mineral oil within the oilfields;  
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, whether in the course of being 
sunk or not;  
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;  
(iv) all open cast workings;  
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing i nto or removal from a 
mine of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom;  
(vi) all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, railways, tramways and sidings in or 
adjacent to and belonging to a mine;  
(vii) all protective works being ca rried out in or adjacent to a mine;  
(viii) all workshops and stores situated within the precincts of a mine and under the same 
management and used primarily for the purposes connected with that mine or a number of 
mines under the same management;  
(ix) all power stations,  transformer sub -stations, con vertor stations, rectifier stations and 
accumulator storage stations for supplying electricity solely or mainly for the purpose of 
working the mine or a number of mines under the same management;  
(x) any premise s for the time being used for depositing sand or other material for use in a 
mine or for depositing refuse from a mine or in which any operations in connection with such 
sand, refuse or other material is being carried on, being premises exclusively occupie d by the 
owner of the mine;  
(xi) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine on which any process 
ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried 
on;]  
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).   
2. Subs. by s.  2, ibid. for clause (j) (w.e.f  31-5-1984).  
 7 
 (jj) “minerals ” means all substances which can be obtained from the earth by mining, digging, 
drilling, dredging, hydraulicing, quarrying or by any other operation and includes mineral oils 
(which in turn include natural gas and petroleum) ; 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(k) “office of the mine” means an office at th e surface of the mine concerned ; 
2[(kk) “open cast working ” means a quarry, that is to say, an excavation where any operation 
for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on, not bein g a 
shaft or an excavation which e xtends below superjacent ground ;]  
(l) “owner ”, when used in relation to a mine, means any person who is the immediate 
proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part thereof and in the case of a mine the 
busin ess whereof is being carried on by a liquidator or receiver , such liquidator or receiver  3*** 
but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty, rent or fine from the mi ne, or is 
merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any lease, grant or l icence for the working thereof, or  
is merely the owner of the soil and not interested i n the minerals of the mine ; but 4[any contractor 
or sub -lessee] fo r the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Act in like 
manner as if he were an owner, but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability;  
(m) “prescribed “ means prescribe d by rules, regulations or bye -laws, as the case may be;  
5[(n) “qualified medical practitioner ” means a medical practitioner  who possesses any 
recognised medi cal qualification as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956)  and who is enrolled on a State medical register as defined in 
clause ( k) of that section ;]  
(o) “regulations ”, “rules ” and “bye-laws” mean respect ively regulations, rules and bye -laws 
made under this Act;  
(p) where work of the same kind is carried out by two or more sets of persons working during 
different periods of the day each of such sets is called a “relay ” 6[and each of such periods is 
called a “shift”]; 
7[(pp) “reportable injury ” means any injury other than a serious bodily injury which involves, 
or in all probability will involve, the enforced absence of the injured person from work for a 
period of seventy -two hours or more;]  
8[(q) “serious bodily injury ” means any injury which i nvolves, or in all probability will 
involve, the permane nt loss of any part or section of a body or the use of any part or section of a 
body, or the permanent loss of or injury to the sight or hearing or any permanent physical 
incapacity or the fracture of  any bone or one or more joints or bones of any phalanges of hand or 
foot;  
(r) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such 
other night as may be approved in writing for a particular area by the Chief Inspector or an  
Inspector .] 
                                                      
1. Clause ( jjj) omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
3. Certain words o mitted by Act 42 of 1983 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “any contractor” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
7. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
8. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clauses ( q) and ( r) (w.e .f. 31 -5-1984).  8 
 1[(2) A person working or employed in or in connection with a mine is said to be working or 
employed — 
 (a) “below ground” if he is working or employed — 
 (i) in a shaft which has been  or is in the course of being sunk ; or 
(ii) in any excavation  which e xtends below superjacent ground ; and  
(b) “above ground” if he is working in an open cast working or in any other manner not 
specified in clause ( a).] 
2[3. Act not to apply in certain cases .—(1) The provisions of this Act, except those contained in 
3[sections 7,  8, 9, 40, 45 and 46] shall not apply to — 
(a) any mine or part thereof in which excavation is being made for prospecting purposes only 
and not for the purpose of obtaining minerals for use or sale:  
Provided that — 
 (i) not more than twenty persons are employed on any one day in connection with any 
such excavation;  
(ii) the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest point nowhere 
exceeds six metres or, in the case of an excavation for coal, fifteen metres; and  
(iii) no pa rt of such excavation ext ends below superjacent ground ; or 
(b) any mine engaged in the extraction of kankar, murrum, laterite, boulder, gravel, shingle, 
ordinary sand (excluding moulding sand, glass sand and other mineral sands), ordinary clay 
(excluding kaolin, china clay, white clay or fire clay), building stone, 4[slate], road metal, earth, 
fullers earth, 4[, marl, chalk]  and lime stone:  
Provided that — 
(i) the workings do not extend below superjacent ground ; or 
(ii) where it is an open cast working — 
(a) the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest point nowhere 
exceeds six metres;  
(b) the number of persons employed on any one  day does not exceed fifty; and  
(c) explosives are not used in connection with the excavation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Gove rnment may, if it is 
satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances obtaining in relation to a mine or part thereof or 
group or class of mines, it is necessary or desirable so to do, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, 
declare that any of the prov isions of this Act, not set out in sub -section ( 1), shall apply to any such 
mine or part thereof or group or class of mines or any class of persons employed therein.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), if at any time any of the 
conditions specified in the proviso to clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) is not fulfilled in 
relation to any mine referred to in that sub -section, the provisions of this Act not  set out in  
sub-section ( 1), shall become immediately applica ble, and it shall be the duty of the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine to inform the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and within the 
prescribed time about the non -fulfilment.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 3, for “sections 7, 8, 9, 44, 45 and 46” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  9 
 4. References to time of day .—In this Act, references to time of day are references to Indian 
standard time, being five and a half hours ahead of Greenwich mean time:  
Provided that, for any area in which Indian standard time is not ordinarily observed, the Central 
Government may make rules — 
(a) specifying the area ; 
(b) defining the local mean time ordinarily observed therein; and  
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the mines situated in the area.  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTORS AND CERTIFYING SURGEONS  
5. Chief Inspector and Inspectors .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint such a person as possesses the prescribed qualifications to be Chief Inspector 
of Mines for all the territories to which this Act extends and such persons as possess the prescribe d 
qualifications to be Inspectors of Mines subordinate to the Chief Inspector.  
(2) No person shall be appointed to be Chief Inspector or an Inspector, or having been appointed 
shall continue to hold such office, who is or becomes directly or indirectly int erested in any mine or 
mining rights in India.  
(3) The district magistrate may exercise the powers and perform the duties of an Inspector subject 
to the general or special orders of the Central Government:  
 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to em power a district magistrate to 
exercise any of the powers conf erred by 1[section  22 or section 22A] or section 61.  
(4) The Chief Inspector and all Inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
2[6. Functions of Inspectors .—(1) The Chief Inspector may, with the approval of the Central 
Government and subject to such restrictions or conditions as he may think fit to impose, by order in 
writing, authorise any Inspector named or any clas s of Inspectors specified in the order to exercise 
such of the powers of the Chief Inspector under this Act (other than those relating to appeals) as he 
may specify.  
(2) The Chief Inspector may, by order in writing, prohibit or restrict the exercise by any  Inspector 
named or any class of Inspectors specified in the order of any power conferred on Inspectors under 
this Act.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the Chief Inspector shall declare the 
local area or areas within which or  the group or class of mines with respect to which Inspectors shall 
exercise their respective powers.]  
7. Powers of Inspectors of Mines .—(1) The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and of the regulations, rules and bye -laws and of any orders made 
thereunder are observed in the case of any mine;  
(b) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and examine any mine or any 
part thereof at any time by day or night:  
Provided that the power conferred by this clause shall not be exercised in such a manner as 
unreasonably to impede or obstruct the working of any mine;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 4, for “section 22” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959. s. 4, for s. 6 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  10 
 (c) examine into, and make inquiry respecting, the state and condition of any mine or any part 
thereof, the ventilation of the mine, the sufficiency of the bye -laws for the time being in force 
relating to the mine, and all matters and things connected with or relating to the health, safety and 
welfare of the persons  employed in the mine, and take whether on the precincts of the mine or 
elsewhere, statements of a ny person which he may consider necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act;  
 (d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by regulations made by the Cen tral 
Government in' this behalf : 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub -section to answer any question or 
make any statement tending to incriminate himself.  
(2) The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may, if he has reason to bel ieve, as a result of any 
inspection, examination or inquiry under this section, that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed, search any place and take possession 1[of any material or any plan, section, register 
or other record] appertaini ng to the mine, and the provisions of the 2[Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974)]  shall so far as may be applicable, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as 
they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued u nder 3[section 94]  of 
that Code.  
8. Powers of special officer to enter,  measure, etc. —Any person in the service of the 
Government duly authorised in this behalf by a specia l order in writing of the Chief  Inspector or of an 
Inspector may, for the p urpose of  surveying, leveling  or measuring any mine 4[or any output 
therefrom] , after giving not less than three days ’ notice to the manager of such mine, enter the mine 
and may survey, level or me asure the mine or any part thereof 4[or any output therefrom] at any time 
by day or night:  
Provided that, where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or of an Inspector an emergency exists, 
he may, by order in writing, authorise any such person to enter the mine for any of the aforesaid 
purposes without giving any such not ice. 
9. Facilities to be afforded to Inspectors .—Every owner, agent and manager of a mine shall 
afford the Chief Inspector and every Inspector and every person authorised under section 8 all 
reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection, survey, m easurement, examination or inquiry 
under this Act.  
5[9A. Facilities to be provided for occupational health survey .—(1) The Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or other officer authorised by him in wr iting in this be half may, at any time during the 
normal worki ng hours of the mine or at any time by day or night as may be necessary, undertake 
safety and occupational health survey in a mine after giving notice in writing to the manager of the 
mine; and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall afford all neces sary facilities (including 
facilities for the examination and testing of plant and machinery, for the collection of samples and 
other data pertaining to the survey and for the transport and examination of any person employed in 
the mine chosen for the surv ey) to such Inspector or officer.  
(2) Every person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in any safety and 
occupational health survey under sub -section ( 1) shall present himself for such examination and at 
such place as may be necessary and shal l furnish all information regarding his work and health in 
connection with the said survey.  
(3) The time spent by any person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in the safety 
and occupational health survey, shall be counted towards his working  time, so however that any 
overtime shall be paid at the ordinary rate of wages.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 5, for “of any register or other record ” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs by Act 42 of 1983, s.  5, for “Code of Criminal Proc edure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “section 98” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  11 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “ordinary rate of wages ” means the basic 
wages plus any dearness allowance and underground allowance and compensation in cash including 
such compensation, if any, accruing  through the free issue of food grains and edible oils as persons 
employed in a mine may, for the time being, be entitled to, but does no t include a bonus (other than a 
bonus given as incentive for production) or any compensation accruing through the provision of 
amenities  such as free housing, free supp ly of coal, medical and educational facilities, sickness 
allowance, supply of kerosene o il, baskets, tools and uniforms.  
(4) Any person who, on examination under sub -section ( 2), is found medically unfit to discharge 
the duty which he was discharging in a mine immediately before such presentation shall be entitled to 
undergo medical treatment  at the cost of the owner, agent and manager with full wages during the 
period of such treatment.  
(5) If, after the medical treatment, the person referred to in sub -section ( 4) is declared medically 
unfit to discharge the duty which he was discharging in a  mine immediately before presenting himself 
for the said examination and such unfitness is directly ascribable to his employment in the mine 
before such presentation, the owner, agent and manager shall provide such person with an alternative 
employment in the mine for which he is medically fit:  
Provided that where no such alternative employment is immediately available, such person shall 
be paid by the owner, agent and manager disability allowance determined in accordance with the rates 
prescribed in this b ehalf:  
Provided further that where such person  decides to leave his employment in the mine, he shall be 
paid by the owner, agent and manager a lump sum amount by way of disability compensation 
determined in accordance with the rates prescribed in this beha lf. 
(6) The rates under the provisos to sub -section ( 5) shall be determined having regard to the 
monthly wages of the employees, the nature of disabil ities and other related factors .] 
10. Secrecy of information obtained .—(1) All copies of, and extracts fro m, registers or other 
records appertaining to any mine and all other information acquired by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or by any one assisting him , in the course of the inspection 1[or survey] of any mine under 
this Act or acquired by any person authorised under section 8 1[or section 9A] in the exercise of his 
duties thereunder , shall be regarded as co nfidential and shall not be dis closed to any person or 
authority unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers disclosure necessary to ensu re the 
health , safety or welfare of any person employed in the mine or in any other mine adjacent thereto.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to the disclosure of any such information (if so 
required) to — 
(a) any Court;  
2[(b) a Committee or court of inquiry constituted or appointed under section 12 or section 24 
as the case may be;]  
(c) an official superior or the owner, agent or manager of the mine concerned;  
(d) a Commissioner for workmen ’s compensation appointed under the Work men's 
Compensation Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) ;  
3[(e) the Controller, Indian Bureau of Mines;  
(f) any registered or recognised trade union;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 8 ( w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 12 
 (g) such other officer, authority or organisation as may be specified in this be half by the 
Central Government.]  
 (3) If the Chief Inspector, or an Inspector or any other person referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
discloses, contrary to the provisions of this section, any such information as aforesaid without the 
consent of the Central Government, he shall be punishable with im prisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) No court shall proceed to the trial of any offence under this section except with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government.  
11. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The Central Government may appoint qualified medical 
practitioners to be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such 
mine or  class or description of mines as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) Subject to such conditions a s the Central Government may think fit to impose, a certifying 
surgeon may, with the approval of the Central Government, authorise any qualified medical 
pract itioner to exercise all or any of his powers under this Act for such period as the certifying 
surgeon may specify, and references to a certifying surgeon shall be deemed to include references to 
any qualified medical practitioner when so authorised.  
(3) No person shall be appointed to be, or authorised to exercise the powers of, a certifying 
surgeon, o r, having been so appointed or authorised, continue to exercise such powers, who is or 
becomes the owner, agent or manager of a mine, or is or becomes directly or indirectly interested 
therein, or in any process or business carried on therein or in any pat ent or machinery connected 
therewith, or is otherwise in the employment of the mine.  
(4) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection with — 
1*   *   *   *   * 
 (b) the examination of persons engaged in a mine in su ch dangerous occupatio ns or processes as 
may be pres cribed ;  
(c) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed for any mine or clas s or 
description of mines where — 
 (i) cases of illness have occurred which it is reasonable to believe are du e to the nature of any 
process carried on or other conditions  of work prevailing in the mine ; 
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER III  
2[COMMITTEES ] 
12. Committees .—(1) The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as that 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, constitute for the 
purposes of this Act, a Committee consisting of — 
(a) a person in the service of the Government, not being the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, 
appointed by the Central Government to act as Chairman;  
(b) the Chief Inspector of Mines;  
(c) two persons to represent the interests of miners appointed by the Central Government;  
(d) two persons to represent the interests of owners of mines appointed by t he Central 
Government;  
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for the heading  “MINING BOARDS AND COMMITTEES” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  13 
 (e) two qualified mining engineers not directly employed in the mining industry, appointed by 
the Central Government:  
Provided that one at least of the persons appointed under clause ( c) shall be for representing the 
interests of wor kers in coal mines and one at least of the persons appointed under clause ( d) shall be 
for represent ing the interests of owners of coal mines.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may constitute 
one or more Com mittees to deal with specific matters relating to any part of the territories to which 
this Act extends or to a mine or a group of mines and may appoint members thereof and the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) (except the proviso thereto) shall apply for the constitution of any 
Committee under this sub -section as they apply for the constitution of a Committee under that  
sub-section.  
(3) No act or proceeding of a Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any 
vacancy among its members or any  defect in the constitution thereof.  
13. Functions of the committee .—(1) The Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 12 shall — 
(a) consider proposals, for making rules and regulations under this Act and make appropriate 
recommendations to th e Central Government;  
(b) enquire into such accidents or other matters as may be referred to it by the Central 
Government from time to time and make reports thereon; and  
(c) subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), hear and decide such appeals or objections 
against notices or orders under this Act or the regulations, rules or bye -laws thereunder, as are 
required to be referred to it by this Act or as may  be prescribed.  
(2) The Chief Inspector shall not take part in the proceedings of the Committee with respect to 
any appeal or objection against an order or notice made or issued by him or act in relation to any 
matter pertaining to such appeal o r objection as a member of the Committee.  
14. Powers , etc., of the committee s.—(1) A Committee constitute d under section 12 may 
exercise  such of the powers of an Inspector under this Act as it thinks necessary or expedient to 
exercise for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act.  
(2) A Committee constituted under section 12 shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  
when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attend ance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of documents; and  
(d) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.]   
15. Recovery of expenses .—The Central Government may direct that the expens es of any inquiry 
conducted by 1[a Commi ttee constituted under sec tion12] shall be borne in whole or in part by the 
owner or agent of the mine concerned, and the amount so directed to be paid may, on application by 
the Chief Inspector or an Inspector to a magistrate having jurisdiction at the place where the mine is 
situated or where such owner or agen t is for the time being resident, be recovered by the distress and 
sale of any movable property within the limits of the magistrate's jurisdiction belonging to such owner 
or agent : 
Provided that the owner or his agent has not paid the amount within six wee ks from the date of 
receiving the notice from the Central Government or the Chief Inspector of Mines.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  14 
 CHAPTER IV  
MINING OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT OF MINES  
16. Notice to be given of mining operations .—(1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall, 
before the commencement of any mining operation, give to the Chief Inspector, the 1[Controller] , 
Indian Bureau of Mines and the district magistrate of the distri ct in which the mine is situate, notice in 
writing in such form and containing such particulars relati ng to the mine as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any notice given under sub -section ( 1) shall be so given as to reach the persons concerned at 
least one month before the com mencement of any mining operation.  
2[17. Managers .—(1) Save as may be otherwise prescribed , every mine shall be under a sole 
manager who shall have the prescribed qualification and the owner or agent of every mine shall 
appoint a person having such qualification to be the manager:  
Provided that the owner or agent may appoint himself as manager if he possesses the prescribed 
qualifications.  
(2) Subject to any instructions given to him by or on behalf of the owner or agent of the mine, the 
manager shall be responsible for the overall management, control, supervision and direction of the 
mine and a ll such instructions when given by the owner or agent shall be confirmed in writing 
forthwith.  
(3) Except in case of an emergency, the owner or agent of  a mine or anyone on his behalf shall not 
give, otherwise than through the manager, in structions affecting the fulfil ment of his statutory duties, 
to a person, employed in a mine, who is responsible to the manager.  
18. Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers .—(1) The owner and agent of 
every mine shall each be responsible for making  financial and other provisions and for taking such 
other steps as may be necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations, 
rules, bye -laws and orders made thereunder.  
(2) The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in  the rules made under clauses ( d), (e) 
and ( p) of section 58 shall be exclusively carried out by the owner and agent of the mine and by such 
person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent may appoint for securing compliance with 
the aforesaid prov isions.  
(3) If the carrying out of an y instructions given under sub -section ( 2) or given otherwise than  
through the manager under sub -section ( 3) of section 17, results in the contravention of the provisions 
of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye -laws or orders made thereunder, every person giving such 
instructions shall also be liable for the contravention of the provisions concerned.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the owner, agent and manager of 
every mine shall each be responsible to see that all operations carried on in connection with the mine 
are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the regulations, rules, bye -laws and 
orders made thereunder.  
(5) In the event of any contravention by a ny person whosoever of any of the provisions of this Act 
or of the regulations, rules, bye -laws or orders made thereunder except those which specifically 
require any person to do any act or thing or prohib it any person from doing an act or thing, besides t he 
person who contravenes, each of the following persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of such 
contravention unless he proves that he had used due diligence to secure compliance with the 
provisions and had taken reasonable means to prevent such contrav ention: — 
(i) the official or officials appointed to perform duties of supervision in respect of the 
provisions contravened;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by. Act 42 of 1983, s. 12, for “Director” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub -sections 17 and 18 (w.e. f. 31-5-1984).  15 
 (ii) the manager of the mine;  
(iii) the owner and agent of the mine;  
(iv) the person appointed, if any, to carry out the responsibility under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that any of the persons aforesaid may not be proceeded against if it appears on inquiry 
and investigation,  that he is not prima facie  liable.  
(6) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against th e owner or agent of a mine 
under this section that the manager and other officials have been appointed in accordance with the 
provision s of this Act or that a person to carry the responsibility under sub -section ( 2) has been 
appointed. ] 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISION S AS TO HEALTH AND SAFETY  
19. Drinking Water .—1[(1) In every mine effect ive arrangements shall be made to provide and 
maintain at suitable points conveniently situated a sufficient supply of cool and wholesome drinking 
water for all persons employed therei n: 
Provided that in the case of persons employed below ground the Chief Inspector may, in lieu of 
drinking water being provided and maintained at suitable points, permit any other effective 
arrangements to be made for such supply.]  
(2) All such points shal l be legibly marked `DRINKING WATER' in a language understood by a 
majority of the persons employed in the mine and no such point  shall be situated within 2[six mete rs] 
of any washing place urinal or latrine unless a shorter distance is approved in writing  by the Chief 
Inspector.  
(3) In respect of all mines or any class or description of mines, the Central Government may make 
rules for securing compliance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) and for the examination 
by prescribed authorities of th e supply and distribution of drinking water.  
20. Conservancy .—(1) There shall be provided, separately for males and females in every mine, 
a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient and 
accessible to per sons employed in the mine at all times.  
(2) All latrines and urinals provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be adequately lighted, ventilated 
and at all times maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.  
(3) The Central Government may specify the number of  latrines and urinals to be provided in any 
mine, in proportion to the number of males and females employed in the mine and provide for such 
other matters in respect of sanitation in mines (including the obligations in this regard of persons 
employed in th e mine) as it may consider necessary in the interests of the health of the persons so 
employed.  
3[21. Medical appliances .—(1) In every mine there shall be provided and maintained so as to be 
readily accessible during all working hours such number of first -aid boxes or cupboards equipped 
with such contents as may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a first -aid box or cupboard or room.  
(3) Every first -aid box or cupboard shall be kept in the charge of a responsible pers on who is 
trained in such first -aid treatment as may be prescribed and who shall always be readily available 
during the working hours of the mine.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 10, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 14, for “twenty feet” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 11, f or sections 21 and 22 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  16 
 (4) In every mine there shall be made so as to be readily available such arrangements as may be 
prescribed for the conveyance to hospitals or dispensaries of persons who, while employed in the 
mine, suffer bodily injury or become ill.  
(5) In every mine wherein more than one hundred and fifty persons are employed, there shall be 
provided and maintained a first -aid room of such size with such equipment and in the charge of such 
medical and nursing staff as may be prescribed.  
22. Powers of Inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or when 
employment of persons is dangerous. —(1)  If, in respect of any matter for which no express 
provision is made by or under this Act, it appears to the Chief Inspector or an Inspector that any mine 
or part thereof or any matter, thing or practice in or connected with the mine, or with the control, 
supervision, management or direction thereof, is dangerous to human life or safety or defective so as 
to threaten, or tend to, the bodily injury of any person, he may give notice in writing thereof to the 
owner, agent or manager of the mine and shall state  in the notice the particulars in respect of which he 
considers the mine or part thereof  or the matter, thing or practice to be dangerous or defective and 
require the same to be remedied within such time and in such manner as he may specify in the notice.  
(lA) Where the owner, agent or manager of mine fails to comply with the terms of a notice given 
under sub -section ( 1) within the period specified therein, the Chief Inspector or the Inspector, as the 
case may be, may, by order in writing, prohibit the emp loyment in or about the mine or any part 
thereof of any person whose employment is not in his opinion reasonably necessary for securing 
compliance with the terms of the notice.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chief  Inspector or the 
Inspector, as the case may be, may, by order in writing addressed to the owne r, agent or manager of a 
mine, p rohibit the extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks of minerals in any mine or part thereof, 
if, in his opinion, such operat ion is likely to cause the crushing of pillars or blocks of minerals or the 
premature collapse of any part of the workings or otherwise endanger the mine or the life or safety of 
persons employed therein or if, in his opinion, adequate provision against th e outbreak of fire or 
flooding has not been made by providing for the sealing off and isolation of the part of the mine in 
which such operation is contemplated and for restricting the area that might be affected by fire or 
flooding.  
(3) If the Chief Inspec tor, or an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special order in 
writing by the Chief Inspector, is of opinion that there is urgent and immediate danger to the life or 
safety of any person employed in any mine or part thereof, he may, by order  in writing containing a 
statement of the grounds of his opinion, prohibit, 1[until he is satisfied that the danger  is removed], the 
employment in or about the mine or any part thereof of any person whose employment is not in his 
opinion reasonably necessa ry for the purpose of removing the danger.  
2[(3A) Every person whose employment is prohibited under’ sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 3) 
shall be entitled to payment of full wages for the period for which he would have been, but for the 
prohibition in empl oyment and the owner, agent or manager shall be liable for payment of such full 
wages of that person:  
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may instead of paying such full wages provide such 
person with an alternative employment at the same wages whic h such person was receiving in the 
employment which was prohibited.]  
(4) Where a notice has been given under sub -section ( 1) or an order made under sub -section ( lA), 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) by an Inspector, the owner, agent or manager of the min e may, 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Ac t 42 of 1983, s. 15, for “until the danger is removed” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984) . 
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 17 
 within ten days after the receipt of the notice or order, as the case may be, appeal against the same to 
the Chief Inspector who may confirm, modify or cancel the notice or order.  
(5) The Chief Inspector or the Inspector sending a notice under sub -section ( 1) or making an order 
under sub -section ( lA), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) and the Chief Inspector making an order  
(other than an order of cancellation in appeal) under sub -section ( 4) shall forthwith report the same to 
the Central Government.  
(6) If the owner, agent or manager of the mine objects to a notice sent under sub -section ( 1) by the 
Chief Inspector or to an order made by the Chief Inspector under sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), he may, within twenty days after the receipt of the notice 
containing the requisition or of the order or after the date of the decision on appeal, as the case may 
be, send his objection in writing stating the grounds the reof to the Central Government 1[which shall , 
ordinarily within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the objection, refer ] the same to a 
Committee.  
(7) Every notice under sub -section ( 1), or order under sub -section ( lA), sub -section ( 2),  
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), to whi ch objection is made under sub -section ( 6), shall be complied 
with, pending the receipt at the mine of the decision of the Committee:  
Provided that the Committee may, on the application of the owner, agent or manag er, suspend the 
operation of a 2[notice] u nder sub -section ( 1), pending its decision on the objection.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the powers of a magistrate under section 144 of the 3[Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) .] 
4[22A. Power to prohibit employment in certain cases .—(1) Where in respect of any matter 
relating to safety for which express provision is made by or under this Act, the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine fails to comply with such provisions, the Chief Inspector may give notice in 
writing requiring the same to be complied with within such time as he may specify in the notice or 
within such extended period of time as he may, from time to time, specify thereafter.  
(2) Where the owner, agent or manager fails to comply with the terms of a notice given under sub -
section ( 1) within the period specified in such notice or, as the case may be, within the extended 
period of time specified under that sub -section, the Chief Inspector may, by order in writing, prohibit 
the employment in or about the mine or any part thereo f of any person whose employment is not, in 
his opinion, reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the terms of the notice.  
(3) Every person whose employment is prohibited under sub -section ( 2), shall be entitled to 
payment of full wages for the pe riod for which he would have been, but for the prohibition, in 
employment, and the owner, agent or manager shall be liable for payment of such full wages of that 
person:  
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may, instead of paying such full wages, prov ide such 
person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such person was receiving in the 
employment which was prohibited under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5), (6) and ( 7) of section 22 shall apply in relation to a no tice 
issued under sub -section ( 1) or an order made under sub -section ( 2) of this section as they apply in 
relation to a notice under sub -section ( 1) or an order under sub -section ( lA) of that section .] 
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 15, for “which shall refer” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “requisition” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 18 
 23. Notice to be given of accidents .—1[(1) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine — 
(a) an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily injury, or  
(b) an explosion, ignition, spontaneous heating, outbreak of fire or irruption or inrush of water 
or other liquid matter, or  
(c) an influx of inflammable or noxious gases, or  
(d) a breakage of ropes, chains or other gear by which persons or materials are lowered or 
raised in a shaft or an incline, or  
(e) an overwinding of cages or other means of conveyance in any shaft while persons or 
materials are being lowe red or raised, or  
(f) a premature coll apse of any part of the working , or 
(g) any other accident which may be prescribed,  
the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall give notice of the occurrence to such authority in  such 
form and within such time as may  be prescribed, and he shall simultaneously post one copy of the 
notice on a special notice board in the prescribed manner at a place where it may be inspected by trade 
union officials, and shall ensure that the notice is kept on the board for not less tha n fourteen days 
from the date of such posting. ] 
2[(lA) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident causing reportable injury to any 
person, the owner agent or manager of the mine shall enter in a register such occurrence in the 
prescribed form and  copies of such entries shall be furnished to the Chief Inspector once in a quarter.]  
(2) Where a notice given under sub -section ( 1) relates to an accident causing loss of life, the 
authority shall make an inquire into the occurrence within two months of t he receipt of the notice and, 
if the authority is not the Inspector, he shall cause the Inspector to make an inquiry within the said 
period.  
3[(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that accidents 
other than those specified in sub -sections ( 1) and (lA) which cause bodily injury re sulting in the 
enforced absence from work of the person injured for a period exceeding twenty -four hours shall be 
entered in a register in the prescribed form or shall be subject to the pro visions of sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( lA), as the case may be. ] 
(4) A copy of the entries in t he register referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be sent by the owner, 
agent, or manager of the mine, 4[on or before the 20th day of January in the year following that to 
which the entries relate], to the Chief Inspector.  
 2[(5) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily 
injury to any person, the place of accident shall not be disturbed or altered before the  arrival or 
without the consent of the Chief Inspector or the Inspector to whom notice of the accident is required 
to be given under sub -section ( 1) of section 23, unless such disturbance or alteration is necessary to 
prevent any further accident, to remov e bodies of the deceased, or to rescue any person from danger, 
or unless discontinuance of work at the place of accident would seriously impede the working of the 
mine:  
Provided that where the Chief Inspector or the said Inspector fails to inspec t the plac e of accident 
within seventy -two hours of the time of the accident, work may be resume d at the place of the 
accident. ] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 17 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 17 , ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).    
4.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 12, for certain words  (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   19 
 24. Power of Government to appoint Court of inquiry in cases of accidents .—1[(1) When any 
accident of the nature referred to in any of th e clauses of sub -section ( 1) of section 23 occurs in or 
about a mine, the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that a formal inquiry into the causes of 
and circumstances attending the accident ought to be held, appoint a competent person to hold suc h 
inquiry and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal o r special know ledge to act as 
assessor or assessors in holding the inquiry.]  
(2) The person appointed to hold any such inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court under 
the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of enforcing the atten dance of 
witnesses and compell ing the production of documents and material objects 2* * *.  
(3) Any person holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers of an 
Inspector under this Act as he may think it necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes of the 
inquiry.  
(4) The person holding an inquir y under this section shall make a report to the Central 
Government stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding any observations 
which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.   
25. Notice of certain diseases .—(1) Where any person employed in mine contracts any disease  
notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette as a disease connected with mining 
operations, the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, shall send notice thereof to 
the Chief Inspector and to such other authorities, in such form and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
 (2) If any medic al practitioner attends on a person who is or has been employed in a mine and 
who is or is believed by the medical practitioner to be suffering from any disease notified under  
sub-section ( 1), the medical practitioner shall without delay send a report in writing to the Chief 
Inspector stating —  
(a) the name and address of the patient,  
(b) the disease from which the patient is or is believed to be suffering, and  
(c) the name and address of the mine in w hich the patient is or was last  employed.  
 (3) Where th e report under sub -section ( 2) is confirmed to the satisfaction of the Chief Inspector 
by the certificate of a certifying surgeon or otherwise that the person is suffering from a disease 
notified under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Inspector shall pay to the medical practitioner such fee as 
may be prescribed, and the fee so paid shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue from the 
owner, agent or manager of the mine in which the person contacted the disease.  
 (4) If any medical practitioner fails to comp ly with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
26. Power to direct investigation of causes of disease .—(1) The Central Government may, if it 
considers it expedient to do so, appoint a competent  person to inquire into and report to it on any case 
where a disease notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 25 has been or is suspected to have been 
contacted in a mine, and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special knowledge 
to act as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 24 shall apply to an inquiry under this 
section in the same manner as they apply to any inquiry under that section  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 13, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
2. Certain words omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 20 
 27. Publication of reports .—The Central Government  may cause any report submitte d by a 
Committee under 1[section 12] or any report of extracts from any report submitted to it under section 
26, and shall cause every report submitted by a Court of inquiry under section 24 to be published at 
such time and in  such manner as it may think fit.   
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
28. Weekly day of rest .—No person shall be allowed to work in a mine on more than six days in 
any one week.  
29. Compensatory days of rest .—(1) Where in pursuance of action und er section 38 or as a 
result of exempting any mine or the persons employed therein from the provisions of section 28, any 
person employed therein is deprived of any of the weekly days of rest for which provision is made in 
section 28, he shall be allowed, within the month in wh ich such days of rest were due to him or within 
the two months immediately following that month, compensatory days of rest equal in number to the 
days of rest of which he has been deprived.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the  manner in which the days of rest for which 
provision is made in sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed.  
30. Hours of work above ground .—(1) No adult employed above ground in a mine shall be 
required or allowed to work for more than forty -eight hours in any week  or for more than nine hours 
in any day:  
2[Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily maximum hours 
specified in this sub -section may be exceeded in order to facilitate the change of shifts.]  
(2) The periods of work of any such adult shall be so arranged that, along with his interval for 
rest, they shall not in any day spread over more than twelve hours, and that he shall not work for more 
than five hours continuously before he has had an interval for rest of at least half an hour:  
3[Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject to such 
conditions as he may deem fit to impose, permit the spread -over to extend over a period not exceeding 
fourteen ho urs in any day.]  
4[(3) Persons belonging to two or more shifts shall not be allowed to do work of the same kind 
above ground at the same time:  
Provided that, for the purposes of this sub -section, persons shall not be deemed to belong to 
separate shifts by reason only of the fact that they receive their intervals for rest at different times.]  
5[31. H ours of work below ground .—(1) No adult employed below ground in a mine shall be 
allowed to work for more than forty -eight hours in any week or for more than eig ht hours in any day:  
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily maximum hours 
specified in this sub -section may be exceeded in order to facilitate the change of shifts.  
(2) No work shall be carried on below ground in  any mine except by a system of shifts so 
arranged that the period of work for each shift is not sp read-over more than the daily maximum hours 
stipulated in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) No person employed in a mine shall be allowed to be present in any part of a m ine below 
ground except during the periods of work shown in respect of him in the register maintained under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 48.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 18, for “section 13” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
2. The p roviso added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 14 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 14,  ibid.,  for the proviso (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for section 31 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  21 
 1[32. Night shift .—Where a person employed in a mine works on a shift which extends beyond 
midnight — 
(a) for the pur poses of sections 28 and 29, a weekly day of rest shall mean in his cas e a period 
of twenty -four consecutive hours beginning when his shift ends;  
(b) the following day for him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty -four hours beginning 
when such shift ends, and the hours he has worked after midnight shall be counted in the previous 
day.]  
33. Extra wages for overtime .—2[(1)Where in a mine a person works above ground for more 
than nine hours in any day, or works below ground for more than eight hours in a ny day or works for 
more than forty -eight hours in any week whether above ground or below ground, he shall in respect of 
such overtime work be entitled to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages, the period of 
overtime work being calculated o n a daily basis or weekly basis, whic hever is more favourable to 
him; and ]  
3[(2) Where any person empl oyed in a mine is paid on piece -rate basis, the time -rate shall be 
taken as equivalent to the daily average of his full -time earnings for the days on whi ch he actually 
worked during the week immediately preceding the week in which overtime work has been done, 
exclusive of any overtime, and such time -rate shall be deemed to be the ordinary rate of wages of such 
person:  
Provided that if such person has not w orked in the preceding week on the same or identical job, 
the time -rate shall be based on the average for the days he has worked in the same week excluding the 
overtime or on the daily average of his earnings in any preceding week, whichever is higher.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rate of wages ” shall have the same 
meaning as in the Explanation  to sub - section ( 3) of section 9A.]  
(4) The Central Government may prescribe the registers to be maintained in a mine for the 
purpose of  securing compliance with the provisions of this section.  
4[34.Prohibition of employment of certain persons .—No person shall be required or allowed to 
work in a mine if he has already been working in any other mine within the preceding twelve hours.]  
5[35.Limitation of daily hours of work including overtime work .—Save in respect of cases 
falling within clause ( a) and -clause ( e) of section 39, no person employed in a mine shall be required 
or allowed to work in the mine for more than ten hours in any day inclusive of overtime.]  
36. Notices rega rding hours of work .—(1) The manager of every mine shall cause to be posted 
outside the office of the mine a notice in the prescribed form stating the time of the commencement 
and of the end of work at the mine  and, if it is proposed  to work by a system of relays, the time of the 
commencement and of the end of work for each relay.  
(2) In the case of a mine at which mining operations commence after the commencement of this 
Act, the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be posted not less than seven days before the com - 
mencement of work.  
(3) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also state the time of the commencement and of 
the intervals for rest for persons employed above ground and a copy thereof shal l be sent to the Chief 
Inspector, if he so requires.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 16, for section 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by Act 42  of 1983, s. 19, for “sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3)” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).     
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 18, for section 34 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 35 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 22 
 (4) Where it is proposed to make any alteration in the time fixed for the commencement or for the 
end of work in the mine generally or for any relay or in the rest intervals fixed for persons employed 
above ground, an amended notice in the prescribed form shall be posted outside the office of the mine 
not less than seven days before the change is made, and a copy of such notice shall be sent to the 
Chief Inspector not less than seven days before such chan ge. 
(5) No person shall be allowed to work in a mine otherwise than in accordance with the notice 
required by sub -section ( 1). 
37. Supervising staff .—Nothing in section 28, section  30, section 31, section 34 or 1[sub-section 
(5) of section 36], shall apply  to persons who may by rules be defined to be, persons, holding 
positions of supervision or management or employed in a confidential capacity.  
38. Exemption from provisions regarding employment .—(1) In case of an emergency 
involving serious risk to the saf ety of the mine or of persons e mployed therein, or in case of an 
accident, whether actual or apprehended, or in case of any act of God or in case of any urgent work to 
be done to machinery, plant or equipment of the mine as the result of break -down of such  machinery, 
plant or equipment, the manager may, subject to the provisions of section 22 2[and section 22 A] and 
in accordance with the rules under section 39, permit persons to be employed in contravention of 
section 28, section 30, section 31, section  34 or 1[sub-section ( 5) of section 36], on such work as may 
be necessary to protect the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein:  
Provided that, in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant o r equipment under this 
section the manager  may take the action permitted by this section, although the production of 
3[mineral] would thereby be incidentally affected, but any action so taken shall not exceed the limits 
necessary for the purpose of avoid ing serious interference with the ordinary w orking of the mine.  
(2) Every case in which action has been taken by the manager under sub -section ( 1), shall be 
recorded together with the circum stances relating thereto and a report thereof shall also be made to the 
Chief Inspector or the Inspector.  
4[39. Power to make exempting rules .— 5[The central government]  may make rules providing 
for the exemption to such extent, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified, from the provisions of sections 28, 30, 31, 34 or sub -section ( 5) of section 36 — 
(a) of all or any of the persons employed in a mine, where an emergency involving serious 
risk to the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein is apprehended;  
(b) of all or any of the persons so employed, in case of an accide nt, actual or apprehended;  
(c) of all or any of the persons engaged in work of a preparatory or complementary nature, 
which must necessarily be carried on for the pur pose of avoiding serious inter ference with the 
ordinary worki ng of the mine ; 
(d) of all or  any of the persons engaged in urgent repairs ; and 
(e) of all or any of the persons employed in any work which for technical reasons must be 
carried on continuously.]  
6[40. Employment of persons below eighteen years of age .—(1) After the commencement of 
the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983  (42 of 1983) , no person below eighteen ye ars of age shall be 
allowed to work in any mine or part thereof.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule, for “ sub-section ( 4) of section 36” . 
2.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s.  20 (w.e.f.  31-5-1984).  
3.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 20, for “coal” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4.  Subs. by s. 21,  ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 21, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).     
6. Subs. by  s. 22, ibid., for section 40 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984 ). 23 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), apprentices and other trainees, not 
below sixteen years of a ge, may be allowed to work, under proper supervision, in a mine or part 
thereof by the manager:  
Provided that in the case of trainees, other than apprentices, prior approval of the Chief Inspector 
or an Inspector shall be obtain ed before they are allowed to work.  
Explanation .—In this section and in section 43, “apprentice ” means an apprentice as defined in 
clause ( a) of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961  (52 of 1961). ] 
41. [Certificate of fitness .] Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act  1983  (42 of 1983) , s. 23  
(w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
42. [Effect of  certificate of fitness granted to adolescents .] Omitted by s. 23, ibid.  
(w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
1[43. Power to require medical examination .—(1) Where an Inspector is of opinion that any 
person employed in a mine otherwise than as an apprentice or other trainee is not an adult or that any 
person employed in a mine as an apprentice or other trainee is either below sixteen years of age or is 
no longer fit to work, the Inspector may serve on the manager of the mine a notice requiring that such 
person shall be examined by a certifying surgeon and such person shall not, if the Inspector so directs, 
be employed or permitted to work in any mine until he has been so examined and has been certified 
that he is an adult or, if  such person is an apprentice or trainee, that he is not below sixteen years of 
age and is fit to work.  
(2) Every certificate granted by a certifyin g surgeon on a reference under sub-section ( 1), shall, 
for the purpose of this Act, be conclusive evidence o f the matters referred therein .] 
44. [Working hours for adolescents notcertified to be fit for work as adults .] Omitted by the Mines 
(Amendment) Act  1983  (42 of 1983) , s. 25 (w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
2[45. Prohibition of the presence of persons below eighteen ye ars of age in a mine .—Subject 
to the  provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 40, after such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, no person below eighteen years of age shall 
be allowed to be present in any part of a mine above ground where any operation connected with or 
incidental to any mining operation is being carried on.]  
3[46. Employment of women .—(1) No woman shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law, be employed — 
(a) in any part of a mine which is below ground;  
(b) in any mine above ground except between the hours of 6 A.M. and 7 P.M. 
(2) Every woman employed in a mine above ground shall be allowed an interval of not less than 
eleven hours between the termination of emp loyment on any one day and the commencement of the 
next period of employment.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette, vary the hours of employment above ground of women  in respect 
of any mine or class or description of mine, so however that no employment of any woman between 
the hours of 10 P.M. and 5 A.M. is permitted thereby.]  
47. [Disputes as to age .] Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act , 1959 (62 of 1959), s. 28  
(w.e.f. 16-1-1960).  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 24, for section 43 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for section 45 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act  62 of 1959, s. 27, for section 46 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 24 
 48. Registers of persons employed .—1[(1) For every mine there shall be kept in the prescribed 
form and place a register of all persons employed in the mine showing in respect of each such 
person — 
(a) the name of the employee  with the name of his father or , of her husband, as the case may 
be, and such other particulars as may be necessary  for purposes of identification ; 
(b) the age and sex of the employee;  
(c) the nature of employment (whether above ground or below ground, and  if above ground, 
whether in open cast workings or otherwise) and the date of commencement thereof;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed; and the relevant entries shall be authenticated 
by the signature or the thumb impression of the person concerned.]  
(2) The entries in the register prescribed by sub -section ( 1) shall be such that workers working in 
accordance therewith would not be working in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter.  
(3) No person shall be employed in a mine until the particulars required by sub -section ( 1) have 
been recorded in the register in respect of such person and no person shall be employed except during 
the periods of work shown in respect of him in the register.  
3[(4) For every mi ne other than a mine which, for any special reason to be recorded, is exempted 
by the Central Government by general or special order, there shall be kept in the prescribed form and 
place separate registers showing in respect of each person employed in the mine — 
(a) below ground;  
(b) abo ve ground in open cast workings ; and  
(c) above ground in other cases — 
(i) the name of the employee ;  
(ii) the class or kind of his employment;  
(iii) where work is carried on by a system of relays, the shift to which he belongs and the 
hours of the shift.]  
(5) The register of persons employed below ground referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall show at 
any moment the name of every person who is then present below ground in the mine.  
4[(6) No person shall enter any open cast  working or any working below ground unless he has 
been permitted by the manager or is authorised under this Act or any other law to do so.]  
CHAPTER VII  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
5[49. Application of Chapter .—The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice 
of any right to which a person employed in a mine may be entitled under any other law or under the 
terms of any award, a greement or contract of service:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 29, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960)  
2. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 27 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 29, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 16-1-1960).    
4. Ins. by s. 29 , ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs by s. 30, ibid., for sections 49 to 56 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  25 
 1[Provided that if such award , agreement or contract of service, provides for a longer annual  leave 
with wages than that provided in this Chapter, the quantum of leave, which the person employed shall 
be entitled to, shall be in accordance with such award, agreement or contract of service, but leave shall 
be regulated in accordance with the provis ions of sections 50 to 56 (both inclusive) with respect to 
matters not provided for in such award, a greement or contract of service.]  
50. Leave defined .—For the purposes of this Chapter, leave shall not include weekly days of rest 
or holidays for festivals  or other similar occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the 
period of leave.  
51. Calendar year defined .—For the purposes of this Chapter, a calendar year shall mean the 
period of twelve months beginning with the first day of January in any  year.  
52. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Every person employed in a mine who has completed a 
calendar year ’s service therein shall be allowed, during the subsequent calendar year, leave with 
wages, calculated, — 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground, at  the rate of one day for every 2[fifteen 
days] of work performed by him, and  
(b) in any other case, at the rate of one day for every twenty days of work performed by him.  
(2) A calendar year ’s service referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have been 
completed, — 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine,  if he has during the calendar 
year put in not less than one hundred and ninety attendances at the mine; and  
(b) in the case of any other person, if he has during t he calendar year put in not less than two 
hundred and forty attendances at the mine.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section — 
(a) any days of lay -off by agreement or contract or as permissible under the st anding order ; 
(b) in the case of a female employee, maternity leave for any number of days not exceeding 
twelve weeks; and  
(c) the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed;  
shall be deemed to be the days on which the employee has worked in a mine for the purpose of 
computation of the attendances, but he shall not earn leave for these days.  
(3) A person whose service commences otherwise than on the first day of January shall be entitled 
to leave with wages in the subsequent calendar year at the rates specified in sub -section ( 1), if— 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, he has put in attendances for not 
less than one -half of the total number of days during the remainder of the calendar year; and  
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendances for not less than two -thirds of the total number 
of days during the remainder of the calendar year.  
(4) Any leave not taken by a person to which he is entitled in any one calendar year under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be added to the leave to be  allowed to him under sub -section 
(1) durin g the succeeding calendar year:  
Provided that the total number of days of leave which may be accumulated by any such person 
shall not at any one  time exceed thirty days in all :  
Provided further that any such pers on who has applied for leave with wages but has not been 
given suc h leave in accordance with sub -section ( 6) shall be entitled to carry forward the unavailed 
leave without any limit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 28, for the proviso (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “sixteen days” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  26 
 (5) Any such person may apply in writing to the manager of the mine not less than fifteen days 
before the day on which he wishes his leave to begin, for all leave or any portion thereof then 
allowable to him unde r sub -sections ( 1), (3) and ( 4): 
Provided that the number of times in which leave may be taken during any one calend ar year shall 
not exceed three.  
(6) An application for such lea ve made in accordance with sub -section (5) shall not be refused 
unless the authority empowered to grant the leave is of opinion that owing to the exigencies of the 
situation the leave should be  refused.  
(7) If a person employed in a mine wants to avail himself of the leave with wages due to him to 
cover a period of illness, he shall be granted such leave even if the application for leave is not made 
within the time specifi ed in sub -section ( 5). 
(8) If the employment of a pers on employed in a mine is termi nated by the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled up to the day of 
termination of his employment, or if such person having applied for and having not been granted such 
leave, quits his employment before he has taken the leave, the owner, agent or manager of the mine 
shall pay him the amount payable under section 53, in respect of the leave not taken, and such 
payment shall be made, where the employment of the person is terminated by the owner, agent or 
manager, before the expiry of the second working day after such termination, and where a person 
himself quits his employment, on or before the next pay day.  
(9) The unavailed leave of a pers on employed in a mine shall not be taken into consideration in 
computing the period of any notice required to be given before the termination of his employment.  
1[(10) Where a person employed in a mine is discharged or dismissed from service or quits his 
employment or is superannuated or dies while in service, he or his heirs or his nominee, as the case 
may be, shall be entitled to wages in lieu of leave due to him calculated at the rate specified in sub -
section ( 1), if,— 
(a) in the case of a person employ ed below ground in a mine, he has put in attendance for not 
less than one -half of the total number of days from the date of his employment to the date of his 
discharge or dismissal or quitting of employment or superannuation or death; and  
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendance for not less than two -thirds of the total number 
of days from the date of his employment to the date of his discharge or dismissal or quitting of 
employment or superannuation or death,  
and payment of such wages shall be made by the owner, agent or manager of the mine at the rate 
specified in section  53, where the person is discharged or dismissed from service or quits employment 
or is superannuated, before the expiry of the second w orking day after such discharge , dismissal, 
quitting of employment or superannuation, as the case may be, and where the person employed dies 
while in service, within a period of two months of his death.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of 2[sub-section s (1),(3) and ( 10)] any fraction of leave of half a  
day or more shall be treated as one full day and fraction of less than half a day shall be omitted.  
53. Wages during leave period. —For the leave allowed to a person employed in a mine under 
section 52, he shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily average  of his total full -time earnings for the 
days on which he was employed during the month immediately preceding his leave, exclusive of any 
over-time wages and bonus but inclusive of any dearness allowance and compensation in cash 
including such compensation , if any, accruing through the free issue of food  grains and other articles 
as persons employed in the mine may, for the time being, be entitled to:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 29, for “sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3)” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  27 
 Provided that if no such average earnings are available, then the average shall be computed on the 
basis of  the daily average of the total full -time earnings of all persons similarly employed for the same 
month.  
54. Payment in advance in certain cases. —Any person employed in a mine who has been 
allowed leave for not less than four days, shall, before his leave begins, be paid the wages due for the 
period of the leave allowed.  
55. Mode of recovery of unpaid wages .—Any sum required to be paid by the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine under this Chapter but not paid by him shall be recoverable as delayed wages 
under  the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936  (4 of 1936 ). 
56. Power to exempt mines .—Where the Central Government is satisfied that the leave rules 
applicable to persons employed in any mine provide benefits which in its opinion are not less 
favourabl e than those provided for in this Chapter, it may, by order in writing and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified therein, exempt the mine from all or any of the provisions of this 
Chapter.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
REGULATIONS, RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
57. Power of  Central Government to make regulations .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Off icial Gazette, make regulations  consistent with this Act for all or any of the 
following purposes, namely: — 
 (a) for prescribing the qualifications required for appointment as  Chief Inspector or 
Inspector;  
(b) for prescribing and regulating the duties and powers of the Chief Inspector and of 
Inspectors in regard to the inspection of mines under this Act;  
(c) for prescribing the duties of owners, agents and managers of mines and of persons acting 
under  them, and for prescribing the 1[qualifications (including age) of agents and managers] of 
mines and of persons acting under them;  
(d) for requiring facilities to be provided for enabling managers of mines and o ther persons 
acting under them to efficiently discharge their duties ; 
(e) for regulating the manner of ascertaining, by examination or otherwise, the qualifications 
of managers of mines and persons acting under them, and the granting and renewal of certifi cates 
of competency;  
(f) for fixing the fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such examinations and of the grant and 
renewal of such certificates;  
(g) for determining the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which it shall be 
lawful for m ore mines than one to be under a single manager, or for any mine  or mines to be 
under a manager not having the prescribed qualifications ;  
2[(h) for providing for inquiries to be made under this Act, including any inquiry r elating to 
misconduct or incom petence on the part of any person holding a certificate under this Act and for 
the suspension or cancellation of any such certificate and for providing, wherever necessary, that 
the person appointed to hold an inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil c ourt under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
compelling the production of documents and material objects;]  
(i) for regulating, subject to the provisions of the Indian Explosives Act,  1884  (4 of 1884) , 
and of any rules made thereunder, the storage, conveyance and use of explosives;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for “qualifications of managers” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 31,  ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  28 
 1[(j) for prohibiting, restricting or  regulating the employment of 2*** women in mines or in 
any class of mines or on  particular kinds of labour which are a ttended by danger to the life, safety 
or health of such persons and for limiting the weight of any single load that may be carried by any 
such person;]  
(k) for providing for the safety of the persons employed in a mine, their means of entrance 
thereinto an d exit therefrom, the number of shafts or outlets to be furnished, and the fencing of 
shafts, pits, ou tlets, pathways and subsidences ; 
(1) for prohibiting the employment in a mine either as manager or in any other specified 
capacity of any person except pe rsons paid by the owner of the mine and directly answerable to 
the owner or manager of the mine ; 
3[(m) for providing for the safety of the roads and working places in mines, including the 
siting, maintenance and extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks  of minerals and the 
maintenance of sufficient barriers between mine and mine;  
(n) for the inspection of workings and sea led off fire -areas in a mine, and for the restriction of 
workings in the vicinity  of the sea or any lake or river or any other body of surface water, whether 
natural or artificial, or of any public road or building, and for requiring due precaution to be taken 
against the irruption or inrush of water or other liquid matter into, outbreak of fire in or premature 
collapse of, any workings;]  
(o) for providing for the ventilation  of mines and the action to be taken in respect of dust, fire, 
and inflammable and noxious gases, including precautions against spontaneous combustion, 
underground fire and coal dust;  
4[(p) for regulating, subject to t he provisions of th e Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (9 of 1910) , 
and of  any rules made thereunder, the generation, storag e, transformation, trans mission and use of 
electricity in mines and for providing for the care and the regulation of the use of all electrical 
apparatus and electrical cables in mines and of all other machinery and plant therein;]  
(q) 5[for regulating the use of machinery in mines, for providing for the safety of persons 
employed on or near such machinery and on haulage roads] and for restricting the use of certain 
classes of locomotives underground;  
(r) for providing for proper lighting of mines and regulating the use of safety lamps therein 
and for the search of persons entering a mine in which safety lamps are in use;  
(s) for providi ng against e xplosions or ignitions 6[of inflammable gas or dust] or irruptions of 
or accumulations of water in mines and against danger arising therefrom and for prohibiting, 
restricting or regulating the extraction of minerals in circumstances likely to r esult in the  
premature collapse of 6[workings] or to result in or to aggravate the collapse of 6[workings] or 
irruptions of water or ignitions in mines;  
(t) 7[for p rescribing under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 23, the types of accidents 
and for  prescribing the notices] of accid ents and dangerous occurrences and the notices, reports 
and returns of mineral output, persons employed and other matters provided for by regulations, to 
be furnished by owners, agents and managers of mines,  and for prescr ibing the forms of such 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. The words “adolescents and” omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause s (m) and ( n) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs.  by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
7. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “ for prescribin g the notices” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 29 
 notices, returns and reports, the persons and authorities to whom they are to be furnished, the 
particulars to be contained in them, and the time within  which they are to be submitted ;  
1[(u) 2[for requiring owners, agents and manag ers of mines to have fixed boundaries for the 
mines, for prescribing the plans and sections and field notes connected th erewith to be kept by 
them ] and the manner and places in which such plans, sections and field notes are to be kept for 
purposes of recor d and for the submission of copies  thereof to the Chief Inspector ; and for 
requiring the making of fresh surveys and plans by  them, and in the event of non -compliance, for 
having the survey made and plans prepared through any other agency and for the recovery of 
expenses thereof in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue;]  
 (v) for regulating the procedure on the occurrence of accidents or accidental explo sions or 
ignitions in or about mines 3[for dealing effectively with the  situation ]; 
(w) for prescribing the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, the notice to be given 
by the owner, agent or man ager of a mine under section 16 ; 
 (x) for prescribing the notice to be given by the owner, agent or manager of a mine before 
mining operations  are commenced at or extended to any point within 4[forty -five metres]  of any 
railway subject to the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) , or of any 5[public 
roads or other works , as the case may be, which are maintained by the Gov ernmen t or any local 
authority] ; 
 (y) for the protection from injury, in respect of any mine when the workings are discontinued, 
of property vested in the Government or any local authority or railway company as defined in the 
Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890 );  
6[(yy) for requiring protective works to be constructed by the owner, agent or manager of a 
mine before the mine is closed, and in the event of non -compliance, for getting such works 
executed by any other agency and for recovering the expenses thereof from such owner in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue;]  
 (z) for requiring the fencing of any mine or part of a mine or any quarry, incline, shaft, pit or 
outlet, whether the same is being worked or not, or any dangerous or prohibited area, subsi dence, 
haulage, tramline or pathway, where such fencing is necessary for the protection of the public ; 
and  
(zz) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
58. Power of Central Government to make rules .—The Central Government may, by 
notificati on in the  Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act for all or any of the following 
purposes, namely: — 
7[(a) for providing the term of office and other conditions of service of, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, the members of a Committee and for regulating the procedure to be followed by a 
committee for transacting its business;]  
(b) for prescribing the form of the register referred to i n sub -section ( 3) of section 23 ; 
(c) for providing for the appointment of Courts of inquiry un der section 24, for regulating the 
procedure and powers of such Courts, for the payment of travelling allowance to the members, and for 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
3.  Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4.  Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “fifty yards” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
6.  Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
7. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  30 
 the recovery of the expenses of such Courts 1[including any other expense s connected with the inquiry 
2[in the same mann er as an arrear of land revenue] ] from the manager,  owner or agent of the mine 
concerned;  
2[(cc) for providing for inspection of mines to be carried out on behalf of the persons employed 
therein by a technical expert (not less than an overman in status), t he facilities therefor, the frequency 
at which and the manner in which such inspections are to be carried out and the manner in which 
reports of such inspections are to be made: ] 
(d) for requiring the maintenance in mines wherein any women are employed or were employed 
on any day of the preceding twelve months of suitable rooms to be reserved for the use of children 
under the age of six years belonging to such women, and for prescribing, either generally or with 
particular reference to the number  of women e mployed in the mine the number and standards of such 
rooms, and the nature and extent of the amenities to be provided and the supervision to be exercised 
therein;  
(e) for requiring the maintenance at or near pit -heads of bathing places equipped with shower  
baths and of locker -rooms for the use of men employed in mines and of similar and separate places 
and rooms for the use of women in mines where women are employed, and for prescribing, either 
generally or with particular reference to the numbers of men an d women ordinarily employed in a 
mine, the number and standards of such places and rooms;  
(f) for prescribing the standard of sanitation to be maintained and the scale of latrine and urinal 
accommodation to be provided at mines, the provision to be made fo r the supply of drinking water 
3***; 
 1[(ff) for providing for the supply and maintenance of medical appliances and comforts and for 
prescribing the contents and number of first -aid boxes and cupboards, the training in first -aid work, 
the size and equipmen t of first -aid rooms and staff in charge thereof and the arrangements for 
conveyance of injured perso ns to hospitals or dispensaries ; 
(fff) for requiring the imparting of practical instruction to, or the training of, persons employed or 
to be employed in mines otherwise than in a position of supervision or management and for 
prescribing schemes for such instruction and training;]  
(g) for prohibiting the possession or consumption of intoxicating drinks or drugs in a mine and the 
entry or presence therein of  any person in a drunken state;  
(h) for prescribing the forms of notices required under section 36, and for requiring such notices 
to be posted also in specified languages;  
(i) for defining the persons who shall,  for the purpose of section 37, be deemed to  be persons 
holding positions of supervision or management or empl oyed in a confidential capacity ; 
(j) for prohibiting the employment in mines of persons or any class of persons who have not been 
certified by a qualified medical practitioner to have comple ted their fifteenth year, and for prescribing 
the manner and the circumstances in which such certificates may be granted and revoked;  
4*   *   *   *   * 
1[(kk) for requiring persons employed or seeking employment at mines to submit themselv es for 
medical examina tion and for prohibiting on medical grounds the employment of any person at a mine 
either absolutely or in a particular  capacity or in particular work ;] 
 5[(l) for prescribing the form of registers required by section 48 and the maintenance and form  of 
registers for the purposes of Chapter VII;]  
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 62 of 195 9, s. 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
2. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 6-1-1960).  
4. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32, for clause (l) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  31 
 (m) for prescri bing abstracts of this Act and of the regulations and rules and the language in which 
the abstracts and bye -laws shall be posted as  required by sections 61 and 62 ; 
 (n) for requiring notices, returns  and reports in connection with any matters dealt with by rules to 
be furnished by owners, agents and managers of mines, and for prescribing the forms of such notices, 
returns and reports, the persons and authorities to whom they are to be furnished , the particulars to be 
contained in them, and the times, within which they are to be submitted;  
(o) for requiring the provision and maintenance in  mines, wherein more than 1*** fifty persons 
are ordinarily employed, of adequate and suitable shelters for taking food with provision for drinking 
water;  
(p) for requiring the provision and maintenance in any mine specified in this behalf by the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector, wherein more than two hundred and fifty persons are ordinarily employed, of a 
canteen or cante ens for the use of such persons ;  
(q) for requiring the employment in every mine wherein five hundred or more persons are 
ordinarily employed, of such number of welfare officers as may be specified and for prescribing the 
qualifications and the ter ms and conditions of  ,and the duties to be performed by, such welfare 
officers ;  
2[(r) for requiring the establishment of rescue stations for specified mines or groups of specified 
mines or for all mines in a specified area and for prescribing how and by whom such stations shall be 
established;  
 (s) for providing for the management of rescue stations;  
 (sa) for providing for the standards of physical fitness and other qualifications of the persons 
constituting rescue brigades;  
 (sb) prescribing the places of residence of the persons constituting rescue brigades;]  
 (t) for prescribing the position, equipment, control, m aintenance and functions of 3*** rescue 
stations;  
4[(u) for providing for the levy and collection of a duty of excise (at a rate not exceedi ng  
twenty -five paise per tonne) on coke and coal produced in and despatched from mines specified under  
clause ( r), the creation of a rescue stations fund for such mines, the crediting to such fund of such 
sums of money as the Central Government may, afte r due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide from out of the proceeds of such cess credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, 
the manner in which the money from such fund shall be utilised and the administration of such fund; ] 
 (v) For providing for the formation,  training,  composition and d uties of rescue brigades 5***; and 
and generally for the condu ct of rescue work in mines; 6***  
7[(vv) for providing for the constitution of safety Committees for specified mine or groups of 
specifi ed mines or for all mines in a specified area for promoting safety and for laying down the 
composition, manner of formation and functions of such safety Committees, and;]  
(w) generally to provide for any matter not provided for by this Act or the regulatio ns, provision 
for which is required in order to give effect to this Act.  
 
                                                      
1.  The words “one hundred and”  omitted by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31, for clauses ( r) and ( s) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. The word “Central” omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Certain words omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. The word “and” omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
7. Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  32 
 59. Prior publication of regulation and rules .—(1) The power to make regulations and rules 
conferred by sections 57 and 58 is subject to the condition of the regulations and rules being made 
after previous publication.  
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General  Clauses 
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) , as that after which a draft of regulations or rules proposed to be made will be 
taken under consideration, shall not be less than three months from the date on which the draft of the 
proposed regulations or rules is publish ed for general information.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(4) No regulation or rule shall be made unless the draft thereof has been referred to the 
Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 and unless that Committee has had a 
reasonable opportunity of reporting as to the expediency of making the same and as to the suitability 
of its provisions.]  
 (5) Regulations and rules shall be published in the Official Gazette and, on such publication, shall 
have effect as if enacted in this Act.  
(6) The provisi ons of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 4) shall not apply to the first occasion on which 
rules referred to in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of section 58 are made.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
60. Power to make regulation s without previous publication .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and 4[(4)] of sect ion 59, regulations under 5*** section 57 may be 
made without previou s publication and without 6*** reference to 7[the Committee constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 12] , if the Central Government is satisfied that for the prevention of 
apprehended danger or the speedy remedy of conditions likely to cause danger it is necess ary in 
making such regulations to dispense with the delay that would result from  such publication and 
reference:  
Provided that any regulations so made 8[shall be sent to the sai d Committee for information and ] 
shall not  remain in force for more than 9[one year] from the making thereof.  
61. Bye -laws .—(1)The owner, agent or manager of a mine may, and shall, if called upo n to do so 
by the Chief Inspector or Inspector, frame and submit to the Chief Inspector or Inspector a draft of 
such by  laws, not being inconsistent with this Act or any regulations or rules for the time being in 
force, 10[governing the use of any particula r machinery or the adoption of a particular method of 
working in the mine] as such owner, agent or manager may deem necessary to prevent accidents and 
provide for the safety, convenience and discipline of the persons employed in the mine.  
(2) If any such o wner, agent or manager — 
(a) fails to submit within two months a draft of bye -laws after being called upon to do so by 
the Chief Inspector or Inspector, or  
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 62 of 1959 , s. 33 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s . 32, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f.  31-5-1984).  
3. Omitted by s.  32, ibid. (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
4.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 34, for “( 3)” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
5. The words, brackets and letters “clause ( i) and clauses ( k) to ( s) excluding clause ( 1) of” omitted by s. 34, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
6. The word “previous ” omitted by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
7. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 33, for “Mining Boards” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
8. Ins. by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
9. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 34, for “two years” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
10. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 33 
 (b) submits a draft of bye -laws which is not in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or Inspector 
sufficient,  
the Chief Inspector or Inspector may — 
 (i) propose a draft of such bye -laws as appear to him to be sufficient, or  
(ii) propose such amendments in any draft submitted to him by the owner, agent or manager 
as will, in his opinion, render it sufficient, and shall send such draft bye -laws or draft amendments 
to the owner, agent or manager as the case may be, for consideration.  
(3) If within a period of two months from the date on which any draft bye -laws or draft 
amendments are sent by the Chie f Inspector or Inspector to the owner, agent or manag er under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Chief Inspector or Inspector and the owner, agent or manager are 
unable to agree as to the terms of the bye -laws to be made under sub -section ( 1), the Chie f Inspector 
or Inspector shall refer the draft bye-laws for settlement to the 1[Committee constituted unde r sub -
section ( 1) of section 12 ]. 
(4) (a) When such draft bye -laws have been agreed to by the owner, agent or manager and the 
Chief Inspector or Inspe ctor, or, when they are unable to agr ee, have been settled by the 1[Committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12] a copy of the draft bye -laws shall be sent by the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector to the Central Government for approval.  
(b) The Ce ntral Government may make such modification of the draft bye -laws as it thinks fit.  
(c) Before the Central Government approves the draft bye -laws, whether with or without 
modifications, there shall be published, in such manner as the Central Government ma y think best 
adapted for informing the persons affected, notice of the proposal to make the bye -laws and of the 
place where copies of the draft bye -laws may be obtained, and of the time (which shall not be less 
than thirty days) within which any objections  with reference to the draft by -laws, made by or on 
behalf of persons affected should be sent to the Central Government.  
(d) Every objection shall be in writing and shall state — 
(i) the specific grounds of objections, and  
(ii) the omissions, additions or modifications asked for.  
(e) The Central  Government shall consider any objection made within the required time by or on 
behalf of persons appearing to it to be affected, and may approve the bye -laws either in the form in 
whic h they were published or after making such amendments thereto as it thinks fit.  
(5) The bye -laws, when so approved by the Central Government, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act, and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall cause a copy of the  bye-laws, in English 
and in such other language or languages as may be prescribed, to be posted up in some conspicuous 
place at or near the mine, where the bye -laws may be conveniently read or seen by the persons 
employed; and as often as the same become defaced, obliterated or destroyed, shall cause them to be 
renewed with all reasonable despatch.  
(6) The Central Government may, by order in writing rescind, in whole or in part, any bye -law so 
made, and thereupon such bye -law shall cease to have effect acc ordingly.  
2[61A.  Laying regulations, rules and bye -laws before parliament .—Every regulation made 
under section 57, every rule made under section 58 and every bye -law made under section 61 shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House  of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act  42 of 1983, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 34 
 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions afo resaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, rule or bye -law or 
both Houses agree that the regulation, rule or bye -law should not be made, the regulation, rule or bye -
law shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or  be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation, rule  or bye -law, as the case may be. ] 
62. Posting up of abstracts from Act, regulations,  etc.—There shall be kept posted up at or near 
every Mine in English and in such other language or languages as may be prescribed, the prescribed 
abstracts of the Act and of the regulations and rules.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
63. Obstruction .—(1)Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector, an Inspector, or any person 
authorised under section 8 in the discharge of his duties  under this Act, or refuses or wilfully neglects 
to afford the Chief Inspector, Inspector or such person any reason able facility for making any entry, 
inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relation to any mine, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred  rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever refuses to produce on the dem and of the Chief In spector or Inspector any registers  or 
other documents kept in pur suance of this Act, or prevents or a ttempts to prevent or does any thing 
which he has reason to believe to be  likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being 
examined by an inspecting officer acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.  
64. Falsification of records, etc .—Whoever — 
(a) counterfeits, or knowingly makes a false statement in, any certificate, or any official copy 
of a certificate, granted under this Act, or  
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false certificate, or  
(c) makes or produces or uses an y false declaration, statement or evidence knowing the same 
to be false, for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for any other person a certificate, or the 
renewal of a certificate, under this Act, or any employment in a mine, or  
1[(d) falsifies any pl an, sectio n, register or record, the main tenance of which is required by or 
under this Act or produces before any authority such false plan, section, register or record, 
knowing the same to be false, or]  
(e) makes, give s or delivers any plan, return, notic e, record or report containing a statement, 
entry or detail which is not to the best of his knowledge or belief true,  
 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or  with fine 
which may extend to 2[one thousand rupees], or with both.  
65. Use of false certificates of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a 
certificate of fitness granted to himself under 3[section 43 ] a certificate granted to another person 
under that section, or, having been grante d a certificate of fitness to himself under that section, 
knowingly allows it to be used, or allows an attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which m ay 
extend to 4[two hundred] rupees, or with both.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 35, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “five hundred rupees”  (w.e.f. 16 -1- 1960).  
3. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s.  36, for “section 40” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 36, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  35 
 66. Omission to furnish plans, etc .—Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of 
proving which shall lie upon him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner or at or 
within  the prescri bed time any plan, 1[section,] return, notice, register, record or report required by or 
under this Act to be made or furnished shall be punishable  with fine which may extend to 2[one 
thousand] rupees.  
67. Contravention of provisions regarding employment o f labour .—Whoever, save as 
permitted by section 38, contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or 
of any order made thereunder   prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment or presence of 
persons in or about a mine  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or  with fine which may extend to 3[one thousa nd] rupees, or with both 4***. 
5[68. Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of age .—If a person below 
eighteen years of age is employed in a mine in contravention of section 40, the owner, agent or 
manager of such mine shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.]  
69. Failure to appoint manager .—Whoever in contravention of the provisions o f section 17, 
fails to appoint a manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or  with fine which may extend to 6[two thousand and five hund red] rupees, or with both 
both 7*** 
70. Notice of accidents .—(1) Whoever in contravention of the provision of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23 fails to give notice of any accidental occurrence or to post a copy of the notice on the 
special notice board referre d to in that sub -section and to keep it th erefor the period specified shall  be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 2 3 fails to record in the prescribed register or to give notice of any 
accidental occurrence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred ru pees, or with both.  
71. Owner, et c., to report to Chief Inspector in certain cases .— Where the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine, as the case may be, has taken proceedings under this Act against any person 
employed in or about a mine in respect of an offence under this Act, he shall withi n twenty -one days 
from the date of the judgment or order of the court report the result thereof to the Chief Inspector.  
72. Obligation of persons employed in a mine .—No person employed in a mine shall — 
(a) wilfully interfere with or misuse any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in a 
mine for the purpose of securing the health, safety or welfare of the persons employed therein ; 
(b) wilfully and without reasonable cause do anything likely to en danger himself or others;  
(c) wilfully neglect to make use of any appliance or other thing provided in the mine for the 
purpose of securing the health or safety of the persons employed therein.  
8[72A.  Special Provision for contravention of certain regulat ions.—Whoever contravenes any 
provision of any regulation or of any bye -law or of, any order made thereunder, relating to matters 
specified in clauses ( d), (i), (m), (n), (o), (p), (r), (s) and ( u) of section 57 shall be punishable with 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 37 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “two hundred ” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 3 8, ibid., for “five hundred ” (w.e.f.  16-1-1960).    
4. Certain words omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 37, for section 68 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 39, for “five hundred” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
7. Certain words omitted by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960].  
8. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for sections 73 and 74 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  36 
 imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
72B. Special provision for contravention of orders under section 22 .—Whoever continues to 
work a mine in contravention of any order issued under sub -section ( lA), sub -section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 3) of section 22 1[or under section ( 2) of section 22A ] shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend two years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees:  
 1[Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in 
writing in the judgment of the court such fine shall not be less than two thousand rupees. ] 
72C. Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous resul ts.—(1) Whoever 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or of any order made 
thereunder [other than an order made under sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 22 2[or under sub -section ( 2) of section 22A] ], shall be punishable — 
(a) if such contravention results in loss of life, with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both; or  
(b) if such contravention results in serious bo dily injury, with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to thre e thousand rupees, or with both ; or  
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to persons employed in the mine 
or other persons in or about the mine, with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both : 
2[Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in 
writing in the judgment of the court, such fine in the case of a contravention referred to in clause ( a) 
shall not be less than three thousand rupees. ]  
(2) Where a person having been convicted under this section is again convicted thereunder, he 
shall be punishable with double the punishment provided by sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any court imposing or confirming in appeal, revision or otherwise a sentence of fine passed 
under this section may, when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to 
be paid as compensat ion to the person injured or, in the case of his death, to his legal representative:  
Provided that at if the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall 
be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapse d, or, if an appeal has been 
presented, before the decision of the appeal.  
73. General provision for disobedience of orders .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or of any order made thereunder for the contrav ention of 
which no penalty is hereinbefore provided, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
74. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—If any person who has been convicted for an 
offence punishable under any of the foregoing provisions (other than sections 72B and 72C) is again 
convicted for an offence committed within two years of the previous conviction and involving a 
contravention of the same provision, he shall be punishable for each subsequent conviction with 
double the punishment to which he would have been liable for the first contravention of such 
provision.]  
75. Prosecution of owner, agent or manager .—No prosecution shall be instituted against any 
owner, agent or manager for any offence under this Act except at the instance of the Chief Inspector 
or of the district magistrate or of an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special order in  
writing by the Chief Inspe ctor: 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 38 (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by s.  39, ibid. (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  37 
 1[Provided that the Chief Inspector or the district magistrate or the Inspector as so authorised 
shall , before instituting such prosecution , satisfy himself that the owner , agent or manager had failed 
to exercise all due diligence to prevent the comm ission of such offence.]  
2[Provided further that] in respect of an offence committed in the course of the technical direction 
and management of a mine, the district magistrate shall not institute any prosecution against an owner, 
agent or manager without t he previous approval of the Chief Inspector.  
3[76. Determination of owner in certain cases .—Where the owner of a mine is a firm or other 
association of individuals, all, or any of the partners or members thereof or where the owner of a mine 
is a company, a ll or any of the directors thereof or where the owner of a mine is a Government or any 
local authority, all or any of the officers or persons authorised by such Government or local authority, 
as the case may be, to manage the affairs of the mine, may be pr osecuted and punished under this Act 
for any offence for which the owner of a mine is punishable:  
4[Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice in writing to the Chief 
Inspector that it has nominated ,— 
 (a) in the case of a firm, an y of its partners or managers;  
 (b) in the case of an association, any of its members or managers;  
 (c) in the case of a company, any of its directors or managers,  
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is in each cas e either in 
fact in charge of the management of, or holds the largest number of shares in such firm, association or 
company, to assume the responsibility of the owner of the mine for the purposes of this Act, such 
partner, member, director or manager, as t he case may be, shall, so long as he continues to so reside 
and be in charge or hold the largest number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the 
mine for the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing cancelling his nomination or stati ng that he 
has ceased to be a partner, member, director or manager, as the may be, is received by the Chief 
Inspector.  
Explanation .—Where a firm, association or company has different establishments or branches or 
different units in any establishment or bra nch, different persons may be nominated under this proviso 
in relation to different establishments or branches or units and the person so nominated shall, with 
respect only to the establishment, branch or unit in relation to which he has been nominated, be  
deemed to be the owner of the mine. ]] 
77. Exemption of owner,  agent or manager from liability in certain cases .—Where the owner, 
agent or manager of a mine, accused of an offence under this Act, alleges that another person is the 
actual offender, he shal l be entitled, upon compla int made by him in this behalf 5[and on his 
furnishing the known address of the actual offender] and on giving to the prosecutor not less than 
three clear days notice in writing of his intention so to do, to have that other person  brought before the 
court on the date appointed for the hearing of th e case ; and if, after the commission of the offence has 
been proved, the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, proves to the satisfaction 
of the Court — 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the exec ution of the relevant provision of this 
Act, and  
(b) that the other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent or 
connivance,  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 40 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 41, for section 76 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 42 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960). 38 
 the said other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment as if 
he were the owner, agent or manager of the mine, and the owner, agent or manager, as the case may 
be, shall be acquitted;  
Provided that — 
(a) the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, may be examined on oath 
and his evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in support shall be subject to cross -
examination by or on behalf of the person he alleges as the actual  offender and by the prosecutor ; 
(b) if in spite of due diligence the person alleged as the actual offender cannot be brought 
before the court on the date appointed for the hearing of the case, the court shall adjourn the 
hearing thereof from time to time so however that t he total period of such adjournments does not 
exceed three months, and if by the end of the said period the person alleged as the actual offender 
cannot be brought before the court, the court shall proceed to hear the case against the owner, 
agent or manag er, as the case may be.  
78. Power of Court to make orders .—(1) Where the owner, agent or manager of a mine is 
convicted of an offence punishable under this Act, the court may, in addition to awarding him any 
punishment, by order in writing, require him wit hin a period specified in the order (which may be 
extended by the court from time to time on application made in this behalf) to take such measures as 
may be so specified for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was committed.  
(2) Where a n order is made under sub -section ( 1), the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the 
case may be, shall not be liable under this Act in respect of the continuance of the offence during the 
period or extended period, if any, but if on the expiry of such p eriod or extended period the order of 
the court has not been fully complied with, the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day 
after such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or with both.  
79. Limitation of prosecutions .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, 
unles s complaint thereof has been made — 
(i) within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed, or  
(ii) within six months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to the 
knowledge of the Inspector,  or  
1[(iia) in any case in which the accused is or was a public servant and previous sanction of the 
Central Government or of the State Government or of any other authority is necessary for taking 
cognizance of the offence under any law for the time being in fo rce, within three months of the 
date on which such sanction is rece ived by the Chief Inspector, or ]  
(iii) in any case where a Court of inquiry has been appointed by the Central Government 
under secti on 24, within 2[one year] after the date of the publicat ion of the report referred to in 
sub-section ( 4) of that section,  
whichever is later.  
3[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, —  
(a) in the case of a continuing offence, the period of limitation shall be computed with 
reference to every point of time during which the offence continues;  
(b) where for the performance of any act time has been extended under this Act, the period of 
limitation shall be computed from the expiry of the extended period.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 42 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. The Explanation  added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 43 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  39 
 80. Cognizance of offences .—No Court inferior to th at of a 1[Metropolitan Magistrate or J udicial 
Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence under this Act which is alleged to have been 
committed by any owner, agent or manager of a mine or any offence which is by this Act made 
punishable with impr isonment.  
80A. [Special provision regarding fine. ] Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983 (42  of 
1983) , s. 44 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984) . 
81. Reference to Mining Board or Committee in lieu of prosecution in certain cases .—(1) If 
the Court trying any case insti tuted at the instance of the Chief Inspector or of the district magistrate 
or of an Inspector under this Act is of opinion that the case is one which should, in lieu of a 
prosecution, be referred to 2*** a Committee it may stay the criminal proceedings and  report the 
matter to the Central Government with a view to such reference being made.  
(2) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 1), the Central Gover nment may refer the case to 
2*** a Committee, or may direct the Court to proceed with the trial.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
82. Decision of question whether a mine is under this Act .—If any question arises as to 
whet her any excavation or working 3[or premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, on which 
any process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being 
carried on] is a mine within the meaning of this Act, the Central Government may decide the question, 
and a certificate signed by a Secretary to the Central Government shall be conclusive on the point.  
83. Power to exempt from operation of Act .— 4[(1)] The Central Government may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette, exempt eith er absolutely or subject to any specified conditions any 
local area or any mine or group or class of mines or any part of a mine or any class of  persons from 
the operation of  5[all or any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations, rules or bye -laws.]  
Provided that no local area or mine or group or class of mines shall be e xempted from the 
provisions of 6[sect ions 40 and 45] unless it is also exempted from the operation of all the other 
provisions of this Act.  
7[(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order and subject to such restrictions as 
it may think fit to impose, authorise the Chief Inspect or or any other authority to exempt, subject to 
any specified conditions, any mine or part thereof from the operation o f any of the provisions of the 
8[regulations rules or bye -laws] if the Chief Inspector or such authority is of opinion that the 
condition s in any mine or part thereof are such as to render compliance with such provision 
unnecessary or impracticable.]  
84. Power to alter or rescind orders .—9[(1)] The Central Government may reverse or modify 
any order passed under this Act.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 43, for “presidency magistrate or m agistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. The words “a Mining Board or” omitted by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
3. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 45 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Section 83 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f . 16-1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 46, for “all or any of the provisions of this Act” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “section 45” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
7.  Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 46 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
8. Subs. by Act 42 o f 1983, s. 46, for “regulations or rules under this Act” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
9. Section 84 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  40 
 1[(2) The Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reverse or modify any order 
passed by him under the Act or under any regulation, rule or bye -law. 
(3) No order prejudicial to the owner, agent or manager of a mine shall be made under this section 
unles s such owner, agent or manager has been given a reasonable opportunity of making 
representation.]  
85. Application of Act to mines belonging to Government .—This Act shall 2[also] apply to 
mines belonging to the Government.  
3[85A.  Persons required to give notice, etc., legally bound to do so .— Every person required to 
to give any notice or to furnish any information to any authority under this Act shall be legally bound 
to do so within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
4[85B.  Signing of returns, notices, etc. —All returns and notices required to be furnished or 
given or communications sent by or on behalf of the owner of a mine in connection with the 
provisions of this Act or any regulation, rule, bye -law or any order made there under to whom power 
in this behalf has been delegated by the owner by a power of attorney.  
 85C.  No fee or charge to be realised for facilities and conveniences .—No fee or charge shall 
be realised from any person employed in a mine in respect of any protec tive arrangements or facilities 
to be provided, or any equipment or appliances to be supplied under the provisions of this Act.]  
86. Application of certain provisions of Act 63 of 1948 to mines .—The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official G azette, direct that the provisions of Chapters III and IV of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) shall, subje ct to such exceptions and restr ictions as may be specified 
in the notification, apply to all mines and the precincts thereof.  
87. Protection of ac tion taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
whatever shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
88. [Repeal of Act  4 of 1923 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  Act, 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 
and the First Schedule . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 47 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2.  Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 47 (w.e .f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Ins. by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 48 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
--------------------------The Notaries Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952  
_________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to appoint notaries . 
4. Registers.  
5. Entry of names in the Register and issue or renewal of certificates of practice . 
6. Annual publication of lists of notaries . 
7. Seal of notaries . 
8. Functions of notaries . 
9. Bar of practice without certificate . 
10. Removal of names from Register . 
11. Construction of references to notaries public in other laws . 
12. Penalty for falsely representing to be a notary, et c. 
13. Cognizance of offence.  
14. Reciprocal arrangements for recognition of notarial acts done by foreign notaries . 
15. Power to make rules . 
16. [Repealed. ] 
  2 
 THE NOTARIES ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 53 OF 19521 
[9th August, 1952 .] 
An Act to regulate the profession of notaries.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Notaries Act, 1952 .                  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2* * *. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
4*   *   *   *  * 
(b) “instrument ” includes every document by which any right or liability is, or purports to be, 
created , transferred, modified, limited, extended, suspended, extinguished or recorded;  
5[(c) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate  entered in any roll under the provisions of the 
Advocates Act , 1961  (25 of 1961) ;] 
(d) “notary” means a person appointed as such under this Act:  
Provided that for a period of two years from the commencement  of this Act it shall include also a 
perso n who, before such commencement  was appointed a notary public  6[under] the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881  (26 of 1881) , 7* * * and is, immediately before such commencement, in 
practice in  8[any part of India:  
Provided further that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir the said period of two years 
shall be computed from the  date on which this Act comes into force in that State.]  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Register” means a Register of Notaries maintained by the Government under section 4 ; 
9[(g)  “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means th e administrator thereof.]  
3. Power to appoint notaries .—The Central Government, for the whole or any part of India, and any 
State Government, for the whole or any part of the State, may appoint as notaries any legal practitioners 
or other persons who possess such qualifications as may be prescribed.  
4. Registers .—(1) The Central Government and every State Government shall maintain, in such form 
as may be prescribed, a Register of the notaries appointed by that Government and entitled to practice as 
such under this Act.  
(2) Every such Register shall include the following particulars about the notary whose name is 
entered therein, namely: — 
(a) his full name, date of birth, residential and professional address;  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule, Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 
of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I; Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Schedule and the State of Sikkim by S.O. No. 213(E), 
dated 16 -5-1975, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1975, Part II, s. 3( ii) (w.e.f. 16 -5-1975).  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu an d Kashmir ” omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and theSchedule ( w.e.f. 15-8-1968).  
3. 14th February, 1956: vide notification No. S.R.O. 317, dated 10 th February, 1956, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,   
s. 3. 
4. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1999, s. 2, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
6. Subs. by  Act 25 of 1968 , s. 2 and the Schedule, for “either under ” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
7. The words “or by Master of Faculties in England ” omitted by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
8. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for “any part of India ” (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
9. Subs. by the A.O.  (No. 3) , 1956, for clause ( g). 3 
 (b) the date on which his name is entered in the Register;  
(c) his qualifications; and  
(d) any other particulars which may be prescribed.  
5. Entry of names in the Register and issue or renewal of certificates of practice .—(1) Every 
notary who int ends to practise as such  1[may] on payment to the Government appointing him of the 
prescribed fee, if any, be entitled — 
(a) to have his name entered in the Register maintained by that Government under section 4, and  
(b) to a certificate authori sing him to practi se for a period of   2[five years] from the d ate on which 
which the certificate is issued to him.  
3[(2) The Government appointing the notary, may, on receipt of an application and the prescribed fee, 
fee, renew the certificates of practice of any notary for a period of five years at a time.]  
6. Annual publication of lists of notaries .—The Central Government and every State Government 
shall, during the month of January each year, publish in the Official Gazette a list of notaries appointed by 
that Government and in practice at the beginning of th at year together with such details pertaining to them 
as may be prescribed.  
7. Seal of notaries .—Every notary shall have and use, as occasion may arise, a seal of such form and 
design as may be prescribed.  
8. Functions of notaries .—(1) A notary may do all or any of the following acts by virtue of his 
office, namely: — 
(a) verify, authenticate, certify or attest the execution of any instrument;  
(b) present any promissory note, hundi or bill of exchange for acceptance or payment or demand 
better security;  
(c) note or protest  the dishonour by non -acceptance or non -payment of any promissory note, 
hundi or bill of exchange or protest for better security or prepare acts of honour under the Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881  (26 of 1881) , or serve notice of such note or protest;  
(d) note and draw up ship's protest, boat's protest or protest relating to demurrage and other 
commercial matters;  
(e) administer oath to, or take affidavit from, any person;  
(f) prepare bottomry and respondentia bonds, charter parties and othe r mercantile documents;  
(g) prepare, attest or authenticate any instrument intended to take effect in any country or place 
outside India in such form and language as may conform to the law of the place where such deed is 
intended to operate;  
(h) translate,  and verify the translation of, any document from one language into another;  
4[(ha) act as a Commissioner to record evidence in any civil or criminal trial if so directed by any 
court or authority;  
(hb) act as an arbitrator, mediator or conciliator, if so required;]  
(i) any other act which may be prescribed.  
(2) No act specified in sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a notarial act except when it is done by a 
notary under his signature and official seal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1999, s. 3, for “shall” (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “three years ” (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
3. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  4 
 9. Bar of practice without certificate .—(1) Subject  to the provisions of this section, no person shall 
practi se as a notary or do any notarial act under the official seal of a notary unless he holds a certificate of 
practice in force issued to him under section 5:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the presentation of any promissory note, hundi 
or bill of exchange for acceptance or payment by the clerk of a notary acting on behalf of such notary.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall, until the expiry of two years from the commencement  
of this Act, apply to any such person as is referred to in the proviso to clause ( d) of section 2.  
1[Provided that in relation to  the State of Jammu and Kashmir the said period of two years shall be 
computed from the  date on which this Act com es into force in that State.]  
10. Removal of names from Register .—The Government appointing any notary may, by order, 
remove from the Register maintained by it under section 4 the name of the notary if he — 
(a) makes a request to that effect; or  
(b) has  not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or  
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(d) has been found, upon inquiry in the prescribed manner, to be guilty of such professional or 
other misconduct as, in the opinion of the Government, renders his unfit to practise as a notary;  2[or] 
2[(e) is convicted by any court for an offence involving moral turpitude; or  
(f) does not get his certificate of practice renewed.]  
11. Construction of references to notaries public in other laws .—Any reference to a notary public 
in any other law shall be construed as a reference to a notary entitled to practice under this Act.  
12. Penalty for falsely representing to be a notary, etc. —Any person who — 
(a) falsely represents that he is a notary without b eing appointed as such, or  
(b) practises as a notary or does any notarial act in contravention of section 9,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  3[one year] , or with fine, or with 
both.  
13. Cognizance of offence .—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence  committed by a 
notary in the exercise or purported exercise of his functions under this Act save upon complaint in writing 
made by an officer authorised by the Central Government or a State Government by gene ral or special 
order in this behalf.  
(2) No Magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try an 
offence punishable under this Act.  
14. Reciprocal arrangements for recognition of notarial acts done by foreign notari es.—If the 
Central Government is satisfied that by the law or practice of any country or place outside India, the 
notarial acts done by notaries within India are recognised for all or any limited purposes in that country or 
place, the Central Government ma y, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the notarial acts 
lawfully done by notaries within such country or place shall be recognised within India for all purposes 
or, as the case may be, for such limited purposes as may be specified in the  notification.  
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1999, s. 5, for “or” (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “three months ” (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  5 
 (a) the qualifications of a notary, the form and manner in which applications for appointment as a 
notary may be made and the disposal of such applications;  
(b) the certificates, testimonials o r proofs as to character, integrity, ability and competence which 
any person applying for appointment as a notary may be required to furnish;  
1[(c) the fees payable for appointment as a notary and for the issue and renewal of a certificate of 
practice, are a of practice or enlargement of area of practice and exemption whether wholly or in part, 
from such fees in specified classes of cases;]  
(d) the fees payable to a notary for doing any notarial act;  
(e) the form of Registers and the particulars to be entere d therein;  
(f) the form and design of the seal of a notary ; 
(g) the manner in which inquiries into allegations of professional or other misconduct of notaries 
may be made;  
(h) the acts which a notary may do in addition to those specified in section 8 and t he manner in 
which a notary may perform his functions;  
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be , prescribed.  
2[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediatel y following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
16. [Amendment of Act 26 of 1881.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1957 (36 of 1957 ), s. 2 
and Schedule I . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1999, s. 7, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 17 -12-1999).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Part B States Marriages Validating Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE PART B STATES MARRIAGES VALIDATING ACT , 1952  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Validation of certain irregular marriages . 
3. Validation of records of marriages validated by section  2. 
 
  2 
 THE PART B STATES MARRIAGES VALIDATING ACT , 1952  
ACT NO. 1 OF 1952  
[15th February , 1952 .] 
An Act to validate certain marriages solemnized in certain Part B States between the 26th day of 
January, 1950 and the 31st day of March, 1951, under the Indian Christian Marriage           
Act, 1872.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Part B States Marriages Validating Act, 1952 . 
2. Validation of certain irregular marriages .—All marriages between persons one or both of whom 
is or are a Christian or Christians, which were solemnized in any Part B State other  than the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir between the 26th day of January, 1950 and the 31st day of March, 1951, under the 
Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872) , shall be, and sh all be deemed to have been with effect 
from the date of solemnization of each of them respectively, as good and valid in law as if such marriages 
had been solemnized by a person duly authorised under the said Act to solemnize such marriages in the 
Part B S tate concerned.  
3. Validation of records of marriages validated by section 2 .—Certificates of marriages which are 
declared by section 2 to be good and valid in law, and register books, and certified copies of true and duly 
authenticated extracts therefrom,  deposited or purporting to be deposited in compliance with the 
provisions of the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872) , in so far as the register, books and 
extracts relate to such marriages as aforesaid, shall be received as evidence of such m arriages as if such 
marriages had been duly solemnized under the said Act.  
________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE -PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ACT, 1952  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title.  
2.  Definitions.  
PART II  
CONDUCT OF PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS  
3.  Returning Officer and his ass istants.  
4.  Appointment of dates for nominations, etc . 
5.  Public notice of election . 
5A. Nomination of candidates.  
5B. Presentation of nomination papers and requirements for a valid nomination.  
5C. Deposit.  
5D. Notice of nominations and the time and plac e for their scrutiny.  
5E. Scrutiny of nominations.  
6. Withdrawal of candidature.  
7. Death of candidate before poll.  
8. Procedure in contested and uncontested elections.  
9. Manner of voting at elections.  
10. Counting of votes.  
11. Declaration of results.  
12. Report of the result.  
PART III  
DISPUTES REGARDING ELECTIONS  
13. Definitions.  
14. Authority to try election petitions.  
14A. Presentation of petition.  2 
 SECTIONS  
15. Form of petitions, etc., and procedure.  
16. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.  
17. Orders of the Supreme Court.  
18. Grounds for declaring the election of a returned candidate to be void.  
19. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may he declared to have been 
elected.  
20. Transmission of orders to the Central Go vernment and its publication.  
PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20A.  Return or forfeiture of candidate ‟s deposit.  
21.  Power to make rules.  
22.  Maintenance of secrecy of voting.  
23.  Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
The Presidential and Vice -Presidential Electio ns Rules, 1974.  
 
 3 
 THE PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE -PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1952  
[14th March , 1952 .] 
An Act to regulate certain matters relating to or connected with elections to the offices of 
President and Vice -President of India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Presidential and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952.  
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless the contest otherwise requires, — 
(a) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(b) “election ” means a Presidential election or Vice -Presidential election;  
(c) “election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(d) “Elector ”, in relation to a Presidential election, means  a member of the electoral college 
referred to in article 54, and in relation to a Vice -Presidential election, means  1[a member of the 
electoral college referred to in article 66;]  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Presid ential election ” means an election to fill the office of the President of India;  
2[(ff) “public holiday ” means any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of section 25 of 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881  (26 of 1881) ;] 
(g) “Returning Officer ” includes an Assistant Returning Officer performing any function which 
he is 3[competent] to perform under sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(h) “Vice -Presidential election ” means an election to fill the office of the Vice -President of India.  
PART II  
CONDUCT OF PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS  
3. Returning Officer and his assistants .—(1) For the purposes of each election the Election 
Commission shall, in consultation with the Central Government, appoint a Returning Officer who shall 
have his office in  New Delhi and may also appoint one or more Assistant Re turning Officers.  
(2) Subject to rules made under this Act, every Assistant Returning Officer shall be competent to 
perform all or any of the functions of the Returning Officer . 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 5 of 1974, s. 2, for  “a member of either House of Parliament ” (w.e.f. 23 -3-1974 ).   
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -3-1974 ).  
3. Subs . by s. 2, ibid., for “authorised ” (w.e.f. 23 -3-1974 ). 
 4 
 4. Appointment of date s for nominations, etc .—1[(1) The Election Commission shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint  for every election — 
(a) the last date for making nominations, which shall be the  fourteenth day after the date of 
publication of the notification under this  sub-section, or, if that day is a public holiday, the next 
succeeding day which is not a public holiday;  
(b) the date for the scrutiny of  nominations, which shall be the day  immediately following the last 
date for making nominations or, if that day is a  public holiday, the next succeeding day which is not a 
public holiday;  
(c) the last date for the withdrawal of  candidatures, which shall be the  second day after the date 
for the scrutiny of nominations or, if that day is a  public holiday, the next  succeeding day which is not 
a public holiday;  
(d) the date on which a poll shall, if necessary, be taken, which shall be a date not earlier than the  
fifteenth day after the last date for the withdrawal of the candidatures.]  
(2) In the case of the first Pr esidential and Vice -Presidential  elections, the notifications under                  
sub-section ( 1) shall be issued as soon as may be after  both Houses of Parliament have been constituted.  
(3) In the case of an election to fill a vacancy caused by the  expiration of the term of off ice of the 
President or Vice -President, the  notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued on, or as soon as 
conveniently may be after, the  sixtieth day before the expiration of the term of office of the outgoing  
President or Vice -President, as the case may be, and the dates shall be so appointed under the said                
sub-section that the election will be  completed at such time as will enable the President or the                    
Vice -President  thereby elected to ente r upon his office on the day following the expiration of the term of 
office  of the outgoing President or Vice -President, as the case may be.  
(4) In the case of an election to fill a vacancy in the office of  President or Vice -President occurring by 
reason o f his death, resignation or removal or otherwise, the notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
issued  as soon as may be after the occurrence of such vacancy.  
2[5. Public notice of election .—On the issue o f a notification under sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 4, the 
Returning Officer for the election shall gi ve public notice of the intended election in such form and in 
such manner as may be prescribed, inviting nominations of candidates for such election and specifying 
the place at which the nomination papers  are to be delivered.  
 5A. Nomination of candidates .—Any person may be nominated as a candidate for election to the  
office of President or Vice -President if he is qualified to be elected to that office under the Constitution.  
5B. Presentation of nomination  papers and requirements for  a valid nomination .—(1) On or 
before the date appointed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, each candidate shall,  either in 
person or by any of his proposers or  seconders, between the  hours of eleven o‟clock in th e forenoon and 
three o‟clock in the afternoon, deliver to the  returning officer at the place specified in this behalf in the 
public notice  issued under section 5 a nomination paper completed in the prescribed form and  subscribed 
by the candidate as assenti ng to the nomination, and  
(a) in the case of Presidential election, also by at least 3[fifty electors] as proposers and at least 
3[fifty electors] as seconders;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1974, s. 3, for  sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. .23 -3-1974).  
2.  Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 5 (w.e.f. 23 -3-1974)  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 19 97, s. 2, for “ten electors ” (w.e.f. 5 -6-1997).  5 
 (b) in the case of Vice -Presidential election, also by at least 1[twenty electors] as proposers  and at 
least 1[twenty electors]  as seconders : 
Provided that no nomination paper shall be presented to the Returning Officer on a day which is a 
public holiday.  
(2) Each nomination paper shall be accompanied by  a certified copy  of the entry relating to th e 
candidate in the electoral roll for the  parliamentary constituency in which the candidate is registered as an 
elector.  
(3) The Return ing Officer shall not accept any nomination paper  which is present ed on any day 
before eleven o‟clock in the forenoon and  after three o‟clock in the afternoon.  
(4) Any nomination paper which is not received before three  o‟clock in the afternoon on the last date 
appointed under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 4 or to which the certified copy referred to in   
sub-section (2) of this section is not attached shall be rejected and a brief  note relating to such rejection 
shall be recorded on the nomination paper  itself.  
(5) No elector shall subscribe, whether as proposer or as  seconder, more than one nomination paper at 
the same election and, if he does , his signature shall be inoperative on any paper other than the one first  
delivered.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall prevent any candidate from being  nominated by more than one 
nominat ion paper for the same election : 
Provid ed that not more than four nomination papers shall be  presented by or on behalf of any 
candidate or accepted by the Returning  Officer.  
5C. Deposit .—(1) A candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election unless he 
deposits or causes to be dep osited a sum of   2[fifteen thousand rupees] : 
Provided  that where a candiate has been nominated by more than one nomination paper for the same 
election, not more than one deposit shall be required or him under this sub -section.  
(2) The sum required to be de posited under sub -section ( 1) shall not be deemed to have been 
deposited under that sub -section unless at the time of presentation of the nomination paper under          
sub-section ( 1) of section 5B, the candidate has either deposited or caused to be depo sited that sum with 
the Returning Officer in cash or enclosed with the nomination paper a receipt showing that the said sum 
has been deposited by him or on his behalf in the Reserve Bank of India or in a Government Treasury.  
5D. Notice of nominations and t he time and place for their scrutiny .—On the presentation of a 
nomination paper, the Re turning Officer shall — 
(a) sign thereon a certificate stating the date and time of presentation of the nomination paper and 
enter thereon its serial number;  
(b) inform t he person or persons presenting the nomination paper of the date, time and place fixed 
for the scrutiny of nominations ; and 
(c) cause to be affixed in some conspicuous place in his office a copy of the nomination paper as 
certified and numbered under claus e (a). 
5E. Scrutiny of nominations .—(1) On the date fixed for the scrutiny of nomination s under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4, the candidates, one proposer or one seconder of each candidate and one other 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 35 of 1997, s. 2, for “five elector s” (w.e.f. 5 -6-1997). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “two thousand five hundred rupees ” (w.e.f. 5 -6-1997).  6 
 person duly authorised in writing b y each candidate, but no other person, shall be entitled to be present at 
the time of scrutiny of nominations and the Returning Officer shall give them all reasonable facilities for 
examining the nomination papers of all candidates which have not been reje cted under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 5B.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that it shall not be necessary to scrutinise on the 
date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations the nomination papers already rejected under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 5B.  
 (3) The Return ing Officer shall then examine the nomination papers and shall decide all objections 
which may be made to any nomination paper and may either on such objection or on his own motion, 
after such summary inquiry if any, as he thinks n ecessary, reject any nomination on any of the following 
grounds :— 
(a) that, on the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations, the candidate is not eligible for election 
as President or Vice -President, as the case may be, under the Constitution; or  
(b) that any of the proposers or seconders is not qualified to subscribe a nomination paper under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 5B; or  
(c) that the nomination paper is not subscribed by the required number of proposers or seconders; 
or 
(d) that the signature of the candidate or any of the proposers or seconders is not genuine or has 
been obtained by fraud; or  
(e) that there has been a failure to comply with any of the provisions of section 5B or section 5C.  
(4) Nothing contained in clauses ( b) to ( e) of sub -section (3) shall be deemed to authorise the 
rejection of the nomination of any candidate on the ground of any irregularity in respect of a nomination 
paper, if the candidate has been duly nominated by means of another nomination paper in respect of 
which no irreg ularity has been committed.  
(5) The Returning Officer shall not reject any nomination paper on the ground of any defect which is 
not of a substantial character.  
(6) The Returning Officer shall hold the scrutiny on the date appointed in this behalf under cl ause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 and shall not allow any adjournment of the proceedings except when such 
proceedings are interrupted or obstructed by riot or open violence or by causes beyo nd his control : 
Provided that in case an objection is raise d by the Returning Officer or is made by any other person 
the candidate concerned may be allowed time to rebut it not later than the next day but one following the 
date fixed for scrutiny, and the Returning Officer shall record his decision on the date to which the 
proceedings have been adjourned.  
(7) The Returning Officer shall endorse on each nomination paper his decision accepting or rejecting 
the same and if the nomination paper is rejected, shall record in writing a brief statement of his reasons 
for such rejection.  
(8) For the purposes of this section, a certified copy of an entry in the electoral roll for the time being 
in force shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that the person referred to in that entry is an elector for 
that constituency, unle ss it is proved that he is subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in           
section 1 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) .] 
 6. Withdrawal of candidature .—(1) Any candidate may withdraw his candidature by a notice in 
writing in the prescribed form  subscribed by him and delivered before three  o‟clock in the  afternoon on 
the date fixed under clause ( c) of sub section ( 1) of section 4, to the Returning Officer either by such 7 
 candidate in person or  1[by any one of his propo sers or seconders] who  has been a uthorised in this behalf 
in writing by such candidate.  
(2) No person who has given notice of withdrawal  of his candidature under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
allowed to cancel the  notice.  
2[(3) The Returning Officer shall, on b eing satisfied as to the genuineness of a notice of  withdrawal 
and the identity of the person delivering it under sub -section ( 1), cause the notice to be affixed in some 
conspicuous  place in his office. ] 
 7. Death of candidate before poll .—If a candidate, whose nomination has been made and is found 
to be in order on scrutiny, dies after the time fixed for nomination and a report of his death is received by 
the Re turning Officer before the commencement of the poll, the Re turning Officer shall, upon being 
satisfied of the fact of the death of the candidate, countermand the poll and report the fact to the Election 
Commission, and all proceedings with reference to the election shall be commenced a  new in all re spects 
as if for a new election : 
Provided that no fu rther nomination shall be necessary in the case of a candidate whose nomination 
was valid at the time of the countermanding of the poll:  
Provided further that no person who has under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 given a notice of 
withdrawal of his candidat ure before the countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for being 
nominated as a candidate for the election  after such countermanding.  
8. Procedure in contested and uncontested elections .—If after the expiry of the period within 
which candidatures ma y be withdrawn under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 — 
(a) there is only one candidate who has been validly nominated and has not withdrawn his 
candidature in the manner and within the time specified in that sub -section, the Returning Officer 
shall forthwith d eclare such candidate to be duly elected to the  office of President or Vice -President, 
as the case may be;  
(b) the number of candidates who have been duly nominated but have not so withdrawn their 
candidatures exceeds one, the Returning Officer shall forth with publish in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed a list containing the names in alphabetical order and addresses of candidates as 
given in the nomination papers, together with such other particulars as may be prescr ibed, and a poll 
shall be taken;  
(c) there is no candidate who ha s been duly nominated and has no t so withdrawn his candidature, 
the Re turning Officer shall report the fact to the Election Commission and thereafter all the 
proceedings in relation to the election  shall be commenced afresh  and f or that purpose the Election 
Commission shall cancel the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in respect of such 
election and issue another notification under that sub -section appointing the dates referred to in that 
sub-section for  the purposes of such fresh election.  
9. Manner of voting at elections .—At every election where a poll is taken, votes shall be given by 
ballot in such manner as may be prescribed, and no votes shall he received by proxy.  
10. Counting of votes .—At every el ection where a poll is taken, vo tes shall be counted  by, or under 
the supervision of, the Returning Officer, and each candidate and  one representative of each candidate 
authorised in writing by the candidate,  shall have a right to be present at the time of  counting.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1974, s. 5, for “by his proposer or seconder” . 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 3). 8 
 11. Declaration of results .—When the counting of the votes has been completed, the Returning 
Officer shall forthwith declare the result of the election in the manner provided by this Act or the rules 
made thereunder.  
 12. Report of the result .—As soon as may be after the result of an election has been declared, the 
Returning Officer shall report the result to the Central Government and the Election Commission, and the 
Central Government shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette the decl aration containing the 
name of the person elected to the office of President or Vice -President, as the case may be.  
1[PART III  
DISPUTES REGARDING ELECTIONS  
13. Definitions .—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “candidate ” means a perso n who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a 
candidate at an election;  
(b) “costs ” means all costs, charges and expenses of, or incidental to, a trial of an election 
petition;  
(c) “returned candidate ” means a candidate whose name has been publ ished under section 12 as 
duly elected.  
14. Authority to try election petitions .—(1) No election shall be called in question except by  
presenting an election petition to the authority specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The authority having jurisdiction to  try an election petition  shall  be the Supreme Court.  
(3) Every election petition shall be presented to such authority in  accordance with the provisions of 
this Part and of the rules made by the  Supreme Court under article 145.  
14A. Presentation of petition .—(1) An election petition calling in  question an election may be 
presented on one or more of the grounds specified  in sub -section ( 1) of section 18 and section 19, to the 
Supreme Court by any candidate  at such election or — 
(i) in the case of Presidential e lection, by twenty or more electors joined  together as petitioners;  
(ii) in the case of Vice -Presidential election, by ten or more electors joined  together as petitioners.  
(2) Any such petition may be presented at  any time after the date of publication of the declaration 
containing the name  of the return candidate at the election under section 12, but not later than thirty days 
from  the date of such publication.  
15. Form of petitions, etc., and procedure .—Subject to the  provisions of this Part, rules made 
[whether before or after the commencement  of the Presidential and Vice -Presidential Elections 
(Amendment) Act, 1977 (20 of 1977)]  by the Supreme Court under Article 145 may regulate the form of 
election  petitio ns, the manner in which they are  to be presented , the persons who are to  be made parties 
thereto, the procedure to be adopted in connection therewith  and the circum stances in which petitions ar e 
to abate, or may be withdrawn,  and in which new petitioners may be substituted, and may require security 
to be given for costs.  
16. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner .—A petitioner may claim eithe r of the following 
declarations :— 
(a) that the election of the returned candidate is void;  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1977, s. 2, fo r Part III.  9 
 (b) that the election of the returned candidate is void and that he himself or any other candidate 
has been duly elected.  
 17. Orders of the Supreme Court .—(1) At the conclusion of the trial of the  election petition, the 
Supreme Court shall make an  order — 
(a) dismissing the election petition; or  
(b) declaring the election  of the returned candidate to be void; or  
(c) declaring the election  of the returned candidate to be void and the petitioner or any other 
candidate  to have been duly elected.  
(2) At the time of making  an order under sub -section ( 1), the Supreme Court shall also make an order  
fixing the total amount of costs payable and specifying the persons by and to  whom costs shall be paid.  
18. Grounds for declaring the election of a returned candidate to be void .—(1) If the Supreme 
Court  is of opinion, — 
(a) that the offe nce of  bribery or undue influence at the election has been committed by the 
returned  candidate or by any person with the consent of the returned candidate; or  
(b) that the result of the  election has been materially affected — 
(i) by the improper  reception o r refusal of a vote ; under this Act; or 
(ii) by any non -compliance  with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any 
rules or  orders made ;  
(iii) by reason of the fact that the nomination of any candidate (other than the  successful 
candidate ), who has not withdrawn his candidature, has been wrongly accepted; or  
(c) that the nomination of any candidate has been wrongly rejected or the  nomination of the 
successful candidate has been wrongly accepted;  
the Supreme  Court shall declare  the electio n of the returned candidate to be void.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the  offences of briber y and undue influence at an election have 
the same meaning as in Chapter IXA of the Indian  Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
19. Grounds for which a candidate other than the returned candidate may he declared to have 
been elected .—If any person who has lodged an election petition has, in addition to calling in  question 
the election of the returned candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate  has 
been duly elected and  the Supreme Court is of opinion that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate 
received a majority of the valid votes, the Supreme  Court shall, after  declaring the election of the returned 
candidate to be void, declare the  petitioner or such other candidate,  as the case ma y be, to have been duly 
elected : 
Provided  that the petitioner or  such other candidate shall not be declared to be duly elected if it is 
proved  that the election of such candidate would have been void if he h ad been the  returned candidate and 
a petition had been presented calling in question his  election.  
20. Transmission of orders to the Central Government and its publication .—The Supreme Court 
shall,  after announcing the orders made under section 17, send a copy thereof to the  Central Government, 
and on receipt of such copy the Central Government shall  forthwith cause the order to be pub lished in the 
Official Gazette.]  10 
 PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
1[20A. Return or forfeiture of candidate ’s deposit .—(1) The deposit m ade under section 5C shall 
either be returned to the person making it or his legal representative or be forfeited to the Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) Except in cases hereafter mentioned in this section, the depo sit shall be returned as soon as 
practicable after the result of the election is declared.  
(3) If the candidate is not shown in the list referred to in clause ( b) of section 8, or if he dies before 
the commencement of the poll, the deposit shall be returne d as soon as practicable after the publication of 
the list or a fter his death, as the case may be.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the deposit shall be forfeited if at the election where 
the poll has been taken, the candidate is not elect ed, and the number of valid votes polled by such 
candidate does not exceed one -sixth of the number of votes necessary to secure the return of a candidate 
at such election.]  
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after consulting the Elect ion 
Commission, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules    may 
provide for all or any o f the following matte rs, namely :— 
(a) the maintenance of a list of members of the electoral college referred to in article 54 with their 
addresses corrected up to date for the purposes of Presidential elections;  
(b) the maintenance of a list of   2[members of the electoral coll ege referred to in article 66] with 
their addresses corrected up to date for the purposes of Vice -Presidential elections;  
(c) the powers and duties of a Returning Officer and the performance by any officer appointed to 
assist the Returning Officer of any f unction of the Returning Officer;  
3[(cc) the form and manner in which public notice under section 5 shall be given by the Returning 
Officer .] 
(d)  the form and manner in which nominations may be made and the procedure to be followed in 
respect of the prese ntation of nomination papers;  
(e) the scrutiny of nominations and, in particular, the manner in which such scrutiny shall be 
conducted and the conditions and circumstances under which any person may be present or may enter 
objections thereat;  
(f)  the publ ication of a list of valid nominations;  
4[(g) the place and hours of polling, the manner in with votes are to be g iven both generally and in 
the case of illiterate voters or voters not conver sant with the language in which ballot papers are 
printed or vote r under physical or other disability and the procedure as to voting to be followed at 
elections;]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1974, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -3-1974).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “members of both Houses of Parliament ”.    
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. 
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( g). 11 
 (h) the scrutiny and counting of vo tes including cases in which a re -count of the votes may be 
made before the declaration of the result of the election;  
(i) the safe custody of ballot boxes, ballot papers and other election papers, the period for which    
such papers shall be preserved and the inspection and production of such papers;  
(j) any other matter required to be prescribed by this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made under  this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such  modified form, or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
22. Maintenance of secrecy of voting .—(1) Every officer, c lerk or other person who performs any 
duty in connection with the recording or counting of vo tes at an election shall maintain, and aid in 
maintaining, the secrecy of the voting and shall not (except for some purpose authorised by or under any 
law) communi cate to any person any information calculated to violate such secrecy.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.  
23. Juris diction of civil courts barred .—Save as provided in Part III, no Civil Court shall have 
jurisdiction to question the legality of any action taken or of any decision given by the Returning Officer 
or by any other person appointed under this Act in connectio n with an election.  
 
 
_____________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1974, s. 9.  12 
 THE PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE -PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIO NS RULES, 1974  
CHAPTER I  
Preliminary  
 1. Short title and commencement .—(1) These rules1 may be called the Presidential and                 
Vice -Presidential Elec tions Rules,  1974.  
(2) They shall come into force at once.  
2. Interpretation .—(1) In these rules, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
 (a)   “Act” means the Presidential and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952  (31 of 1952) ; 
 (b)   “article” means an article of the Constitution of India;  
 (c)   “Form” means a Form appended to these rules;  
 (d)   “section” means a section of the Act.  
 (2) The General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall apply for the interpretation of these  rules as it 
applies for the interpretation of an Act of Parliament.  
CHAPTER II  
Nomination of candidates  
3. Public notice of intended election .—The public notice of an intended election referred to in 
section 5 shall be in Form 1 and shall be published by the Returning Officer by such  means, in such 
language or languages and in such places as the Election Commission may direct.  
4.   Nomination paper .—Every nomination paper presented under sub -section ( 1) of section 5B shall 
be completed in Form 2 or Form 3, as may be appropriate.  
5. No tice of withdrawal of candidature .—(1) A notice of withdrawal of candidature under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 6 shall be in Form 4.  
(2) On receipt of such notice, the Returning Officer shall note thereon the date on which and the hour 
at which it was delivered, and cause a copy thereof, together with the note, to be affixed in some 
conspicuous place in his office.  
6.  Preparation and publication of the list of contesting candidates. —In every case in which a poll 
is to be taken under cla use ( b) of section 8, the Returning Officer shall, immediately after the expiry of 
the period within which candidature may be withdrawn under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 — 
(a)  prepare in Form 5 a list of contesting candidates (that is to say, candidates w ho have been 
duly nominated but have not withdrawn their candidatures within the time specified in that behalf), 
containing the names in alphabetical order as given in the nomination papers together with their 
addresses;  
(b)   cause the list to be publishe d in the Gazette of India   and in such other manner as the 
Election   Commission may direct; and  
(c)  cause a copy of the list to be affixed in some conspicuous place in his office.  
                                                      
1. These rules were publi shed with the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department) Notification           
No. S.O. 305(E), dated 21 st May,  1974. See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3 ( ii). 13 
 CHAPTER III  
The Poll  
7. Fixing place and time of polling for Presidential election .—At every Presidential election where 
a poll is to be taken,  the Election Commission shall — 
(a)  fix a place of polling in the Parliament House in New Delhi, and also in the premises in each 
State in which the Legislative Assembly, if any, of that  State meets for the transaction of business;  
(b)  specify with reference to each such place of polling the group of electors who will be entitled 
to vote, and the hours during which the poll will be taken, at such place; and  
(c)   give due publicity to th e places so fixed and the groups of electors and the hours so specified.  
8. Fixing place and time of polling for Vice -Presidential election .—At every Vice -Presidential 
election where a poll is to be taken,  the Election Commission shall — 
(a)   fix a place o f polling in the Parliament House in New Delhi;  
(b)   specify the hours during which the poll will be taken; and  
(c)   give due publicity to the place so fixed and the hours so specified.  
9.  Presiding and polling officers .—(1) The Returning Officer or suc h Assistant Returning Officer 
as may be specified in this behalf by the Election Commission shall conduct the poll at each place of 
polling.   Every such officer is hereinafter referred to as the presiding officer.  
(2)  The presiding officer may appoint suc h polling officer or officers as he thinks necessary to assist 
him in taking the poll, but he shall not so appoint any person who has been employed by, or on behalf of, 
or has been working for, a candidate in or about the election.  
10. Design and form of b allot papers .—(1) Every ballot paper shall have a counterfoil attached 
thereto and the said ballot paper and the counterfoil shall be in such form, and the particulars therein shall 
be in such language or languages, as the Election Commission may direct.  
(2)   The names of the candidates shall be printed on the ballot paper in the same order as in the list of 
contesting candidates published under rule 6.  
(3)   Every presiding officer shall be supplied with a sufficient number of ballot papers by the 
Electio n Commission.  
11. Ballot boxes. —Every ballot box used at the poll shall be of a design previously approved by the 
Election Commission.  
12. Procedure before the commencement of poll .—(1) The presiding officer shall, immediately 
before the commencement of th e poll, allow inspection of the ballot box to be used at the poll to such 
candidates and authori sed representatives of candidates as may be present at the place of polling.  
(2)   The presiding officer shall then secure and seal the box in such manner that the slit for the 
insertion of ballot papers remains open, and shall also allow such candidates and authori sed 
representatives of candidates as may be present to affix their own seals, if they so desire.  
13. Admission to the place of polling .—(1) The presid ing officer shall exclude from the place of 
polling all persons except — 
(a)   the polling officers and other public servants on duty;  
(b)   the candidates, and one representative authori sed in writing by each candidate;  
(c)   the electors;  14 
 (d)   persons au thori sed by the Election Commission; and  
(e)    such other persons as the presiding officer may from time to time admit for the purpose of 
assisting him in taking the poll.  
(2)    The presiding officer shall close the place of polling at the hour fixed und er clause (b) of rule 7 
or, as the case may be, under clause ( b) of rule 8 for the close of the poll and shall not admit therein any 
elector after that hour:  
Provided that all electors present at the place before it is so closed shall be entitled to have t heir votes 
recorded.  
14. Procedure for giving ballot papers. —(1) The polling officer shall be furnished with an authentic 
list or part thereof of the electors entitled to vote at the place of polling.  
(2) Immediately before a ballot paper is delivered to a n elector, a mark shall be placed against his 
name in that list, and the number of the elector as shown in that list shall be entered on the counterfoil of 
the ballot paper.  
(3) The elector shall sign his name in the list in token of receipt of the ballot paper, whereupon, but 
not earlier, the ballot paper shall be delivered to him.  
15.  Supply of fresh ballot paper in certain circumstances. —(1) An elector who has inadvertently 
dealt with his ballot paper in such a manner that it cannot be conveniently used  as a ballot paper may, on 
delivering it to the presiding officer and on satisfying him of the inadvertence, obtain another ballot paper 
in place of the ballot paper so delivered, and the latter shall, together with its counterfoil, be marked as 
cancelled by the presiding officer.  
(2) Any ballot papers so cancelled shall be kept in a separate envelope set apart for the purpose.  
16.  Return of unused ballot papers by electors .—If an elector after obtaining any ballot paper for 
the purpose of recording his vo te decides not to use the same, he shall return the ballot paper to the 
presiding officer, who shall mark it „Returned and cancelled‟ and keep it in a separate envelope set apart 
for the purpose.  
17.  Manner of recording votes. —(1) Every elector shall have  as many preferences as there are 
candidates but no ballot paper shall be considered invalid solely on the ground that all such preferences 
are not marked.  
(2)   An elector in giving his vote — 
(a)   shall place on his ballot paper the figure 1 in the space  opposite the name of the candidate 
whom he chooses for his first preference; and  
(b)   may, in addition, mark as many subsequent preferences as he wishes by placing on his ballot 
paper the figures 2,  3 ,4 and so on, in the spaces opposite the names of oth er candidates, in order of 
preference.  
Explanation .—The figures referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of this sub -rule may be marked in the 
international form of Indian numerals or in the Roman form or in the form used in any Indian 
language but shall not be indicated in words.   
(3)   The presiding officer shall, if requested by an elector, explain to him the instructions contained 
on the ballot paper for the recording of   votes.  
18. Maintenance of secrecy of voting by electors within place of polling and voti ng procedure .—
(1) Every elector to whom a ballot paper has been delivered under rule 14 shall maintain secrecy of voting 
within the place of polling and for that purpose observe the voting procedure hereinafter laid down.  
(2) An elector on receiving the ba llot p aper shall forthwith — 
(a)   proceed to one of the voting compartments;  15 
 (b)   record his vote in accordance with sub -rule ( 2) of rule 17;  
(c)   fold the ballot paper so as to conceal his vote;  
(d)   insert the folded ballot paper into the ballot box; and 
(e)   quit the place of polling.  
(3) Every elector shall vote without undue delay.  
(4) No elector shall be allowed to enter a voting compartment when another elector is inside it.  
19. Recording of votes of illiterate or disabled elector .—(1) If an elec tor is unable to read the ballot 
paper or to record his vote thereon in accordance with rule 17 by reason of illiteracy or blindness or, by 
not being conversant with the language in which the ballot papers are printed or, by reason of any 
physical or other  disability, the presiding officer shall record the vote on the ballot paper in accordance 
with the wishes of the elector.  
(2) The elector shall then himself or with the assistance of the presiding officer fold up the ballot 
paper so as to conceal his vote  and insert it into the ballot box.  
(3) While acting under this rule, the presiding officer shall observe as much secrecy as is feasible and 
shall keep a brief record of each such instance but shall not indicate therein the manner in which any vote 
has bee n cast.  
20. Account of ballot papers .—(1) The presiding officer shall at the close of the poll prepare a ballot 
paper account in Form 6 and enclose it in a separate cover with the words “Ballot Paper Account” 
superscribed thereon.  
(2)  The presiding office r shall permit the authori sed representative of a candidate, who so desires, to 
take a true copy of the entries in the ballot paper account and shall attest it as true copy.  
21.  Sealing up of ballot boxes and papers after the close of poll .—(1) As soon as  practicable after 
the close of poll the presiding officer shall, in the presence of such candidates and authori sed 
representatives of candidates as may be present, close and seal up the slit as well as the ballot box.  
(2)  He shall also make up into separ ate packets — 
 (a)   the copy of the list of electors ma rked in accordance with rule 14;  
 (b)   the counterfoils of ballot papers;  
(c)   the ballot papers cancelled under rules 15 and 16; and  
(d)   the unused ballot papers,   
and seal each such packet with h is own seal and the seals of those candidates and authori sed 
representatives of candidates who may desire to affix their seal thereon.  
22. Transfer of ballot papers from ballot boxes in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in rule 21, the Election Commission may, at a Presidential election, direct the presiding officer 
at any place of polling other than the Parliament House in New Delhi to follow after the close of the poll 
the procedure laid down in this rule instead of the procedure laid down in sub -rule ( 1) of rule 21.  
(2) Where a direction has been issued under sub -rule ( 1), the presiding officer shall, as soon as 
practicable after the close of the poll, open the ballot box in the presence of such candidates and 
authori sed representative s of candidates as may be present and transfer all the ballot papers contained in it 
without examining or counting them into a separate cover and record on such cover — 
(a) the name of the place of polling; and  16 
 (b) the date of the poll.  
(3)   After such tra nsfer he shall allow the candidates and their authori sed representatives who may be 
present, to inspect the ballot box and demonstrate to them that it is empty.  
(4)   He shall then seal the cover with his own seal and the seals of those candidates and auth orised 
representatives of candidates who may desire to affix their seals thereon.  
(5)   The cover so sealed shall, for the purposes of rules 23,  25, 32 and 33, be deemed to be the ballot 
box used at that place of polling and the provisions of those rules s hall apply accordingly.  
23. Despatch and custody of ballot boxes and papers .—(1) At a Presidential election, the presiding 
officer at every place of polling other than the Parliament House in New Delhi shall forthwith cause the 
sealed ballot box and packet s and all other papers used at the poll to be sent to the Returning Officer in 
accordance with   such general or special instructions as may be issued in that behalf by the Election 
Commission.  
(2)  The Returning Officer shall make adequate arrangements for  the safe custody of all sealed ballot 
boxes and packets and other papers used at the poll, until the commencement of the counting of votes.  
24. Adjournment of poll in emergencies. —(1) If the proceeding s at any place of polling are 
interrupted or obstructe d by riot or   open violence, or if it is not possible to take the poll at any such place 
on account of a natural calamity or other sufficient cause, the presiding officer shall announce an 
adjournment of the poll to a date to be notified later, and immedia tely report the circumstances to the 
Election Commission and, unless he is the Returning Officer, also to the Returning Officer.  
(2) Whenever a poll is adjourned under sub -rule (1), the Election Commission shall, as soon as may 
be , fix the day on which, t he place at which, and the hours during which the adjourned poll shall be 
taken, and shall notify the said details to all concerned in such manner as it may think fit.  
(3)   On the date on which such adjourned poll is taken, the electors who have already v oted at the 
poll before its adjournment will not be entitled to vote, but only the remaining electors who were entitled 
to vote at the place of polling before its adjournment may vote.  
25.   Fresh poll in case of destruction, etc., of ballot boxes .—(1) If at an election, any ballot box is 
unlawfully taken away from the custody of the presiding officer or the Returning Officer or is in any way 
tampered with, destroyed or lost, the poll taken at the place of polling where that ballot box was used 
shall be dee med to have been vitiated; and the Returning Officer shall, as soon as practicable, report the 
matter to the Election Commission, which shall appoint a day for the taking of a fresh poll at that place 
and fix the hours during which it will be taken.  
(2)  In every such case as aforesaid, the provisions of these rules shall apply to the fresh poll as they 
apply to the original poll.  
26. Voting by electors under preventive detention .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the fore 
going provisions of this Chapter, an  elector may, if he is subjected to preventive detention under any law 
for the time being in force, give his vote by postal ballot.  
(2) The Election Commission shall send by registered post to the officer -in-charge of the jail or other 
place where the elec tor is detained the appropriate ballot paper, together with a form of declaration of 
identity and attestation of signature and necessary envelopes specially prepared for the purpose and a 
letter of instructions, so as to reach that officer in good time bef ore the date fixed for polling.  
(3)  On the date of polling the said officer shall deliver the ballot paper and other necessary papers to 
the elector, allow him all reasonable facilities and sufficient time, not exceeding two hours, for recording 
his vote in accordance with the instructions of the Election Commission, and if and when the elector has 
so recorded his vote, send the ballot paper and other connected papers in a sealed cover, either by 17 
 registered post or through   a special messenger, to the Retu rning Officer so as to reach him before the 
time fixed for the counting of votes under rule 27.  
(4)  It shall be the duty of every Government to intimate to the Election Commission at the 
appropriate time the names of electors, if any, who are subjected to  preventive   detention by or under the 
authority of that Government, together with the necessary particulars as to their places of detention.  
CHAPTER IV  
COUNTING OF VOTES AND DECLATATION OF RESULT  
27. Place and time for counting of votes .—The counting of v otes shall take place at the office of the 
Returning Officer in New Delhi on such day and at such time as the Election Commission may appoint in 
this behalf; and the Election Commission shall give notice to all the candidates of the date and time so 
appoin ted. 
28.  Admission to the place fixed for counting .—The Returning Officer     shall exclude     from the 
place fixed for count ing of votes all persons except — 
(a)   such persons as he may appoin t to assist him in the counting;  
(b)   the candidates and one r epresentative at time a  authori sed in writing by each candidate ;  
(c) public servants on duty in connection with the election ; and  
(d) persons authoris ed by the Election Commission.  
29. Maintenance of secrecy of voting .—Before the counting begins,   the Re turning Officer    shall 
read out the provisions of section 22 to the persons present.  
30.  Statement showing the number of votes of each elect or at the Presidential election. —For the 
purposes of every Presidential election, the Election Commission    shall furnish    the Returning Officer 
with a statement    showing the number of votes which  every  elector has under the provisi ons of clause (2) 
of article 55 ;  and every ballot paper put in by an elector   at that   election shall be deemed to represent as 
many vo tes as that elector is shown as having in that statement.  
31. Ballot papers when invalid .—(1) A ballot paper shall be invalid on which — 
(a) the figure 1 is not marked; or  
(b) the figure 1 is marked opposite the name of more than one candidate or is so mark ed as to 
render it doubtful to which candidate it is intended to apply; or  
(c) the figure 1 and some other figure are marked opposite the name of the same candidate; or  
(d) any mark is made by which the elector   may afterwards be identified.  
Explanation. —The figures referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of this sub -rule may be marked 
in the international form of Indian numerals or in the Roman form or in the form used in any Indian 
language, but shall not be indicated in words.  
(2)  A ballot paper shall a lso be invalid if, being a postal ballot paper, the signature of the elector is 
not duly attested.  
32. Procedure upon opening each ballot box. —After each ballot box and also each sealed cover          
(if any) received under sub -rule ( 3) of rule 26, has be en opened, the Returning Officer shall — 
(a)    count the number of ballot papers taken out  there from and complete Part II of the Ballot 
Paper Account in Form 6;  
(b)   scrutini se the ballot papers and separate those which in his opinion are valid from thos e 
which in his opinion are invalid, endorsing on the latter the word „rejected‟ and the ground of 
rejection; and  18 
 (c)  arrange all the valid ballot papers in parcels according to the first preferences recorded for 
each candidate:  
Provided that if, at a Pres idential election, the ballot box used at a place of polling contains ballot 
papers of electors who, at their request are specially permitted by the Election Commission in pursuance 
of rule 7 to cast their votes at the said place of polling, such ballot pa pers shall, after the counting and 
recording in Form 6 is completed, be separated and added to the other ballot papers of the same kind used 
by electors in the same category and shall thereafter be scrutini sed. 
33. Determination of result .—After all the ba llot boxes and sealed covers (if any) have been opened 
and the ballot papers have been scrutini sed and arranged, the Returning Officer shall proceed to determine 
the result of the voting in accordance with the instructions contained in the Schedule to thes e rules.  
34. Recounting .—The Returning Officer may, either on his own initiative or at the instance of any 
candidate or of the authori sed representative of a candidate in the absence of that candidate, recount votes, 
whether once or more than once, when th e Returning Officer is not satisfied as to the accuracy of a 
previous count:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall make it obligatory on the Returning Officer to recount 
the same votes more than once.  
35. Declaration of result .—(1) When the counting  is complete and the result of the voting has been 
determined, the Returni ng Officer shall forthwith — 
(a)  announce the result to those present;  
(b) report the result to the Central Government and the Election Commission under section 12;  
(c) prepare and c ertify a return of the election in Form 7; and  
(d) seal up in separate packets the valid ballot papers and the rejected ballot papers and record on 
each such packet a description of its contents.  
(2) The Returning Officer shall, as soon as may be thereafte r, forward the certified return to the 
Election Commission.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLENOUS  
 36. Custody of ballot boxes and election papers .—All ballot boxes used at the election and the 
packets of ballot papers and all other papers relating to the election shall,  after the election, be kept in 
such custody as the Election Commission may direct.  
 37. Production and inspection of election papers. —(1) The packets of ballot papers, whether valid 
or rejected, and their counterfoils and the packets containing the lists of electors marked in accordance 
with rule 14 shall not be opened, nor shall their contents be inspected by, or produced before, any person 
or authority, except under the order of the Supreme Court or other competent court.   
(2) All other papers relating t o the election shall be open to public inspection subject to such 
conditions and to the payment of such fee, if any, as the Election Commission may direct.  
 38. Disposal of election papers .—The packets and other papers referred to in rule 37 shall be 
retained for a period of two years from the date of declaration of the result of the election, and shall 
thereafter be destroyed unless a direction to the contrary is given by the Supreme Court or other 
competent court or by the Election Commission.  
 39. Copies  of return of election .—Copies of the certified return of the election referred to in rule 35 
shall be furnished by the Election Commission on payment of a fee of one rupee per copy.  
 40. List of electors .—The Election Commission shall maintain a list of m embers of the electoral 
college referred to in article 54 and a list of members of the electoral college referred to in article 66, with 
their addresses corrected up to date for the purposes, respectively, of Presidential election and                  
Vice -Presidential election.  
 41. Repeal .—The Presidential and Vice -Presidential Election Rules, 1952, are hereby repealed.  19 
 FORM 1  
(See rule 3) 
PUBLIC NOTICE  
OF 
ELECTION TO THE OFFICE OF  *PRESIDENT/ *VICE -PRESIDENT OF INDIA  
Whereas  a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Presidential and Vice -Presidential 
Elections Act, 1952, for the holding of an election to fill the office of President/Vice -President of India 
has been issued by the Election Commission, I……………………., the Returning Officer for suc h 
electi on, do hereby give notice that — 
 (i)  nomination papers may be delivered by a candidate or any one of his proposers or seconders 
to the undersigned at his office in ………………New Delhi, or if he is unavoidably absent, to 
……………………..at the said office be tween 1 1 a.m. and 3 p.m. on any day (o ther than a public 
holiday) not later than the……………………………;  
(ii) each nomination paper shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the entry relating to the 
candidate in the electoral roll for the Parliamentary constitu ency in which the candidate is registered 
as an elector;  
(iii) every candidate shall deposit or cause to be deposited a sum of 1[rupees fifteen thousand]  
only.   This amount may be deposited in cash with the Returning   Officer at the time of presentation of  
the nomination paper or deposited earlier in the Reserve Bank of India or in a Government Treasury 
and in the latter case a receipt showing that the said deposit of the sum has been so made is required 
to be enclosed with the nomination paper;  
(iv) forms of nomination papers may be obtained from the above said office at the times 
aforesaid;  
(v) the nomination papers, other than those rejected under sub -section ( 4) of section 5B of the 
Act, w ill be taken up for scrutiny at ….(place) on…………………….(date) at ………… ….(hours);  
(vi) the no tice of withdrawal of candidatures may be delivered by a candidate, or any one of his 
proposers or seconders who has been authori sed in   this behalf in writing by the candidate, to the 
undersigned at the place specified in paragraph ( i) above before three o‟clock in the afternoon of 
…….(date);  
(vii) in the event of the election being contested, the poll will be taken on ………….(date) 
between hours of …………..and…………..at the places of polling fixed  under the rules.  
  
Place …………………….                                                                  (Signature )…………  
                     (Returning Officer ) 
 
 
Dated the ……………….                                                  
                                                                                                    (Designation )…………….  
                                                      
*Strike off if inapplicable.  
1. Subs. by   S.O.43 1(E) , dated 6th June,1997 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1997).  20 
 FORM 2  
(See rule 4) 
NOMINATION PAPER  
ELECTION TO THE OFFICE   OF THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA  
 We hereby nominate……………………………………………………………... .............  
(Full name and address of the candidate)  
 as a candidate for elec tion to the office of the President of India.  
 We have verified, and do hereby declare, that the said candidate has completed the age of  35 years 
and is registered in the electoral roll for the Parliamentary constituency 
of…………………………………in the State of ……… ………  
A certified copy of the entry in that electoral roll relating to the said candidate is attached.  
We further declare that we are members of the electoral college referred to in article 54 of the 
Constitution   being elected members of the House of the Pe ople or Council of States or the Legislative 
Assembly as indicated hereunder and we append our signatures below in token of subscribing to this 
nomination: — 
Particulars of the proposers and their signatures  
 
SI. No.  Full name  Whether elected 
member of the house 
of the people/Council 
of States/Legislative 
Assembly  State/Union territory (in the 
case of member elected to 
the House of the People or 
Council of States from a 
Union territory) in/ from 
which elected  Signature  Date  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1.      
2.      
3.      
4.      
5.      
6.      
7.      
8.      
9.      
10.      
11.      
12.      
13.      
14.      
15.      
*etc.      
*[There should be at least fifty electors as proposers.]1 
                                                      
1. Subs. by S.O. 431(E), dated 6th June, 1997 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1997).  21 
 Particulars of the seconders and their signatures  
 
S. l. No.  Full name        Whether elected 
member of the house 
of the People/Council 
of States/Legislative 
Assembly  State/Union territory 
(in the case of member 
elected to the House of 
the People or Council 
of States from a Union 
territory) in/ from 
which elected  Signat ure  Date  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1.      
2.      
3.      
4.      
5.      
6.      
7.      
8.      
9.      
10.      
11.      
12.      
13.      
14.      
15.      
*etc.      
*[There should be at least fifty electors as seconders .]1 
I assent to this nomi nation.  
           .............................  
                                                                                                   Signature of candidate  
                                                                                                       
         Date ………………..  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by S.O. 431(E), dated 6th June, 1997 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1997).  22 
 (To be filled by the Returning Officer)  
  
Serial Number of nomination paper……………………………………………………….  
           This nomination paper was delivered to me at my office at…………..(hour) on……….(date) by 
the candidate/prop oser………………(name)/seconder…………(name) with enclosures as indicated 
below purporting to be — 
 (1)  
 (2) 
  
Date ……………                                                                        …………………..  
                                                                                                   Returning Officer . 
  
[Decision of the Returning Officer (if any) under sub -section (4) of section 5B  
 I have rejected this nomination paper under sub -section ( 4) of section 5B of the Presidential and 
Vice -Presidential Ele ctions Act, 1952 for the reasons given below — 
 
 
Date ………….                                                                                      ………………..  
                                                                                                              Returning Officer ] 
Decision of the Returning Officer accepting or rejecting the nomination paper  
 I have examined this nomination paper in accordance with section 5E of the Presidential and       
Vice -Presidential Elections Ac t, 1952 and decide as fol lows: — 
                                                                                                                                                                    
 
Date …………….                                                                      …………… …….  
                                                                                                   Returning Officer  
  
  
(Perforation)…………………………………………………………………… .....................................  23 
 Receipt for Nomination Paper and Notice of Scrutiny  
(To be handed over to the person presenting the nomination   paper)  
Serial Number of the nomination paper……………………………………………….  
 The nomination paper of………………..(name), a candidate for election to the office of the 
President of India, was delivered to me at my o ffice at………….(hour) on.. ..............................................  
..........(date) by the candidate/proposer....................(name)/seconder.................................(name).  
 All nomination papers, other than those rejected under sub -section  (4) of section 5B of the 
Presidential and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952, will be taken up for scrutiny 
at………………………….(hour) on………………….(date) at…… …..(place ). 
 [2. The nomination paper of this candidate has been rejected by me under sub -section ( 4) of section 
5B of the Presidential and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 19 52 for the reasons given   below: —] 
  
   
Date ………………………….                                                   ………………………..  
                                                                                                                        Returning Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ ] Score out if not applicable.  24 
 FORM 3  
(See rule 4) 
NOMINATION PAPER  
ELECTION TO THE OFFICE OF THE VICE -PRESIDENT OF INDIA.  
 We, the undersigned Members of the electoral co llege referred to in article 66 of the Constitution 
being Members of Parliament hereby nominate……………………………….  
……………………………………(full name and address of candidate)  as a candidate for election to the 
office of the Vice -President of India.  
         We have verif ied, and do hereby declare, that the said candidate has completed the age of 35 years   and 
is registered in the electoral roll for the Parliamentary constituency of ………………………in the State 
of ……………………………….  
  A certified copy of the entry in that electoral ro ll relating to t he said candidate is attached.  We 
furnish our full particulars as indicated hereunder and append our signatures below in token of 
subscribing to this nomination.  
Particulars of the proposers and their signatures  
 
Sl. No.  Full name  Whether member of the 
House of the 
People/Council States  State/Union 
territory from 
which  Signature  Date  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1.      
2.      
3.      
4.      
5.      
6.      
7.      
8.      
9.      
10.      
*etc.      
*[There should be at least fifty electors  as proposers .]1 
                                                      
1. Subs. by S.O. 431(E), dated 6th June, 1997 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1997).  25 
 Particulars of the seconders and their signatures  
  
Sl. No.  Full name  Whether member of the 
House of the 
People/Council of 
States  State/Union 
territory from 
which elected  Signature  Date  
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1.      
2.      
3.      
4.      
5.      
6.      
7.      
8.      
9.      
10.      
*etc.      
*[There should be at least  fifty electors as seconders.]1 
 I assent to this nomination.  
  
                                                                                                                         …………………..  
                                                                                                              Signature of candidate . 
Date ........................
                                                      
1. Subs. by S.O . 431(E), dated 6 th June, 1997 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1997).  26 
  
(To be filled by the Returning Officer ) 
 Serial Number of nomi nation paper……………………….  
         This nomination was delivered to me at my office a t……………(hour) 
on………………………..(date) by the candidate/proposer........................(name)/seconder..............(name) 
with enclosures as indicates below purporting to be — 
  
            (1) 
            (2) 
 Date ……………..  
  
  ………………………  
  Returning Officer  
  
[Decision of the Returning Officer (if any) under sub -section (4) of section 5B  
      I have rejected this nomination paper under sub -section ( 4) of section 5B of the President ial and  
Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952 , for the reasons given below: — 
  
   
Date ……………                                                                                              ………………….  
                                                                                                                                    Returning Officer ] 
             
Decision of the Returning Officer accepting or rejecting the nomination paper.  
 I have examined this nomination paper in accordance with section 5E of the  Presidential and             
Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952  and decide as follows: — 
  
 Date ……………                                                                                              ………………….  
                                                                                                                                    Returning Officer  
  
(Perforation)………………………………………………………………………………………..  27 
 Receipt for nomination paper and notice of scrutiny  
(To be handed over to the person presenting the nomi nation paper)  
 Serial Number of the nomination paper……………………………………………………….  
The nomination of …………………..(name), a candidate for election to the office of the                   
Vice -President of India was delivered to me at my office at………………………(hour) 
on…………… …(date)  by the candidate/proposer.........................(name)/seconder....................(name).  
All nomination papers other than those rejected under sub -section ( 4) of section 5B of the Presidential 
and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952, will be taken up for scrutiny 
at…………………………………….(hour)  on....................................(date) at.............................(place).  
   [2. The nomination paper of this candidate has been rejected by me under sub -section ( 4) of section 5B 
of the Presidential  and Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952 , for the reasons given below: —] 
 Date ……………..                                                                                                                                            
                                                                          
               ........................ ..........  
             
                Returning Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ ] Score out if not applicable.  
 
  28 
 FORM 4  
[See rule  5(1)] 
NOTICE  OF WITHDRAWL  
To 
          The Retur ning  Officer   for the election to the office of President/Vice -President of India . 
           I,………………………………..(name) of………….(address) a candidate at the above -
mentioned election do hereby give notice that I withdraw my candidature.  
  
Place ………………                                                                       ……………….........  
Date …………………                                                                   Signature of candidate  
______________________________________________________________________________  
Note:—The notice of withdrawal is required to   be delivered under section 6( 1) of the Presidential and 
Vice -Presidential Elections Act, 1952, by the candidate in      person   or   by any one of his 
proposers or seconders    who has been authori sed in this beh alf in writing by such candidate.  29 
 FORM 5  
[See rule  6(a)] 
ELECT ION TO THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT/ VICE -PRESIDENT  OF INDIA  
List of contesting    Candidate s 
 
Sl. No.  Name of candidate  Address of candidate  
1.   
2.   
3.   
4.   
etc.   
 
 
 
 
 
Place ............... ................  
Date. .............................        ...............................  
          Returning Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
 FORM 6  
(See rule  20) 
PART I —BALLOT PAPER ACCOUNT  
ELECTION TO  THE OFFICE OF PRESIDENT/VICE -PRESIDENT OF INDIA  
  
Name of the place  of polling………………………………..  
  
  Serial Numbers  Total Numbers  
     From       to  
1. Ballot papers received    
2. Ballot papers unused    
3. Ballot papers issued to voters    
4. Ballot papers cancelled.    
                                                                                 
  
  
Date ………………..                                                                           …………………………….  
                                                                                                          Signature of   Presiding Officer  
  
PART II —RESULT OF COUNTING  
(See rule  32) 
(1)  Total number of ballot papers found in the ballot box (boxes) used at the place 
of polling…………………………..  
 (2)    Discrepancy if any between the total number as shown against item (1) in this Part   and 
the    total  number of ballot papers issued to voters as shown in item  3 of Part I minus  the number of 
ballot papers   cancelled as shown in item 4 of Part I.  
  
  
  
Date …………………………..                                                     ………………………………  
                                                                                                       Signature of the Returning Officer . 31 
 FORM 7  
[See rule  35(1)(c)] 
RETURN OF ELECTION TO  THE OFFICE  OF PRESIDENT/VICE -PRESIDENT OF INDIA  
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Serial No.  
Name  
of 
Candidate  
Votes secured at first count  
Votes credited at first exclusion  
Total of columns 3 and 4  
Votes credited at second exclusion  
Total of columns 5 and 6  
Votes credited at third exclusion  
Total of columns 7 and 8  
Votes credited at fourth exclusion  
Total of columns 9 and 10      
               
Exhausted votes               
TOTAL               
 
Total No. of valid ballot papers……………….representing …………………votes.  
Total number of invalid ballot papers…………..representing …………….. votes.  
  
I declare that  
   
(Name)………………………………………………………………………………..  
(Address)……………………………………………………………………………….  
  
has been duly elected to the office of   the President/Vice -President of India.  
  
Place …………………..  
 Date …………………….                                                                          ……………………….  
                                                                                                                 Returning Officer  32 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See rule  33) 
Instructions for the determination of Result  
1. In this Schedule — 
 (1)   the expression “continuing candidate” means any candidate not elected and not excluded 
from the poll at any given time.  
 (2)   the expression “first preference” means the figure I set opposite the name  of any candidate, 
the expressio n  “second preference” similarly means the figure 2,  the expression “third preference” 
the figure 3, and so on;  
 (3)   the expression   “next available preference” means the second or subsequent preference 
recorded in consecutive numerical order for a conti nuing candidate, preferences for candidates 
already excluded being ignored;  
 (4)   the expression “unexhausted paper” means a ballot paper on which a further   preference is 
recorded for a continuing   candidate;  
 (5)   the expression “exhausted paper” means  a ballot paper on which no further preference is 
recorded for a continuing candidate, provided that a paper shall be deemed to be e xhausted in any 
case in which — 
 (a) the names of two or more candidates whether continuing    or not are marked with the 
same  figure, and are next in order of preference; or  
 (b) the name of the candidate next in order of preference, whether continuing or not ,is 
marked by a figure not following   consecutively after some other figure on the ballot paper or by 
two or more figures . 
2. Every ballot paper  represents at each count — 
 (a) in a Presidential election, the number of votes as determined under rule 30; and  
 (b) in a   Vice -Presidential election,   one vote.  
 3. Ascertain the number of first    preference votes secured by eac h candidate and credit him with  that 
number.  
 4. Add up   the numbers so credited to all the candidates, divide the total by two, and add one to the 
quotient disregarding any    remainder. The resulting number is the quota sufficient to secure the turn of a 
candidate at the election.  
 5. If at the end of   the first or any subsequent count, the total number of votes credited to any 
candidate is equal to, or greater than, the quota, or there is only one continuing candidate, that candidate is 
declared elected.  
6. If at the end of any count, no can didate can be declared elected, — 
 (a)  exclude the candidate who up to that stage has been credited with the lowest number of 
votes.  
 (b) examine all the ballot papers in his parcel and sub -parcels,   arrange the unexhauste d papers in 
sub-parcels according to the next available preferences recorded thereon for the continuing 
candidates, count the number of votes in each such sub -parcel and credit it to the candidate for whom 33 
 such preference is recorded, transfer the sub -parcel to that candidate, and make as   separate sub -parcel 
of all the exhausted papers; and  
 (c) see whether any of the continuing candidates has, after such transfer and credit, secure    the 
quota.  
     If, when a candidate has to be excluded under clause  (a) above, two or more candidates have been 
credited with the same number of votes  and stand lowest on the poll,  exclude that  candidate who had 
secured the lowest number of first preference votes,   and if that number  also was the same in the case of 
two or mo re or more candidates, decide by lot which   of them  shall be excluded.  
 All the sub -parcels of exhausted papers referred to in clause ( b) above shall be  set apart as finally 
dealt with and the votes recorded thereon shall not thereafter be taken into  accou nt. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952--------------------------
1 THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY ACT, 1952  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and duration.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to requisition immovable property.  
4. Power to take possession of requisitioned property.  
5. Rights over requisitioned property.  
6. Release from requisitioning  
7. Power to acquire requisitioned property.  
8. Principles and method of determining compensation.  
9. Payment of compensation.  
10. Appeals from orders of requisiti oning.  
11. Appeals from awards in respect of compensation.  
12. Competent authority and arbitrator to have certain powers of civil courts.  
13. Power to obtain information.  
14. Power to enter and inspect.  
15. Service of notice and orders.  
16. Easement not to  be disturbed.  
17. Delegation of powers.  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
19. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
20. Penalty for offences.  
21. Certain persons to be public servants.  
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Validation of certain requisitions and acquisitions.  
24. Repeals and savings.  
25. Special provision as to certain requisitions under Act 51 of 1962.  
26. Special provision as to certain requisitions under Act 42 of 1971.  2 THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 30 OF 19521 
[14th March , 1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the requisitioning and acquisition of immovable property for the purposes 
of the Union.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
 1. Short title, extent and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the Requisitioning and Acqui sition 
of Immovable Property Act, 1952.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “award ” means any award of an arbitrator made under section 8;  
(b) “competent authority ” means any person or authority authorised  by the Central Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent authority under this 
Act for such area as may be specified in the notification;  
(c) “landlord ” means any person who for the time being is receivi ng or is entitled to receive, the 
rent of any premises, whether on his own account, or on account or on behalf or for the benefit, of 
any other person or as a trustee, guardian or receiver for any other person, or who would so receive 
the rent or be entitl ed to receive the rent if the premises were let to a tenant;  
(d) the expression “person interested ”, in relation to any property, includes all persons claiming, 
or entitled to claim, an interest in the compensation payable on account of the requisitioning or 
acquisition of that property under this Act;  
(e) “premises ” means any building or p art of a building and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such building or part of a 
building;  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such buil ding or part of a building for the more beneficial 
enjoyment thereof;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “property ” means immovable property of every kind and includes any rights in or over such 
property;  
(h) “tenant ” means any person by whom or on whose account rent is payable for any premises 
and includes such sub -tenants and other persons as have derived title under the tenant under any law 
for the time being in force.  
3. Power to requisition immovable property .—(1) Where the competent authority is of opin ion that 
any property is needed or likely to be needed for any public purpose, being a purpose of the Union, and 
that the property should be requisit ioned, the competent authority — 
(a) shall call upon the owner or any other person who may be in possession of the property by 
notice in writing (specifying therein the purpose of the requisition) to show cause, within fif teen days 
of the date of the service of such notice on him, why the property should not be requisit ioned; and  
                                                           
1.  This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I and Goa, Daman and Diu by 
Notification . No. G.S.R. 388, dated the 15th March. 1967, Gazette of India, Pt. II., Sec. 3 ( i), p. 471 to and brought into 
force in the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) by Noti fication . No. S.O. 4514, dated 27th November, 1976.  
This Act has been amended in Goa, Daman and Diu by Goa, Daman and Diu Act 6 of 1977.  
2. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by Act 1 of 1970, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -3-1970).  3 (b) may, by order, direct that neither the owner of the property nor any other person shall, without 
permission of the competent authority, dispose of, or structurally alter, the property or let it out to a 
tenant until the expiry of such period , not exceeding two months, as may be specified in the order.  
(2) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any person interested in the property or in 
possession thereof, the competent authority is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to  do, it may, 
by order in writing, requisition the property and may make such further orders as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient in connection with the requisitioning:  
Provided th at no property or part thereof — 
(a) which is bona fide  used by the owner thereof as the residence of himself or his family, or  
(b) which is exclusively used either for religious worship by the public or as a school, hospital, 
public library or an orphanage or for the purpose of accommodation of persons connec ted with the 
management of such place of worship or such school, hospital, library or orphanage,  
shall be requisitioned:  
Provided further that where the requisitioned property consists of premises which are being used as a 
residence by a tenant for not less than two months immediately preceding the date of the service of notice 
under sub -section ( 1), the competent authority shall provide such tenant with alternative accommodation 
which, in its opinion, is suitable.  
4. Power to take possession of requisit ioned property .—(1) Where any property has been 
requisitioned under section 3, the competent  authority may, by notice in writing, order the owner as wel l 
as any other person who may be in possession of the property to surrender or deliver possession thereof to 
the competent authority or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf within thirty days of the service 
of the notice.  
(2) If any person refuse s or fails to comply with an order made under sub -section ( 1), the compe tent 
authority may take possession of the property and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
5. Rights over requisitioned property .—(1) All property requisitioned under section 3, shall be used 
for such purposes as may be mentioned in the notice of requisition.  
(2) Where any premises are requisitioned under section 3, the competent authority may order the 
landlord to execute such repairs as m ay be necessary and are usually made by landlords in that locality 
and as may be specified in the notice, within such reasonable time as may be mentioned therein, and if the 
landlord fails to execute any repairs in pursuance of such order, the competent au thority may cause the 
repairs specified in the order to be executed at the expense of the landlord and the cost thereof may, 
without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be deducted from the compensation payable to the 
landlord.  
6. Release from requisi tioning .—(1) The Central Government may at any time release from 
requisition any property requisitioned under this Act and shall, as far as possible, restore the property in 
as good a condition as it was when possession thereof was taken subject only to th e changes caused by 
reasonable wear and tear and irresistible force:  
Provided that where the purposes for which any requisitioned property was being used cease to exist, 
the Central Government shall, unless the property is acquired under section 7, release  that prop erty, as 
soon as may be, from requisition.  
1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government s hall release 
from requisition, — 
(a) any property requisitioned or deemed to be requisitioned und er this Act before  the 
commence ment of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment)                 
Act, 1970  (1 of 1970) , on or before the expiry of a period of  2[seventeen years ] from such 
commencement;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -3-1970).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1985, s. 2, for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 8 -3-1985).   4 (b) any  property requisitioned under this Act after such commencement, on or before the expiry 
of a period of  1[seventeen years ] from the date on which possession of such property was surren dered 
or delivered to, or taken by, the competent authority under sect ion 4, 
unless such property is acquired under section 7 within the period of  1[seventeen years ] aforesaid.]  
(2) Where any property is to be released from requisition,  2[under sub -section (1) or sub-section ( 1A)] 
the competent authority may, after such inquiry, if any, as it may in any case consider necessary to make 
or cause to be made, specify by order in writing the person to whom possession of the property shall be 
given and such possession shall, as far as practicable, be given to the person from wh om possession was 
taken at the time of the requisition or to the successors -in-interest of such person.  
(3) The delivery of possession of the property to the person specified in an order under                   
sub-section ( 2) shall be a full discharge of  the Central Government from all liability in respect of the 
property, but shall not prejudice any rights in respect of the property which any other person may be 
entitled by due process of law to enforce against the person to whom possession of the prope rty is given.  
(4) Where any person to whom possession of any requisitioned property is to be given is not found 
and has no agent or other person empowered to accept delivery on his behalf, the competent authority 
shall cause a notice declaring that the pro perty is released from requisition to be affixed on some 
conspicuous part of the property and shall also publish the notice in the Official Gazette.  
(5) When a notice referred to in sub -section ( 4) is published in the Official Gazette, the property 
specifi ed in such notice shall cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such publication 
and shall be deemed to have been delivered to the person entitled to possession thereof and the Central 
Government shall not be liable for any compensation or other claim in respect of the property for any 
period after the said date.  
(6) Where any property requisitioned under this Act or any material part thereof is wholly de stroyed 
or rendered substantially and permanently unfit for the purpose for which it  was requisitioned by reason 
of fire, earthquake, tempest, flood or violence of any army or of a mob or other irresistible force, the 
requisition shall, at the option of the Central Government, be void:  
Provided that the benefit of this sub -section shall n ot be available to the Central Government where 
the injury to such property is caused by any wrongful act or default of that Government.  
7. Power to acquire requisitioned property .—(1) Where any property is subject to requisition, the 
Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary to acquire the property for a public 
purpose, at any time acquire such property by publishing in the Official Gazette a notice to the effect that 
the Central Government has decided to acquire the property in pu rsuance of this section : 
Provided that before issuing such notice, the Central Government shall call upon the owner of, or any 
other person who, in the opinion of the Central Government, may be interested in, such property to show 
cause why the property sh ould not be acquired; and after considering the cause, if any, shown by any 
person interested in the property and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, the Central 
Government may pass such orders as it deems fit.  
3[(1A) Notwithstanding any judgment or order by a court or any other authority, setting asi de a notice 
under sub -section ( 1) on th e ground that the owner or any other person who may be interested in the 
property  was not given adequate opportunity to show cause or personal hearing, the Central Government 
may re-issue the notice to the owner or such other person interested in the property, for the purpose of 
giving opportuni ty of being heard:  
Provided that wher e a notice is re -issued, the ow ner or such other person interested in the property  
shall be entitled to the same annual rate of interest, prevalent at any relevant time on the domestic fixed 
deposit offered by the State Bank of India, as defined under clause ( g) of section 2 of  the State Bank of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1985, s. 2, for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 8 -3-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -3-1970).  
3. Ins. by A ct 21 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -3-1952).  5 India Act, 1 955 (23 of 1955) , on the  compensation payable under this A ct, from the date of publication of 
the first notice,  till the final payment of the compensation under this Act:  
Provided further that any enhanced compensation with or without intere st awarded by the cou rt or 
other authority, before the date  of commencement of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property (Amendment) A ct, 2018, shall  be subject to the  re-issuance of a notice under this sub -section 
and shall be applicable only to the cases of land being acquired for national sec urity and defence purpose:  
Provided also that in the cases, where the fina l award under this Act has been made any compensation 
thereof has been accepted b y the owner or such other person interested in the property, before the 
commencement of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of th e immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 
2018, shall not be reopened.]  
(2) When a notice as afor esaid is published in the Official Gazette, the requisitioned property shall, on 
and from the beginning of the day on which the notice is so published, vest absolutely in the Central 
Government free from all encumbrances and the period of requisition of su ch property shall end.  
(3) No property shall be acquired under this section except in the fol lowing circumstances, namely :— 
(a) Where any works have, during the period of requisition, been constructed on, in or over, the 
property wholly or partially at the  expense of the Central Government and the Government decides 
that the value of, or the right to use, such works should be secured or preserved for the purposes of 
Government; or  
(b) where the cost of restoring the property to its condition at the time of its requisition would, in 
the determination of the Central Government, be excessive and the owner declines to accept re lease 
from requisition of the property without payment of compensation for so restoring the property.  
(4) Any decision or de termination of the Central Government under sub -section ( 3) shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any Court.  
(5) For the purposes of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) "works" includes buildings, structures and 
improvements of every description.  
8. Principles and method of determining compensation .—(1) Where any property is requisi tioned 
or acquired under this Act, there shall be paid compensation the amount of which shall be deter mined in 
the manner and in accordance with the principles hereina fter set out, that is to say, — 
(a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance 
with such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the Centra l Government shall appoint as arbitrator a 
person who is,  or has been, or is qualified for appointment as, a Judge of a High Court;  
(c) the Central Government may, in any particular case, nominate a person having expert 
knowledge as to the nature of the property requisitioned or acquired to assist the arbitrator  and where 
such nomination is made, the person to be compensated may also nominate an assessor for the same 
purpose;  
(d) at the commencement of the proceedings before the arbitrator, the Central Government and 
the person to be compensated shall state what in their respective opinion is a fair amount of                
compensation ; 
(e) the arbitrator shall, after hearing the dispute, make an award determining the amount of com -
pensation which appears to him to be just and specifying the person or persons to  whom such 
compensation shall be paid; and in making the award, he shall have regard to the circumstances of 
each case and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), so far as they are applica ble; 
(f) where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who are entitled to the compensation, the 
arbitrator shall decide such dispute and if the arbitrator finds that more persons than one are entitled 
to compensation, he shall apportion the amount thereof amongst such persons;  6 (g) nothing in the Arbit ration Act , 1940  (10 of 1940)  shall apply to arbitrations under this section.  
(2) 1[The amount of compensation payable for the requisitioning of any property shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2A) and ( 2B), consist of —] 
(a) a recurring payme nt, in respect of the period of requisition, of a sum equal to the rent which 
would have been payable for the use and occupation of the property, if it had been taken on lease for 
that period; and  
(b) such sum or sums, if any, as may be found necessary to compensate the person interested for 
all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) pecuniary loss due to requisitioning;  
(ii) expenses on account of vacating the requisitioned premises;  
(iii) expenses  on account of reoccupying the premises upon release from requisition; and  
(iv) damages (other than normal wear and tear) caused to the property during the period of 
requisition, including the expenses that may have to be incurred for restoring the propert y to the 
condition in which it was at the time of requisition.  
2[(2A) The recurring payment, referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), in respect of any prop erty 
shall, unless the property is sooner released from requisition under section 6 or acquire d under section 7, 
be revised in accordance with the p rovisions of sub -section ( 2B)— 
(a) in a case where such property has been subject to requisition under this Act for the period of 
five years or a longer period immediately preceding the commencement of the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable P roperty (Amendment) Act, 1975 — 
(i) first with effect from the date of such commencement, and  
3[(ii) secondly with effect from the expiry of five years,  and thirdly with effect from the 
expiry of  ten years, f rom such commencement;] ] 
(b) in a case where such property has been subject to requisition under this Act immediately 
before such commencement for a period shorter than five years and the maximum period within 
which such property shall, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1A) of section 6, be 
released from requisition or acquired, extends beyond five years from such  commencement, — 
(i) first with effect from the date of expiry of five years from the date on which possession of 
such property has  been surrendered or delivered to, or taken by, the competent authority under 
section 4, and  
2[(ii) secondly with effect from the date of expiry of five years, and thirdly with effect from 
the date of expiry of ten years, from the date on which the revisio n made under sub -clause ( i) 
takes effect;]  
4[(c) in any other case, — 
(i) first with effect from the date of expiry of five years from the date on which possession of 
such property has b een surrendered or delivered to , or taken by, the competent authority under 
section 4, and  
5[(ii) secondly with effect from the date of expiry of five yea rs, and thirdly with effect from 
the date of expiry of ten years, from the date on which the revision under sub -clause  (i) takes 
effec t.]] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1975, s. 3, for “The amount of compensation payable for the requisitioning of any property shall 
consisit of —” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1975).  
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -3-1975).   
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1980, s. 3, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 7 -3-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 7 -3-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1985, s. 3, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 8 -3-1985).  7 (2B) The recurring payment in respect of any property shall be revised by re -determining                         
such payment in the manner and in accordance with the principles set out in sub -section ( 1), read with 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), as if such property had been requisitioned under this Act on the date with 
effect from which the revision has to be made under sub -section ( 2A).] 
1[(3) The compensation payable for the acquisition of any property under section 7 shall be the price 
which the r equisitioned property would have fetched in  the open market, if it had remained in the same 
condition as it was at the time of requisitioning and been sold on the date of acquisition.]  
9. Payment of compensation .—The amount of compensation payable under an  award shall, subject 
to any rules made under this Act, be paid by the competent authority to the person or persons entitled 
thereto in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the award.  
10. Appeals from orders of requisitioning .—(1) Any pe rson aggrieved by an order of requisi tion 
made by the competent authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 may, within twenty -one days from the 
date of service of the order, prefer an appeal to the Central Government:  
Provided that the Central Governmen t may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
twenty -one days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the 
appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Central Govern ment may, after calling for a 
report from the competent authority and giving an opportunity to the parties of being heard and after 
making such further inquiry, if any, as may be necessary, pass such orders as it thinks fit and the order of 
the Central Gov ernment shall be final.  
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may stay the 
enforcement of the order of the competent authority for such period and on such conditions as it thinks fit.  
11. Appeals from awards in respect of compensation .—Any person aggrieved by an award of the 
arbitrator made under section 8 may, within thirty days from the dale of such award, prefer an appeal to 
the High Court within whose jurisdiction the requisitioned or acquired property is situate:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
12. Competent au thority and arbitrator to have certain powers of civil courts .—The competent 
authority and the arbitrator appointed under section 8, while holding an inquiry or, as the case may be, 
arbitration proceedings under this Act, shall have all the powers of a civ il court, while trying a suit, under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of th e following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring  the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.  
13. Power to obtain information .—The Central Government or the competent authority may, with a 
view to carrying out the purposes of section 3 or section 6, or section 7, or section 8, by order require any 
person to furnish to such officer, as may be specified in the order, such information in his pos session as 
may be specified relating to any property which is requisitioned or acquired, or intended to be 
requisitioned or acquired, under this Act.  
14. Power to enter and inspect .—The competent authority or any officer, empowered in this behalf 
by such a uthority by general or special order, may enter and inspect any property for the purposes of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1968, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -8-1968).   8 determining whether, and if so, in what manner, an order under this Act should be made in relation to 
such property or with a view to securing compliance with an o rder made under this Act.  
15. Service of notice and orders .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and any rules that 
may be made under this Act, every notice or order issued or made under this Act shall, — 
(a) in the case of any notice or order of a general nature or affecting a class of persons, be 
published in the Official Gazette; and  
(b) in the case of any notice or order affecting an individual, corporation or firm be served in the 
manner provided for the ser vice of summons in Rule 2 of Order XX IX or Rule 3 of Order XXX, as 
the case may be, in the First Schedule of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ; and  
(c) in the case of any notice or order affecting an individual person (not being a corporation o r 
firm), be served on such person — 
(i) by delivering or tendering it to that person; or  
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by delivering or tendering it to any officer of such  
person or any adult male member of the family of such person, or by affixing a copy  thereof on 
the outer door or on some conspicuous part of the premises in which that person  is known to have 
last resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain; or failing  service by these 
means ; 
(iii) by post.  
(2) Where the ownership of the property is in dispute or where the persons interested in the prop erty 
are not readily traceable and the notice or order cannot be served without undue delay, the notice or order 
may be served by publishing it in the Official Gazette, and  where possible, by affixing a copy thereof on 
any conspicuous part of the property to which it relates.  
16. Easement not to be disturbed .—No person interested in any property requisitioned  or acquired 
under this Act shall, without the previous written consent of the competent authority or except for the 
purposes of effecting repairs or complying with a  municipal requirement, wilfully disturb any 
convenience or easement attached to  such prope rty or remove, destroy or render unserviceable anything 
provided for  permanent use therewith or discontinue or cause to be discontinued any supply or  service 
provided for the property.  
17. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the powers exercisable by it  1*** under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to 
that Governme nt or 2[by the State Government or by an officer subordinate to the State Government.]  
(2) All notifications issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, before Parliament.  
18. Protectio n of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceed ing 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the competent 
authority for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any order made thereunder.  
19. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—Save as otherw ise expressly provided in this Act, no civil 
court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the competent authority or arbitrator is 
empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authori ty in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under 
this Act.  
                                                           
1. The words “by or” omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -12-1953).  
2. Subs. by s. 4 and the Third Schedule, ibid., for “the State G overnment” (w.e.f. 23 -12-1953).  9 20. Penalty for offences .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act, or any rule made 
thereunder, or any order made or direction given under this  Act, or obstructs the lawful exercise of any 
power conferred by or under this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
21. Certain persons to be public servants .—The competent authority, every arbitrator and every 
office r empowered by the Central Government or the competent authority, while exercising any power or 
performing any duty under this Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of            
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the competent authority in making inquiries under section 3 
or section 6;  
(b) the procedure to be followed in arbitration proceedings and appeals under this Act;  
(c) the principles to be followed in determining the amount of  compensation and method of 
payment of such compensation;  
(d) the principles to be followed in apportioning the cost of proceedings before the arbitrator and 
on appeal under this Act;  
(e) the manner of service of notices and orders;  
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session, for a tot al period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica tion 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudic e to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule. ] 
23. Validation of certain requisitions and acquisitions .—(1) All immovable property which 
purports to have been requisitioned by a State Government for any public purpose, being a purpose of t he 
Union, under any Provincial or State Act and which, immediately before the 25th day of January , 1952, 
was used or occupied by the Central Government or by an officer or authority subordinate to that 
Government shall, as from that date, be deemed to be property duly requisitioned under section 3 of this 
Act, and every such requisition shall, notwiths tanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, be 
deemed always to have been valid as if this Act had been in force on and from the date of the requisition 
and the requisition had been duly made by a competent authority under this Act, and all the pro visions of 
this Act shall apply accordingly:  
Provided that all agreements and awards for the payment of compensation in respect of any such 
property for any period of requisition before the 25th day of January, 1952 and in force immediately 
before that dat e shall be valid and shall be deemed always to have been valid and shall continue to be in 
force and shall apply to the payment of compensation in respect of that property for any period of 
requisition after that date.  
(2) Every acquisition of immovable pr operty purporting to hav e been made before the 
commence ment of this Act by a State Government for any public purpose, being a purpose of the Union, 
under any enactment for the time being in force in that State and which, immediately before such 
commencemen t, was used or occupied by the Central Government or by an officer or authority 
subordinate to that Gov ernment shall, notwithstanding any defect in, or invalidity of, the enactment or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1980, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 5 -4-1980).  10 order under which the acquisition was made, be deemed for all purposes to have been validly made as if 
the provisions of the said enactment or order had been included and enacted in this section and this 
section had been in force on and from the date of the acquisition.  
24. Repeals and savings .—(1) The Requisitioned Land (Con tinuance of Powers)                                     
Act, 1947  (17 of 1947) , the Delhi Premises (Requ isition and Eviction) Act, 1947 (49 of 1947), and the 
Requisitionin g and Acquisition of Immov able Property Ordinance, 1952  (3 of 1952),  are hereby repealed.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any property which immediately before such 
repeal was subject to requisition under the provisions of either of the said Acts or the said Ordi nance 
shall, on the commencement of this Act, be deemed to be property requisitioned under section 3 of this 
Act, and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly:  
Provided that — 
(a) all agreements and awards for the payment of compensation in respect of any such property 
for an y period of requisition before the commencement of this Act and in force immediately be fore 
such commencement, shall continue to be in force and shall apply to the payment of compensation in 
respect of that property for any period of requisition after suc h commence ment;  
(b) anything done or any action taken (including any orders, notifications or rules made or issued) 
in exercise of the powers conferred by or under either of the said Acts or the said Ordinance shall, in 
so far as it is not inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken in 
the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act as if this Act was in force on the day in 
which such thing was done or action was taken.  
1[25. Special provision as to certain requisitions under Act 51 of 1962 .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, any immovable property requisitioned by the Central Government or  by 
any officer or authority to whom powers in this behalf have been delegated by that Government, under 
the Defence of India Act, 1962  (51 of 1962) , and the rules made thereunder (including any immovable 
property deemed to have been requisitioned under the s aid Act) which has not been released from such 
requisition before the 10th January, 1968, shall, as from that date, be deemed to have been requisitioned 
by the competent authority under the provisions of this Act for the purpose for which such property was  
held immediately before the said date and all the provisions of t his Act shall apply accordingly : 
Provided that — 
(a) all determinations, agreements and awards for the payment of compensation in respect of any 
such property for any period of requisition be fore the said date and in force immediately before the 
said date , shall continue to be in force and shall apply to the payment of compensa tion in respect of 
that property for any period of requisition as from the said date;  
(b) anything done or any action  taken (including any order s, notifications or rules made or issued) 
by the Central Government or by any officer or authority to whom powers in this behalf have been 
delegated by that Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by or under Chapter VI o f the 
Defence of India Act, 1962  (51 of 1962) , shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under 
this Act as if this section was in force on the date on which such thing was done or action was taken.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of the Defence of India                            
Act, 1962  (51 of 1962) , and the rule s made there under, in so far as those provisions relate to the 
requisitioning of any such immovable property as is referr ed to in sub -section ( 1), shall , as from the 10th 
January, 1968, cease to operate except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser 
and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , shall apply upon such cesser of operation as 
if such cesser were a repeal of an enactment by a Central Act.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1968, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -1-1968).  11 1[26. Special provision as to certain requi sitions under Act 42 of 1971. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, any immovable property requisitioned or  purported to have been 
requisi tioned by the Central Government or by any officer or authority to whom powers in this behalf 
have been delegated by that Government, unde r the Defence of India Act, 1971  (42 of 1971) , and the 
rules made thereun der (including any immovable property deemed to have been requisitioned under the 
said Act), which has not been released from such requisition bef ore the appointed day, shall, — 
(i) if such property was re quisitioned on or before the 21 st day of March, 1977, as from that date, 
and 
(ii) if such property was requisitioned at any time after such date , as fr om the date of its 
requisition,  
be deemed to have been requisitioned by the compete nt authority under the provisions of this Act for the 
purpose for which such property was held immediately before the appointed day and all the provisions of 
this Act sh all apply accordingly:  
Provided that in determining the compensation payable under this  Act in respect of any property so 
deemed to have been requisitioned under this Act , the sum or sums, if any, as may be found necessary to 
compensate the person interested for all or any of the matters specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8 shall be reduced by the sum or sums, if any, paid or payable in respect of such matter or matters 
as compensation in respect of such property under the Defence of India Act, 1971  (42 of 1971) , and the 
rules made thereunder.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided  in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of the Defence of India                         
Act, 1971  (42 of 1971) , and the rules made there under, in so far as those provisions relate to the 
requisitioning of any such immovable property as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall, as from the 21st 
March , 1977, cease to operate except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser and 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , shall apply upon such cesser of operation as if 
such cesser  were a repea l of an enactment by a Central Act.  
Explanation .—In this section “appointed day ” means the 23rd September, 1977.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -3-1977).  
--------------------------The Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE RESERVE AND AUXILIARY AIR FORCES ACT, 1952  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Appointment of competent authority . 
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULAR  AIR FORCE  RESERVE  
4. Constitution of Regular Air Force Reserve . 
5. Recruitment to the Regular Air Force Reserve . 
6. Classes of person in the Regular Air Force Reserve . 
7. Period of service . 
8. Termination of service in the Reserve . 
 
CHAPTER III  
AIR DEFENCE  RESERVE  
9. Constitution of Air Defence Reserve . 
10. Classes of persons in the Air Defence Reserve . 
11. Obligation to register . 
12. Liability to be called up for inquiry . 
13. Calling -up for inquiry . 
14. Medical examination . 
15. Registration of persons considered fit for enrolment . 
16. Calling up for service . 
17. Period  of service . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
AUXILIARY  AIR FORCE  
18. Constitution of Auxiliary Air Force . 
19. Classes of persons in the Auxiliary Air Force . 
20. Officers of the Auxiliary Air Force . 
21. Persons eligible for enrolment . 
22. Period of service . 
23. Termination of service . 
24. Advisory Committees .  2 
 CHAPTER V  
LIABILI TY AND DISCIPLINE OF MEMBERS OF RESERVE  AND AUXILIARY  AIR FORCES  
SECTIONS  
25. Liability to be called up for service . 
26. Application of Air Force Act, 1950 . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Reinstatement in civil employ of persons required to perform service under this Act . 
28. Preservation of certain rights of persons called up for service . 
29. Pay and allowances . 
30. Penalties . 
31. Service of notice . 
32. Competent authority to be public servant . 
33. Power of Central Government to grant exemptions . 
34. Power to make r ules. 
35. [Repealed .] 
36. [Repealed .] 
 
  3 
 THE RESERVE AND  AUXILIARY AIR FORCES ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 62 OF 19521 
[22nd August , 1952.]  
An Act to provide for the constitu tion and regulation of certain Air Force Reserve and also an 
Auxiliary Air Force and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted  by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  —(1) This Act may be called the Reserve and Auxiliary 
Air Forces Act, 1952.  
(2) It extends to the whole of In dia. 
(3) This Chapter shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions sha ll come into force on 
such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different 
dates may be appointed for different provi sions.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Air Force Reserve ” means any of the Air Force Reserves raised  and maintained under this 
Act; 
(b) “competent authority ” means an air officer or a committee consisting of two or more air 
officers appointed under section 3;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r ules made under this Act;  
(d) all other words and expressions used herein and defined in the Air Force Act, 1950 (15 of 
1950) and not hereinbefore defined shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them by that 
Act. 
3. App ointment of competent authority .—The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint an air officer3 or a committee consisting of two or more air officers to perform 
all or any of the functions of the competent authority under this Act for such area as may be  specified in 
the notification.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULAR AIR FORCE  RESERVE  
4. Constitutio n of Regular A ir Force Reserve .—The Central Government may raise and maintain 
in the manner hereafter in this Chapter provided an Air Force Reserve to be designated the Regular Air 
Force Reserve which shall consist solely of persons transferred or a ppointed to it under section 5.  
5. Recruitment to  the Regular Air Force Reserve .—(1) The competent authority may, by general 
or special order, transfer to  the Regular Air Force Reserve — 
(a) any  officer or airman of the Air Force who under the terms and conditions of his service is 
liable to serve in any Air Force R eserve if and when constituted;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule  
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965); and comes into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963); and 
the State of Sikkim vide Notific ation No. S.R.O. 25 (E), dated 20 -4-1976 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1976).  
2. Chapters II and III and provisions of Chapters V and VI except so far as they relate to the Auxili ary Air Force came into force 
on the 15th August, 1955, vide S.R.O. 332, dated the 20th August, 1955, Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 4. Chapter IV and 
provisions of Chapters V and VI relating to the Auxiliary Air Force came into force on the 15th October,  1955, vide S.R.O. 395, 
dated the 1 5th October, 1955, Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 4.  
3. The Deputy Chief of Air Staff, vide S.R.O. 321, dated the 2 0th August, 1955 , Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 4 . 4 
 (b) any officer or airman of the Air Force whose commission or engagement in the Air Force has 
been t erminated before the commencement of this Act and who under the terms of his commission or 
engagement was liable to serve in any Air Force Reserve if and when constituted;  
(c) any officer or airman who has served in the Air Force and has retired therefrom;  and any 
officer or airman so transferred shall be deemed to be a member of th e said Reserve.  
(2) The competent authority may, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed, by special order, appoint to the Regular Air Force Res erve any member of the Air Defence 
Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force raised and maintained under this Act, and where any such member is 
so appointed, he shall cease to be a member of the Air Defence Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force, as the 
case may be, and shall as from the date of such appointment be deemed to be a member of  the Regular 
Air Force Reserve.  
(3) The competent authority may , for reasons which in its opi nion are sufficient, cancel any order 
made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) and o n the cancellation of such order the person in respect 
of whom the order had been made shall cease to be a member of  the Regular Air Force Reserve.  
6. Classes of person s in the Regular Air Force Reserve .—Members of the Regular Air Force 
Reserve shall be divided into the following classes, namely: — 
(a) general duties officers;  
(b) ground duties officers, and  
(c) airmen, and every officer shall be entitled on transfer or appointment to the Reserve to hold 
the same rank as that which he last held in the Air Force, or the Air Defence Reserve or the Auxiliary 
Air Force, as the case may be, befor e such transfer or appointment.  
7. Period of service .—(1) Every member of the Regular Air Force Reserve shall be liable  to serve in 
the Reserve — 
(a) if he is transferred to the Reserve under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, for the period of his 
Reserve liability; and  
(b) if he is appointed to the Reserve under sub -section ( 2) of section 5, for the remainder of the 
period for which he was liable to serve in the Air Defence Reserve or the Auxiliary  Air Force, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that the competent authority may require any such member to serve in the Reserve for such 
further period or periods not exceeding in the aggregate five years as it may think fit.  
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “period of Reserve liability ” in relation to any 
member of the Regular Air Force Reserve means the period for whic h under the terms and conditions of 
his service in the Air Force he was liable to serve in any Air Force Reserve if and when constituted.  
Explanation II .—In computing the period of Reserve liability in relation to any member of the 
Regular Air Force Reserv e whose commission or engagement in the Air Force was terminated before the 
commencement of this Act, the period which has elapsed between such termination and the date of such 
commencement shall be included.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no person shall be liable to serve in the 
Reserve after attaining the prescr ibed age.  
8. Termina tion of service in the Reserve .—Every member of the Regular Air Force Reserve shall, 
on completion of the period of his service therein, cease  to be a member of the Reserve.  
CHAPTER III  
AIR DEFENCE  RESERVE  
9. Const itution of Air Defence Reserve .—The Central Government may raise and maintain in the 
manner hereafter in this Chapter provided an Air Force Reserve to be designated the Air Defence Res erve 
which shall consist of persons deemed under the provisions of sec tion 16 to be enrolled therein.  5 
 10. Classes of pers ons in the Air Defence Reserve .—Members of the Air Defence Reserve shall be 
divided into the following classes, namely: — 
(a) general  duties officers;  
(b) ground duties officers; and  
(c) airmen.  
11. Obligation to register .—(1) Every citizen of India who — 
(a) holds or has held a public transport pilot ’s licence ( “B” Licence) issued under the Indian 
Aircraft Rules, 1937, or  
(b) has had not less than two hundred hours ’ experience of solo flying, including no t less than 
thirty landings, or  
(c) holds or has held a first class navigator's licence issued under the Indian Aircraft Rules, 1937, 
or 
(d) has had at least four years ’ aviation experience during which at least six hundred hours shall 
have been spent in the air, not less than one hundred hours of such experience being experience of 
navigation in the air, or  
(e) holds or has held a first class radio telegraph operator ’s licence issued under Indian Aircraft 
Rules, 1937, or  
(f) holds or has held a radio telephone operator ’s licence issued under Indian Aircraft Rules, 
1937, or  
(g) holds or has held a licence  as ground engineer in any of the categories A, B, C, D or X issued 
under the Indian Aircraft Rules, 1937, or  
(h) is or was at any time employed in connection with any aerodrome or in connection with the 
control and movement of aircraft, in such capacity a s may be prescribed,  
shall within the prescribed period correctly fill up, or cause to be filled up, to the best of his knowledge 
and belief the prescribed form, and sign and lodge it with the competent authority nearest to his usual 
place of residence or  business:  
Provided that nothing contained i n this sub -section shall apply — 
(i) to any person belonging to any of the classes specified in clauses ( a) to ( f), if he has attaine d 
the age of thirty -seven years ; or 
(ii) to any person belonging to any of the c lasses specified in clauses ( g) and ( h), if he has a ttained 
the age of fifty years.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the competent authority may, if it 
is satisfied that the provisions of that sub -section apply to any p erson, by order in writing, require that 
person to furnish within such time such particulars as may be specified in the order and such person shall 
within the specified time furnish correctly to the best of his knowledge and belief the said particulars to 
the said authority in such form a nd manner as may be prescribed.  
12. Liabili ty to be called up for inquiry .—Every person to whom the provisions of section 11 are 
applicable shall be liable to be called up  for inquiry under section 13, — 
(a) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11, 
until he has complet ed his thirty -seventh year, and  
(b) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses ( g) and ( h) of the said sub -section, until he 
has completed his fiftieth year.  
13. Calling -up for inquiry .—The competent authority may cause to be served on any person for the 
time being liable to be called up for inquiry under section 12 a written notice stating that he is called up 
for inquiry regarding his fitness for service in the Air Defence Reserve and r equiring him to present 6 
 himself to such person and at such place and at such time as may be specified in the notice and to submit 
himself  to inquiry by the said person.  
14. Medical examination .—Every person called up for inquiry under section 13 shall, if and when 
required by the competent authority, present himself for examination before such medical officer as may 
be directed by that authority and, for the purposes of such examination, shall comply with the dir ections 
of the medical officer.  
15. Registration of persons considered fit for enrolment .—If, after such inquiry and medical 
examination as aforesaid, the competent authority considers a person fit for enrolment in the Air Defence 
Reserve, it shall inform him accordingly and enter his name a nd other prescribed particulars in a register 
maintained in such form a nd manner as may be prescribed.  
16. Calling up for service .—The competent authority may cause to be served on any person whose 
name is entered in the register maintained in pursuance of  section 15 a written notice stating that he is 
called up for service in the Air Defence Reserve and requiring him to present himself at such place and 
time and to such authority as may be specified in the notice; and the person upon whom the notice is 
served shall be deemed to be enrolled in the Reserv e as from the day so specified.  
17. Period of service .—(1) Every person deemed to be enrolled in the Air Defence Reserve shall be 
liable for service — 
(a) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses ( a) to ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of  
section 11, until he has c ompleted his forty -second year;  
(b) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses ( g) and ( h) of the said sub -section, until 
he ha s completed his fifty -fifth year.  
(2) Every such person, on atta ining the age specified in sub -section ( 1), shall cease to be a mem ber of 
the Air Defence Reserve.  
CHAPTER IV  
AUXILIARY  AIR FORCE  
18. Const itution of Auxiliary Air Force .—(1) The Central Government may raise and maintain in 
the manner hereafter in this Chapter provided an Air Force to be designated the Auxiliary Air Force.  
(2) The Central Government may constitute such number of squadrons and units of the Auxiliary Air 
Force as it thinks f it and may disband or rec onstitute any squadron or unit.  
19. Classes of pers ons in the Auxiliary Air Force .—Members of the Auxiliary Air Force shall be 
divided into the following classes, nam ely:— 
(a) general duties officers;  
(b) ground  duties officers ; and 
(c) airmen.  
20. Offic ers of the Auxiliary Air Force .—The President may grant to such person as he thinks fit a 
commission as an officer in the Auxiliary Air Force with designation of rank corresponding to that of any 
commiss ioned officer in the Air Force.  
21. Persons eligible for enrolment .—Any citizen of India may offer himself for enrolment in the 
Auxiliary Air Force and may, if he satisfies the prescribed conditions, be so enrolled on s uch terms as 
may be prescribed.  
22. Period of service .—Every officer and every enrolled person shall, subject to any rules that may 
be made in this behalf under this Act, be required to serve in the Auxiliary Air Force for a period of five 
years from the date of his appointment or enrolment but may, after the comple tion of his period of 
service, volunteer to serve therein for further periods each of not more tha n five years ’ duration.  7 
 23. Termination of service .—The service of any officer or enrolled person in the Auxiliary Air 
Force may, at any time before the compl etion of his period of service, be terminated by such authority and 
under such c onditions as may be prescribed.  
24. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the 
commen cement of this Act, constitute — 
(a) for the whole o f India , a Central Advisory Committee;  
(b) for each State, a State Advisory Committee; and  
(c) for every unit of the Auxiliary Air Fo rce, a Unit Advisory Committee.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Central Advisory Committee to advise the Central Government on 
matters connected with the Auxiliary Air Force generally, of the State Advisory Committee to advise the 
Central Government on matters connected with the formation of squadrons or units in the State and 
squadrons or units already stationed in the State.  
(3) The duties, powers and procedure of Advisory Committees and in particular the matters in respect 
of which the Advisory Committees may be called upon to give advic e shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
LIABILITY AND DISCIPLINE OF MEMBERS OF RESERVE AND AUXILIARY  AIR FORCES  
25. Liabili ty to be called up for service .—Every member of an Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary 
Air Force shall, during the period of h is service,  be liable to be called up — 
(a) for training for such period as may be prescrib ed and for medical examination,  
(b) for ser vice in aid of the civil power,  
(c) for Air Fo rce service in India or abroad.  
26. Application of Air Force Act, 1950 .—Every member of an Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary 
Air Force shall, when called up for training, medical examination or for service under this Act, be subject 
to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), and the rules made thereunder in the same manner as a  person 
belonging to the Air Force and holding the same rank is subject to the said Act and rules and shall 
continue to be so subject until duly released from such training, medical examination or service, as the 
case may be.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Reinstatement in civil employ of persons required to perform service under this Act .—(1) It 
shall be the duty of every employer by whom a person called up under section 25 is employed to grant 
him such leave as may be necessary and to reinstate him in his employment on the termination of the 
period during which he has been so called up in an  occupation and under conditions not less favourable to 
him than those which would have been applicable to hi m had he not been so called up:  
Provided that if the employer refuses to reinstate such person or denies his liability to reinstate such 
perso n, or  if for any reason the reinstatement of such person is represented by the employer to be 
impracticable, either party may refer the matter to the prescribed authority and that authority shall, after 
considering all matters which may be put before him and af ter making such further inquiry into the matter 
as ma y be prescribed, pass an order — 
(a) exempting the employer from the  provisions of this section, or  
(b) requiring him to re -employ such person on such terms as tha t authority thinks suitable, or  
(c) requi ring him to pay to such person by way of compensation for failure or inability to  
re-employ a sum not exceeding an amount equal to six months' remuneration at the rate at which his 
last remuneration was payable to him by the employer.  8 
 (2) If any employer fails to obey the order of any such authority as is referred to in the proviso to  
sub-section ( 1), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and the court 
by which an employer is convicted under this secti on shall order him (if he has not already been so 
required by the said authority) to pay to the person whom he has failed to re -employ a sum equal to six 
months’ remuneration at the rate at which his last remuneration was payable to him by the employer, an d 
any amount so required to be paid either by the said authority or by the court shall be recoverable as if it 
were a fine imposed by such court.  
(3) In any proceeding under this section it shall be a defence for an employer to prove that the person 
former ly employed did not apply to the employer for reinstatement within a period of two months from 
the termination of the period during which he was called up under section 25.  
(4) The duty imposed by sub -section ( 1) upon an employer to grant leave to a person  such as is 
described in that sub -section or to reinstate him in his employment shall attach to an employer who, 
before such person is actually called up under section 25, terminates his employment in circumstances 
such as to indicate an intention to evade  the duty imposed by that sub -section and such intention shall be 
presumed until the contrary is proved if the termination takes place after the issue of an order relating t o 
that person under section 25.  
28. Preservation of certain rights of persons called up for service .—When any person called up 
under section 25 has any rights under any provident fund or superannuation fund or other scheme for the 
benefit of employees mainta ined in connection with the employment he relinquishes, he shall continue, 
during the period for which he has been so called up and if he is reinstated, until such reinstatement under 
the provisions of this Act, to have in respect of such fund or scheme su ch rights as may be prescribed.  
29. Pay and allowances .—(1) Every member of an Air Force Reserve or the Auxiliary Air Force 
shall, during the period of training or active service, receive such pay and allowances as are admissible to 
an officer or airman, as the case may be, in the corresponding rank, branch or trade of the Air For ce. 
(2) Where any such member was in any employment immediately before he is called up for training 
under section 25, the employer shall,  during the period of the training, be liable to pay to him the 
difference, if any, between the pay and allowances whic h he would have received from the employer if he 
had not been called up for such training and the pay and allowances which he receives as su ch member 
while under training.  
(3) If any employer refuses or fails to pay to any such member the difference in pay  and allowances 
as provided in sub -section ( 2), such difference in pay and allowances may, on application by the member 
to the prescribed authority, be recovered from the employer in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
30. Penalties .—(1) If any person refuses or without lawful excuse (the burden of proving which shall 
lie upon such person) neglects to comply fully with the requirements of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 or of 
any order made under sub -section ( 2) of that section or with the requirements of  section 14, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) If any person wilfully  fails to comply with any notice issued under section 13 or section 16, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both.  
31. Service of notice .—Any notice or order to be served on any person for the purposes of this Act 
may be sent by post to that person at his last known address or may be served upon him in such oth er 
manner as may be prescribed.  
32. Competent authority to be public servant .—For the purposes of this Act every competent 
authority and where the competent authority consists of a committee of two or more air officers, every 
member of the committee shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
India n Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
33. Power of Central Government to grant exemptions .—The Central Government may, for 
special reasons and subject to such conditions as may be prescri bed, by order exempt any person from any 
obligation or liability under this Act or an y particular provision thereof.  9 
 34. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, 
make rules  for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the composition and strength of any Air Force Reserve;  
(b) the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which any officer or airman may be 
transferre d or appointed to the Regular Air  Force Reserve under section 5;  
(c) the age beyond which persons shall not be liable to serve in the Regular Air Force Reserve;  
(d) the form and manner in which the particulars required by sub -section ( 2) of section 11 shal l be 
furnished;  
(e) the form and manner in which registers shall be maintained in pursuance of section 15, the 
particulars to be entered therein, and the correction or revision of such particulars from time to time;  
(f) the pay or allowances payable to per sons called up for inquiry or medi cal examination under 
this Act;  
(g) the terms and conditions subject to which a person may be enrolled as a mem ber of the 
Auxiliary Air Force;  
(h) the authority by which and the conditions subject to which the service of a ny officer or 
enrolled person in the Auxilia ry Air Force may be terminated;  
(i) the constitution and the duties, powers and procedure of Advisory Committees to b e 
constituted under section 24;  
(j) the period and manner of training of members of any Air Force Reserve and the Auxiliar y Air 
Force;  
(k) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which the rank of any member of an Air 
Force Reserve may be determined;  
(l) the constitution of the author ity for the purpose of section 27 and the manner in which such 
authority may cond uct any inquiry under this Act;  
(m) the authority to which an application under sub -section ( 3) of section 29 may be made and the 
manner in which the difference in the pay and  allowances may be r ecovered under that sub -section;  
(n) the manner in which any notice or order issued or mad e under this Act may be served;  
(o) the conditions subject to which any person may be exempted from any obligation or liability 
under this Act or any particular provision thereof;  
(p) any other matter which under this Act is to be, or may be prescribed.  
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a con travention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.  
1[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  
modi fication in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have  effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under 
that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule. ( w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  10 
 35. [ Amendment of section s 2, 4 and 31, Act 45 of 1950 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 
1957  (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the First Schedule .  
36. [Repeal of Act 36 of 1939 .] Rep. by s.  2 and the First Schedule, ibid.  
--------------------------The Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MINISTERS ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1952  
[12th August, 1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the salaries and allowances of Ministers.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “Minister ” means a member of the Council of Ministers, by whatever 
name called, and includes a Deputy Minister.  
1[3. Salaries and daily constituency allowances .—(1) Each Minister shall be entit led to receive a 
salary per mensem, and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as such Minister at the 
same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salaries, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament 
Act, 1954 (30 of 1954) with res pect to members of Parliament . 
(2) Each Minister shall be entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is specified 
under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of Parliament. ] 
4. Residence of Ministers .—2[(1)] Each Minister shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use 
of a furnished residence throughout his term of office and for a period of  3[one month] immediately 
thereafter, and no charge shall fall on the Minister personally in respect of the maintenance of such 
residence.  
4[(2) In the event of death of the Minister, his family shall be entitled to the use of the furnished 
residence occupied by the Minister — 
(a) for a period of one month immediately after his death, without payment of rent and no charge 
shall fall on the family of the Minister in respect of the maintenance of such residence, and  
(b) for a further period of one month, on payment of rent at such rates as may be prescribed by 
rules made in this behalf by the Central Government and also charges in respe ct of electricity and 
water consumed in that residence during such further period.]  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “residence” includes the staff quarters and other 
buildings appurtenant ther eto, and the garden thereof, and “maintenance” in  relation to a residence 
includes the payment of local rates and taxes and the provision of electricity and water.  
5[5. Sumptuary allowance to Ministers .—There shall be paid a sumptuary allowance to each 
Minister at the following rates, namely :— 
(a) the Prime Minister  Rupees three  thousand  per mensem;  
(b) every other Minister who is a member of 
the Cabinet  Rupees two thousand per mensem;  
(c) a Minister of State  Rupees one thousand per mensem;  
(d) a Deputy Minister  Rupees six hundred per mensem.]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 76 of 198 5, s. 2, for section 3 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. Section 4  renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 47 of 1969,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “fifteen days” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 2000, s. 2, for section 5 (w.e.f. 17-9-2001 ). 2 
 6. Travelling and daily allowances to Ministers .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by 
the Central Government, a Minister shall be entitled to — 
(a) trave lling allowances for himself and the members of his family and for the transport of his 
and his family ’s effects— 
(i) in respect of the journey to Delhi from his usual place of residence outside Delhi for 
assuming office, and  
(ii) in respect of the journey from  Delhi to his usual place of residence outside Delhi on 
relinquishing office; and  
(b) trave lling and daily allowances in respect of tours undertaken by him in the discharge of his 
official duties, whether by sea, land or air.  
1[2[(1A) A Minister shall be e ntitled to an amount equal to the fare for a single journey performed 
by him, during each year, within India, either alone or along with spouse or legitimate or step 
children, residing with and wholly dependent on him, or any number of companions or relati ves, at 
the same rates at which travelling allowance is payable to such Minister under clause ( b) of            
sub-section ( 1) in respect of tours referred to in that clause, subject to a maximum of forty -eight such 
fares per year : 
Provided that the spouse or legitimate or step children residing with and wholly dependent on the 
Minister, as the case may be, may undertake such journey alone.] ] 
(2) Any travel ling allowance under this section may be paid in cash or free official transport provided 
in lieu thereof.  
7. Medical treatment, etc. , to Ministers .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central 
Government, a Minister and the members of his family shall be entitled free of charge to accommodation 
in hospitals maintained by the Government  and also to medical treatment.  
8. Advances to Ministers for purchase of motor -cars.—There may be paid to any Minister by  way 
of a repayable advance such sum of money as may be determined by rules made in this behalf for the 
purchase of a motor -car in orde r that he may be able to discharge conveniently and efficiently the duties 
of his office.  
9. Ministers not to draw salary or allowances as Members of Parliament .—No person in receipt 
of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum out of funds provided by 
Parliament by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership of either House of Parliament.  
10. Notification respecting appointment, etc. , of Ministers to be conclusive evidence thereof .—
The date on which any person be came or ceased to be a Minister shall be published in the Official 
Gazette, and any such notification shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that he became, or ceased to 
be, a Minister on that date for all the purposes of this Act.  
3[10A. Exemption from liability to pay income -tax on certain perquisites received by a 
Minister. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , the value of 
rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to a Minister under sub-section ( 1)              
of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head “Salaries ” 
under section 15 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) .] 
4[11. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make  rules to carry out the purposes 
of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 76 of 1985, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2010, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1A) (w.e.f. 5 -2-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 76 of 1985, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1977, s. 2, for section 11 (w.e.f. 9-12-1977 ). 3 
 (2) Every rule made under this Act after the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of 
Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1977 shall be laid before each House of Parliament and no such rule shall 
come into force  until it has been approved, whether with or without modifications , by each House of 
Parliament and published by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. ] 
12. Regularisation of certain payments .—All salaries paid or payable for the period commencing  
on the 14th day of May, 1952, and ending with the commencement of this Act to Ministers described as 
Ministers of Cabinet rank (but not Members of the Cabinet), all charges incurred before the 
commencement of this Act in respect of the accommodation provi ded in any hospital maintained by the 
Central Government for or on the medical treatment of any Minister or any member of his family and all 
payments made before such commencement by way of trave lling or daily allowances to any Deputy 
Minister; shall be de emed to have been properly paid, payable or incurred or made.  
13. [Repeal of Act 53 of 1947 .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957  (36 of 1957) , s. 2 
and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 7-9-1957). 
--------------------------The State Armed Police Forces (Extension of Laws) Act, 1952--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE ARMED POLICE FORCES (EXTENSION OF LAWS) ACT, 1952  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definition.  
3. Extension of disciplinary laws of any State to members of the armed police force of that State 
when serving outside that State . 
4. Power to add to, or omit from, the Schedule.  
5. [Repealed .] 
SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 
 THE STATE ARMED POLICE FORCES (EXTENSION OF LAWS) ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 63 OF 1952  
[22nd August,  1952 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of disciplinary laws in force in any State relating to the 
armed police force of that State to members of the said force when serving outside that State.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the State Armed Police Forces (Extension of 
Laws) Act, 1952.   
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1* * *.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “armed police force ” means any police force constituted by any of the 
enactments specified in the Schedule for the time being in force.  
3. Extension of disciplinary laws of any State to members of the armed police force of that State 
when serving outside that State .—Where any  detachment of an armed police force of a State is serving 
in any part of any other State, whether independently or by being attached to the police force of that other 
State, then, notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 of the Police Act, 1888 ( 3 of 1888), every 
member of the said detachment, while discharging the functions of a police officer in that other State, 
shall continue to be subject to the same laws in respect of discipline and liabilities as would have been 
applicable to him, if he had b een discharging those functions within the State to which the said force 
belongs.  
4. Power to add to, or omit from, the Schedule .—The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, add to, or omit from, the Schedule any enactment and on t he publication of such a 
notification, the Schedule shall be dee med to be amended accordingly.  
5. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 and the Schedule I.   
  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and Schedule.  3 
 SCHEDULE  
(See section s 2 and 4)  
1. The Bengal Military Police  Act, 1892 ( 5 of 1892).  
2. The Eastern Frontier Rifles (Bengal Battalion) Act, 1920 (Bengal Act No.  2 of 1920).  
3. The Bombay State Reserve Police Force Act, 1951 (Bombay Act No.  38 of 1951).  
4. The Central Provinces and Berar Special Armed Constabulary Ac t, 1942 (C.P.  and Berar                      
Act No. 7 of 1942) . 
5. The Madhya Bharat Special Armed Force Act, Samvat 2007 (Madhya Bharat Act No.  75 of  1950).  
6. The Orissa Military Police Act, 1946 (Orissa Act No.  7 of 1946).  
7. The Rajasthan Armed Consta bulary Act, 1950 (Rajasthan Act No.  12 of 1950).  
8. The United Provinces Provincial Armed Constabulary Act, 1948 (U.P.  Act No.  40 of 1948).  
________  
