--------------------------The Andhra State Act, 1953--------------------------
1 THE ANDHRA STATE ACT,  1953  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
FORMATION OF  ANDHRA  STATE AND  TRANSFER OF  TERRITORY  FROM  MADRAS TO MYSORE  
3. Formation of Andhra State.  
4. Transfer of territory from Madras to Mysore.  
5.  Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
Council of states  
6. Representation in the Council of States.  
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
8. Allocation of sitting members.  
9. Bye -election to fill vacancies.  
10. Term of office.  
House of the People  
11. Representation in the House of the Peopl e. 
12. Delimitation of constituencies . 
13. Provision as to sitting members.  
14. Electoral rolls for modified Parliamentary constituencies  
Legislative Assemblies  
15. Strength of Legislative Assemblies.  
16. Allocation of members.  
17. Duration of Legislative  Assemblies.  
18. Electoral rolls for modified Assembly constituencies.  2 SECTIONS  
19. Madras Legislative Council.  
20. Madras Council Constituencies.  
21. Members of the Madras Legislative Council and their terms of office . 
22. Mysore Legislative Council . 
23. Electoral rolls for modified Council constituencies . 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Revision of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders . 
25. Rules of Procedure of the Andhra Legislative Assembly . 
26. Amendment of section 2, Act 43 of 1950.  
27. Amendment of section 9, Act 81 of 1952.  
 
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
28. High Court for Andhra . 
29. Judges of the Andhra High Court . 
30. Jurisdiction of Andhra High Court . 
31. Power to enrol advocates , etc.  
32. Practice and procedure in Andhra High Court . 
33. Custody of the Seal of the Andhra High Court . 
34. Form of writs and other processes . 
35. Powers of Judges.  
36. The place of sitting of the High Court . 
37. Procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court.  
38. Transfer of proceedings from Madras High Court to Andhra High Court.  
39. Savings . 
40. Transitional provisions . 
41. High Court for the added areas of Mysore . 
42. Interpretation . 
PART V  
FINANCIAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislature . 
44. Vote on account by the Madras Legislative Assembly.  
45. Authorisation under the Madras Appropriation Act to cease.  
46. Reports relating to the accounts of Madras State.  3 SECTIONS  
47. Apportionment of assets and liabilities . 
48. Contracts . 
49. Liabilit y in respect of actionable wrongs.  
50. Liability as guarantor.  
51. Power of President to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
52. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State.  
PART VI  
LEGAL  PROVISIONS  
53. Territorial extent of laws . 
54. Power to adapt law s. 
55. Power to construe laws.  
56. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.  
57. Legal proceedings concerned the State of Madras.  
58. Provisions as to certain pending proceedings . 
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE  AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
59. Provisions for detention in , and power to commit to, certain jails and other institutions.  
60. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.  
61. Provisions relating to the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service . 
62. Provisions relating to the Indian Civil Service, the Indian Police, the Indian Service of 
Engineers and the Indian Forest Service.  
63. Provisions relating to other Services . 
64. Power of President to give directions.  
65. Report of the Madras Public Service Commission . 
66. Special provisions with regard to Tungabhadra Project.  
67. Allowances and privileges of the Governor of Andnra.  
68. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.  
69. Power to remove difficulties . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 4 SECTIONS  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
  5 THE ANDHRA STATE ACT,  1953 
ACT NO. 30 OF 1953  
[14th September , 1953 .] 
An Act to provide for the formation of the State of Andhra, the increasing of the area of the 
State of Mysore and the diminishing of the area of the State of Madras, and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as f ollows :— 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he Andhra State Act, 1953.  
(2) This Part and sections 43, 54, 58, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66 and 69 shall come into force at once, and 
all other provisions of this Act shall come into force on the 1st day of October, 1953.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of October, 1953;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution.  
(c) “Assembly constituency ”, “Council constituency ” and “Parliamentary constituency ” have 
the same meaning as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950;  (43 of 1950);  
(d) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme,  
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the State of 
Madras or Mysore as constituted immediately before the appointed day;  
(e) “Order ” means an Order published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “sitting member ” in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who immediately before the appointed day is a member of that House;  
(g) “transferred territory ” means the territory added to the State of Mysore by                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 4.  
PART II  
FORMATION  OF ANDHRA  STATE  AND TRANSFER  OF TERRITORY  FROM  MADRAS  TO MYSORE  
3. Formation of Andhra State .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a Part A 
State to be known as the State of Andhra comprising the territories which immediately before that day 
were comprised in Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, 
Nellore, Kurnool, Anantapur, Cuddapah and Chitt oor districts and Alur, Adoni and Rayadrugtaluks of 
Bellary district in the State of Madras and the said territories shall thereupon cease to form part of the 
State of Madras.  
(2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to alter hereafter the extent, 
boundaries and names of districts, the said ta luks of Alur and Adoni shall be included in, and become 
part of, Kurnool district, and the said taluk of Rayadrug shall be included in, and become part of, 
Anantapur district.  
4. Transfer of territory from Madras to Mysore .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall 
be added to the State of Mysore the territory which immediately before that day was comprised in the 
taluks of Bellary district other than Alur, Adoni and Rayadrug in the State of Madras, and the said 
territory shall thereupon cease to form par t of the State of Madras.  6 (2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to alter hereafter the extent, 
boundaries and names of districts, the transferred territory shall form a separate district to be known 
as Bellary district.  
5.  Amendment o f the First Schedule to the Constitution .—In the First Schedule to the 
Constitution .— 
(a) in Part A, Entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as Entries 2 to 10 respectively, and before 
Entry 2 as so renumbered, the entry “1. Andhra ” shall be inserted;  
(b) in Pa rt A, in the description of the territories of States — 
(i) before the paragraph relating to the territory of the State of Assam, the following 
paragraph shall be inserted namely: — 
“The territory of the State of Andhra shall comprise the territories specifi ed in              
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 ”; and  
(ii) at the end of the last paragraph, the following shall be added, namely: — 
“but in the case of the State of Madras shall not include the territories specified in        
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 and sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 ”; 
and 
(c) in Part B, at the end of the paragraph containing the description of the Territories of States, 
the following shall be added, namely: — 
“and in the case o f the State of Mysore shall also comprise the territory specified in sub -
section ( 1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953. ” 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
Council of states  
6. Representation in the Council of States .—The number of seats allotted to the State of Madras 
in the Council of States shall be reduced from 27 to 18, and there shall be allotted 12 seats to the State 
of Andhra in the said Council.  
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—In the Fourth Schedule to the  
Constitution — 
(a) in the Table of Seats relating to the States specified in Part A of the First Schedule — 
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 10 respectively;  
(ii) before entry 2 as so renumbered, the entry “1. Andhra …….. .12” shall be inserted;  
(iii) in column 2, for the figures “27” and “145” the figures “18” and “148” shall 
respectively be substituted;  
(b) at the end of the Table of Seats, for the figures “204” the figures “207” shall be 
substituted.  
8. Allocation of sitting  members .—The nine sitting members of the Council of States 
representing the State of Madras whose names are specified in Part I of the First Schedule shall be 
deemed to have been elected by the elected Members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra to fill  
nine of the seats allotted to the State of Andhra in the Council of States; and the remaining eighteen 
sitting members whose names are specified in Part II of that Schedule shall continue to be members of 
the Council of States representing the State of Ma dras.  7 9. Bye-election to fill vacancies .—As soon as may be after the appointed day, there shall be held 
a bye -election to fill the vacancies existing on the appointed day in the seats allotted to the State of 
Andhra in the Council of States.  
10. Term of office .—(1) Except as provided in sub -section ( 2), the terms of office of the 
members specified in the First Schedule shall remain unaltered, that is to say, as indicated in that 
Schedule.  
(2) The term of office— 
(a) of one of the two members spec ified against serial numbers 4 and 5 in Part I of the First 
Schedule shall be increased so as to expire on the 2nd day of April, 1958, and  
(b) of one of the seven members specified against serial numbers 7 to 13 in Part II of that 
Schedule shall be reduced  so as to expire on the 2nd April, 1954.  
(3) The member whose term of office is to be increased under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) and the 
member whose term of office is to be reduced under clause ( b) of that sub -section shall be determined 
as soon as may  be after the appointed day by lot drawn in such manner as the Chairman of the 
Council of States may direct . 
(4) The term of office of each of the three  members to be elected by the elected members of the 
Legislative Assembly of Andhra under section 9 shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1956.  
House of the People  
11. Representation in the House of the People .—(1) The number of seats allotted in the House 
of the People to the State of Madras shall be reduced from 75 to 46, the number of seats allotted t o the 
State of Mysore shall be increased from 11 to 12, and there shall be allotted 28 seats to the State of 
Andhra in that House.  
(2) In the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) — 
(a) In the Part relating to Part A Stat es,— 
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 10 respectively, and before entry 2 as 
so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“1. Andhra ……….. 28”; and  
(ii) for the entry in column 2 against Madras, the entry “46” shall be substituted; and  
(b) in the part relating to Part B States, for the entry in column 2 against Mysore, the entry 
“12” shall be substituted.  
12. Delimitation of constituencies .— The Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (Madras)  Order, 1951  and the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Cons tituencies (Mysore) Order, 1951  shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect subject 
to the modifications directed by the Second Schedule.  
13. Provision as to sitting members .—Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing a constituency which on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 12 
stands transferred, whether with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Andhra or to the 
State of  Mysore, shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency 
as so transferred.  
14. Electoral rolls for modified Parliamentary constituencies .—Where by virtue of the 
provisions of section 12, the extent of a Parliamentary constituency has altered, the electoral roll for  8  that constituency as so altered shall as from the appointed day and until it is revised in accordance 
with law, be deemed to consist of so much of the electoral  roll or rolls for any Parliamentary 
constitue ncy or constituencies as relate to the areas comprised within the constituency as so altered.  
 
Legislative Assemblies  
15. Strength of Legislative Assemblies .—(1) The total number of seats to be filled by persons 
chosen by direct election — 
(a) in the Legislative Assembly of Andhra, shall be 140,  
(b) in the Legislative Assembly of Madras, shall be reduced from 375 to 230, and  
(c) in the Legislative Assembly of Mysore, shall be increased from 99 to 104.  
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) — 
(a) in the Part relating to Part A States, — 
(i) entries 1 to 9 shall be renumbered as entries 2 to 10 respectively and before entry 2 as 
so renumbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“1. Andhra …….. ...140”; and  
(ii) for the entry in column 2 against Madras, the entry “230” shall be substituted; and  
(b) in the Part relating to Part B States, for the entry in column 2 against Mysore the entry 
“104” shall be substituted.  
16. Allocation of members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Madras 
representing a constituency which on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 12 
stands transferred, whether with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Andhra or to t he 
State of Mysore shall, as from the appointed day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly 
of Madras and shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Andhra or, as the 
case may be, of Mysore by that constituency as so tran sferred.  
(2) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Madras nominated to that Assembly under 
article 333 to represent the Anglo -Indian community shall, notwithstanding the diminution in the area 
of that State continue to represent the said commun ity in that Assembly under that Article.  
17. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—(1) The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of 
article 172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra, be deemed to have commenced 
on the date on whic h it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Madras.  
(2) The changes in the composition of the Legislative Assemblies of Madras and Mysore shall not 
affect the duration of either of those Assemblies as provided under clause (1) of art icle 172.  
18. Electoral rolls for modified Assembly constituencies .—Where by virtue of the provisions 
of section 12 the extent of an Assembly constituency has altered, the electoral roll for that 
constituency as so altered shall, as from the appointed day and until it is revised in accordance with 
law, be deemed to consist of so much of the electoral roll or rolls for any Assembly constituency or 
constituencies as relate to the areas comprised within the constituency as so altered.  
Legislative Councils  
19. Madras Legislative Council .—(1) In the Legislative Council of Madras there shall be 51 
seats of which — 
 9 (a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses 
(a), (b) and ( c) of clause (3) of article 171 shall be 14,  4 and 4 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Madras in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of the said clause shall be 18; and  
(c) the number to be filled by the persons no minated by the Governor of Madras in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( e) of the said clause shall be 11:  
Provided that as from the 21st day of April, 1954 — 
(a) the number of seats to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -
clause (b) of clause (3) of article 171 shall be increased to 6, and  
(b) the number of seats to be filled by persons referred to in clause ( c) of this sub -section shall 
be reduced to 9.  
(2) The two additional seats allotted under clause ( a) of the p roviso to sub -section ( 1) shall, for 
the purpose of filling them for the first time, be deemed to be seats rendered vacant by the members of 
the Legislative Council of Madras retiring on the expiration of their terms of office on the 20th day of 
April, 195 4. 
(3) The Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950)  shall,— 
(a) as from the appointed day and until the 21st day of April, 1954, stand amended as 
follows:— 
For the entry relating to Madras, the entry — 
“3. Madras 51 14 4 4 18 11 ” shall be substituted; and  
(b) as from the 21st day of April, 1954, stand amended at follows: — 
For the entry relating to Madras, the entry — 
“3. Madras 51 14 6 4 18 9 ” shall be substituted.  
20. Madras Council Constituencies .—The Delimitation of Counci l Constituencies (Madras) 
Order,  1951, shall, until other provision is made by law have effect subject to the modifications  
directed by the Third Schedule : 
Provided that as from the 21st day of April, 1954, the Table appended to paragraph 2 of that Order 
shall have effect subject to the further modification that for the entry in column 3 thereof against 
“Madras (Graduates) ” constituency the entry “6” shall be  substituted.  
21. Members of the Madras Legislative Council and their terms of office .—(1) The sitting 
members of the Legislative Council of Madras whose names are not specified in the Fourth Schedule 
shall, on the appointed day, cease to be members of tha t Council.  
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Council representing the Madras South (Graduates) 
constituency and the Madras South (Teachers) constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be 
deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Council of  Madras by the Madras (Graduates) 
constituency and the Madras (Teachers) constituency, respectively.  
(3) The terms of office of those sitting members who do not cease to be members of the 
Legislative Council on the appointed day shall be determined in acco rdance with the provisions 
contained in the Fourth Schedule.  10 22. Mysore Legislative Council .—(1) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Mysore) 
Order, 1951, shall until other provision is made by law, have effect subject to the modification 
directed b y the Fifth Schedule . 
(2) Any reference in the said Order to the State of Mysore shall be construed as including the 
territory added to that State by sub -section ( 1) of section 4.  
(3) The sitting members of the Legislative Council of Mysore representing th e Chitaldrug (Local 
Authorities) constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to that 
Council by the Chitaldrug -cum-Bellary (Local Authorities) constituency.  
(4) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Mysore representing the Mysore 
(Graduates) constituency or the Mysore (Teachers) constituency, the boundaries of which are by 
virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 2) altered, shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have 
been elected to the said Council  by that constituency as so altered.  
23. Electoral rolls for modified Council constituencies .—As soon as may be after the appointed 
day, the electoral rolls for the Mysore (Graduates) constituency and the Mysore (Teachers) 
constituency shall be revised and  an electoral roll shall be prepared for the Chitaldrug -cum-Bellary 
(Local Authorities) constituency for the Mysore Legislative Council in accordance with the provisions 
of the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) , and the roll so revised or  prepared shall 
come into force immediately upon their final publication in accordance with the rules made under that 
Act. 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Revision of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders .—The Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 , shall have 
effect subject to the modifications directed by the Sixth Schedule.  
25. Rules of Procedure of the Andhra Legislative Assembly .—The rules as to procedure and 
conduct of business in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Madras shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of article 208, have effect 
in relation to the Legislative Assembly of the Andhra subject to such modification s and adaptations as 
may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.  
26. Amendment of section 2, Act 43 of 1950 .—Section 2 of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950, shall be renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of section 2 and to the said section as so 
renumber ed, the following sub -section shall be added, namely: — 
“(2) Any reference in this Act to an order made under section 6, section 9 or section 11 shall, 
unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as including a reference to any such order as 
modified under section 12, section 20 or section 22, as the case may be, of the Andhra State Act, 
1953. ” 
27. Amendment of section 9, Act 8 1 of 1952 .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 9 of the 
Delimitation Commission Act, 1952, for the words “and the orders mad e under either of the said 
Acts” the following shall be substituted, namely :— 
“the Andhra State Act, 1953, and the orders made under any of the said Acts. ” 
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
28. High Court for Andhra .—(1) As from the 1st day of January, 1956, or such earlier date as 
may be appointed under sub -section ( 2), there shall be a separate High Court for the State of Andhra 
(hereinafter referred to as “the High Court of Andhra ”). 11 (2) The President may, if a resolution recommending the establishment of a separat e High Court 
for the State of Andhra has, after having been adopted by the Legislative Assembly of that State, been 
submitted to him, appoint, by notifications in the Official Gazette, a date earlier than the 1st day of 
January, 1956, for the purpose of su b-section ( 1). 
(3) The date mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or, if an earlier date is appointed under subsection ( 2), 
the date so appointed is hereinafter referred to as the “prescribed day. ” 
(4) The principal seat of the High Court of Andhra shall be at such  place as the Governor of 
Andhra may, before the prescribed day, by order, appoint:  
Provided that if a resolution recommending any place for such principal seat is adopted by the 
Legislative Assembly of Andhra, such place shall be appointed by the Governor  as the principal Seat.  
29. Judges of the Andhra High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Madras 
holding office immediately before the prescribed day as may be determined by the President shall on 
that day cease to be Judges of the High Court at Madras and become Judges of the High Court of 
Andhra.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of Andhra 
shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Cour t, 
rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective appointments as Judges of the High 
Court at Madras.  
(3) Any person who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) becomes a Judge of the High Court of Andhra 
shall, except in the case where a Judge othe r than the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras is 
appointed to be the Chief Justice of the High Court of Andhra, continue to be entitled to receive in 
respect of time spent on actual service as a Judge of the High Court of Andhra the special pay whic h 
he was drawing immediately before the prescribed day under sub -paragraph ( 2) of paragraph 10 of the 
Second Schedule to the Constitution.  
30. Jurisdiction of Andhra High Court .—The High Court of Andhra shall have, in respect of 
the territories for the tim e being included in the State of Andhra, all such original, appellate and other 
jurisdiction as, under the law in force immediately before the prescribed day, is exercisable in respect 
of the said territories or any part thereof by the High Court at Madras . 
31. Power to enrol advocates , etc.—(1) The High Court of Andhra shall have the like power to 
approve, admit, enroll, remove and suspend advocates and attorneys and to make rules with respect to 
advocates and attorneys, as are, under the law in force immediately before the prescribed day, 
exercisable by the High Court at Madras.  
(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Andhra shall be regulated in accordance with the 
like principles as, immediately before the prescribed day, are in force with res pect to the right of 
audience in the High Court at Madras:  
Provided that, subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Andhra in the 
exercise of the powers conferred by this section, any person who immediately before the prescribed 
day is an advocate entitled to practice or an attorney entitled to act in the High Court at Madras shall 
be recognised as an advocate or an attorney entitled to practice or to act, as the case may be, in the 
High Court of Andhra.  
32. Practice and procedure in Andhra High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the prescribed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court at Madras shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Cour t of Andhra  
 12 and accordingly that High Court shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to 
practice and procedure as are immediately before the prescribed day exercisable by the High Court at 
Madras:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the prescribed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at Madras shall, until varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Andhra apply with the necessary modifications in relatio n to 
practice and procedure in the High Court of Andhra as if made by that Court.  
33. Custody of the Seal of the Andhra High Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
prescribed day with respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court at Madras s hall, with the 
necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Andhra.  
34. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the prescribed 
day with respect to the form of writs and other pro cesses used, issued or awarded by the High Court at 
Madras shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 
processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Andhra.  
35. Powers of Judges .—The law in force imme diately before the prescribed day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and Division Courts of the High Court at Madras and with 
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relation to the High Court of Andhra.  
36. The place of sitting of the High Court .—The Judges and Division Courts of the High Court 
of Andhra may sit at such place or places in the State of Andhra other than its principal seat as the 
Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of Andhra, appoint.  
37. Procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court .—The law, in force immediately before the 
prescribed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court at Madras and the 
Judges and Division Courts thereof shall with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the 
High Court of Andhra.  
38. Transfer of proceedings from Madras High Court to Andhra High Court .—(1) Except as 
hereinafter provided, the High Court at Madras shall as fr om the prescribed day, have no jurisdiction 
in respect of the State of Andhra.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras immediately before the prescribed day 
as are certified, whether before or after that day by the Chief Justice of that Hi gh Court having regard 
to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought 
to be heard and decided by the High Court of Andhra shall as soon as may be after such certification 
be transferred to the High Cour t of Andhra.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 30,  
but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Madras shall have and the High Court of Andhra 
shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal 
including leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where 
any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Madras  
before the prescribed day:  
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Madras, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Andhra he shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  13 (4) Any order made by the High Court at Madras — 
(a) before the prescribed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Andhra by 
virtue of sub -section  (2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Madras retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Madras, but also as an 
order made by the High Court of Andhra.  
39. Savings .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Andhra of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be 
made on or after the prescribed day with  respect to that High Court by any Legislature of other 
authority having power to make such provision.  
40. Transitional provisions .—(1) The provisions of this section shall have effect with respect to 
the period beginning on the appointed day and ending im mediately before the prescribed day.  
(2) The jurisdiction of the High Court at Madras shall extend to the State of Andhra, and the said 
High Court shall, in relation to the territories of that State, continue to have such jurisdiction as it had 
immediately  before the appointed day.  
41. High Court for the added areas of Mysore .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Mysore shall, as from the appointed day, extend to 
the whole of the transferred territory, and  
(b) the Hi gh Court at Madras shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the 
transferred territory.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras immediately before the appointed day 
as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court  having regard to the place of accrual of the 
cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the 
High Court of Mysore shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High 
Court of M ysore.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter 
provided, the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High Court of Mysore shall, not have, 
jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applicati ons for leave to appeal including leave to 
appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such 
proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed b y the High Court at Madras before the 
appointed day:  
Provided t hat if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Madras, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Mysore he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such  proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Madras — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Mysore by 
virtue of sub -section  (2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Madras retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section ( 3). 
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Madras, but also as an 
order made by the High Court of Mysore.  14 (5) Any person who imm ediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise or an 
attorney entitled to act in the High Court at Madras and was authorised to appear or to act in any 
proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Mysore under su b-section ( 2) or 
the proviso to sub -section ( 3) shall, on such transfer of the proceedings, have the right to appear or to 
act, as the case may  be, in the High Court of Mysore in relation to those proceedings as an advocate or 
an attorney entitled to pract ise or to act in the High Court of Mysore.  
42. Interpretation .—For the purposes of sections 38 and 4 1— 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that Court has disposed of all 
issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal including leave to appeal 
to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to a  High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or 
Division Court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed 
as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
PART V  
FINANCIAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislature .—(1) The Governor of 
Madras may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Andhra and the Consolidated Fund of the State of Madras as he deems necessary 
for a period of not more than four months beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of 
such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of Andhra or the State of Madras, as the case may be:  
Provided that the Governor of Andhra may, after the appointed day, authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Andhra for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of four months.  
(2) Rajpramukh of Mysore may also, at any time before the appointed day authorise such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Mysore as he deems necessary for meeting the 
additional expenditure in respect of the transferred territory for a p eriod of not more than four months 
beginning with the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the 
State.  
44. Vote on account by the Madras Legislative Assembly .—Any grant made by the Legislative 
Assembly of Madras under  sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 206 in respect of the estimated 
expenditure for a part of the financial year 1953 -54 and the law made by the Legislature of that State 
authorising the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for  the purposes for 
which the said grant has been made shall, notwithstanding that the procedure prescribed in article 203 
for the voting of such grant has not been completed and the law in accordance with the provisions of 
article 204 in relation to such ex penditure has not been passed before the appointed day, be deemed to 
be sufficient authority for all expenditure incurred before that day for the purposes for which the said 
grant has been made and for the withdrawal of moneys before that day from the Cons olidated Fund of 
the State in relation to such expenditure.  
45. Authorisation under the Madras Appropriation Act to cease .—As from the appointed day, 
any Act passed by the Legislature of Madras before that day for the appropriation of any money out of 
the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 
1953 -34 shall cease to have effect.  15  
46. Reports relating to the accounts of Madras State .—The reports of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India refer red to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of 
Madras in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each 
of the States of Andhra and Madras who shall cause them to be laid before the  Legislature of the 
State.  
47. Apportionment of assets and liabilities .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the 
assets and liabilities of the State of Madras immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned 
between that State and the  States of Andhra and Mysore in accordance with the provisions contained 
in the Seventh Schedule.  
(2) Any dispute relating to, or arising out of, such apportionment shall be referred to the President 
whose decision shall be final.  
48. Contracts .—(1) Where before the appointed day the State of Madras had made any contract 
in the exercise of the executive power of that State for any purposes of the State, then such contract 
shall— 
(a) if such purposes are as from that day — 
(i) exclusively purposes of the State of Andhra, or  
(ii) partly purposes of the State of Andhra and partly purposes of the State of Mysore and 
not purposes of the State of Madras as constituted on the appointed day,  
be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of th e State of Andhra 
instead of the State of Madras;  
(b) if such purposes are as from that day exclusively purposes of the State of Mysore, be 
deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power of that State instead of the State 
of Madras; and  
(c) in any other case, continue to have effect as having been made in the exercise of the 
executive power of the State of Madras;  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would  have been rights or liabilities of the State of Madras as constituted 
immediately before the appointed day, be rights or liabilities of the State of Andhra, the State of 
Mysore or the State of Madras, as the case may be.  
(2) For the purposes of this secti on there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which 
have accrued or may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any Court or other tribunal in 
proceedings relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liabilit y in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such 
proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the provisions relating to apportionment of liabilities 
in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations contained  in the Seventh schedule; and 
bank balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual 
rights, be dealt with under the said provisions.  
49. Liability in respect of actionable wrongs .—Where immediately before the ap pointed day, 
the State of Madras is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than breach of 
contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) where the cause of action arose — 
(i) wholly within the territories which as from that day are the terri tories of the State of 
Andhra, or  16 (ii) partly within the territories which as from that day are the territories of the State of 
Andhra and partly within the transferred territory but not within any part of the territories 
which as from that day are the territories of the State of Madras,  
be a liability of the State of Andhra;  
(b) where the cause of action arose wholly within the transferred territory, be a liability of the 
State of Mysore; and  
(c) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State of Madras.  
50. Liability as guarantor .—If immediately before the appointed day, the State of Madras is 
liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a Co -operative Society which is registered under the 
Madras Co -operative Societies Act, 1932  (6 of 1932)  and whose area of operations is limited to the 
whole or any part of the territories which on the appointed day become the territories of the State of 
Andhra then as from that day the said liability of the State of Madras in respect of such guarant ee 
shall be a liability of the State of Andhra.  
51. Power of President to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where by virtue 
of any of the provisions of sections 47 to 50 or of the Seventh Schedule, any of the States of Madras, 
Andhra and Mys ore becomes entitled to any property or obtains any other benefits or becomes subject 
to any liability, and the President is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years 
from the appointed day, by any State concerned, that it is just and equitable that that property or those 
benefits should be transferred to or shared with one or both of the other States, or a contribution 
towards that liability should be made by one or both of the other States, the said property or benefits 
shall be alloc ated in such manner, or the other State or States shall make to the State primarily subject 
to the liability such contribution in respect thereof , as the President may after consultation with the 
State Governments concerned, by order determine.  
52. Certain  expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State .—All sums 
payable by any of the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore to any one of the other two States or to 
the Central Government by virtue of the provisions of paragraph 12 or paragraph 17  of the Seventh 
Schedule, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable.  
PART VI  
LEGAL  PROVISIONS  
53. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effect any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Madras or of Mysore shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent auth ority, continue to have the 
same meaning.  
54. Power to adapt law .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Andhra, Madras or Mysore of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government 
may, before the 1st day of April, 1954, by order make such adaptations and modifications of the law, 
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such 
law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made un til altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects a law 
relating to a matter enumerated in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the  Constitution, the Central 
Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government of Andhra, Madras or Mysore, as 
the case may be.  
55. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has 
been made under section 54 of the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, 
tribunal or authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating 
its application in relation to the State of Andhra, Madras or Mysore, construe the law with such 
alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before 
the Court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be.  17 56. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions .—The Governor  as 
respects the State of Andhra and the Rajpramukh as respects the transferred territory may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who as from the appointed 
day shall be competent to exercise such functions exe rcisable under any law in force on that day as 
may be mentioned in that notification and such law shall have effect accordingly.  
57. Legal proceedings concerned the State of Madras .—Where, immediately before the 
appointed day, the State of Madras is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, 
rights or liabilities subject to apportionment between the State of Madras and the States of Andhra and 
Mysore under this Act, the State which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property o r those 
rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the 
State of Madras as a party to those proceedings or to be added as a party thereto, as the case may be, 
and the proceedings may continue according ly. 
58. Provisions as to certain pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately 
before the appointed day before a Court (other than the High Court), tribunal, authority or officer — 
(a) in any area which on that day falls within the State of Madras or the transferred territory 
shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to any part of the territories which as from that day 
are the territories of the State of Andhra, stand transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, 
authority or off icer in the State of Andhra, or  
(b) in any area which on that day falls within the State of Madras or the State of Andhra shall, 
if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to any part of the transferred territory, stand transferred to 
the corresponding cou rt, tribunal, authority or officer in the State of Mysore.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding shall stand transferred under sub -section 
(1), it shall be referred for the decision of the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras and his  
decision shall be final.  
(3) In this section — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal, and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in relation to a State means — 
(i) the court, tribunal authority or officer in which the proceeding would have lain if the 
proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in the State as may be 
determined, before the appointed day by the Governor of Madras, and after the appointed day 
by the Governor or Rajpramukh of that State, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, 
authority or officer.  
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE  AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
59. Provisions for detention in and power to commit to, certain jails and oth er 
institutions .—(1) The Government of Madras and the Government of Mysore shall, for a period of 
five years from the appointed day, make available to the Government of Andhra the jails and other 
institutions specified in Part I and Part II respectively of  the Eighth Schedule for the reception and 
detention of persons committed to, or ordered to be detained in, such jails or institutions by any court, 
tribunal or other authority in the State of Andhra.  18 (2) It shall be competent for a court, tribunal or othe r authority in the State of Andhra to order the 
commitment to, or detention in, any of the jails and other institutions specified in the Eighth Schedule 
during the period referred to in sub -section ( 1) of persons convicted and sentenced, or ordered to be 
detained therein, by such court, tribunal or other authority notwithstanding that such jail or institution 
is outside the State.  
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which the jails and other institutions specified in the 
Eighth Schedule shall be used b y the Government of Andhra for the purposes referred to in sub -
section ( 1) shall be such as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned by the 1st day 
of January, 1954, or, if no agreement is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by order of t he 
President.  
60. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—The Government of Madras and the 
Government of Mysore, in respect of the institutions specified in Part I and Part II, respectively, of the 
Ninth Schedule shall provide for the Gove rnment and the people of the State of Andhra such facilities, 
for such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Governments 
concerned by the 1st day of January, 1954, or, if no agreement is reached by the said date, as ma y be 
fixed by order of the President.  
61. Provisions relating to the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service .—
(1) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service existing 
in the State of Madras immediately before the appointed day, there shall, as from that day, be two 
separate cadres, one for the State of Andhra and the other for the State of Madras, in respect of each 
of the Services.  
(2) The President shall, by order, determine the strength an d composition of, and the allocation of 
individual officers, to the said cadres for each of the States of Andhra and Madras.  
(3) Every officer allocated under sub -section ( 2) to the cadre for the State of Andhra who 
immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Madras shall, — 
(a) if immediately before the appointed day he is holding any post in any area which on that 
day falls in the State of Andhra, be as from that day, deemed to have been duly appointed to that 
post by the Government of Andhra; and  
(b) if immediately before the appointed day he is not holding any post in any such area, be 
appointed by the Government of Andhra to a post in connection with the affairs of that State.  
62. Provisions relating to the Indian Civil Service, the Indian Police, the Indian Service of 
Engineers and the Indian Forest Service .—(1) In respect of the members borne on the Madras 
cadre of the Services known as the Indian Civil Service, the Indian Police, the Indian Service of 
Engineers and the Indian Forest Service, the President shall, by order, determine the allocation of 
individual officers to the States of Andhra and Madras.  
(2) Every officer allocated under sub -section ( 1) to the State of Andhra, who immediately before 
the appointed day, is serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras shall — 
(a) if, immediately before the appointed day, he is holding any post in any area which on that 
day falls in the State of Andhra, be deemed, as from that day, to have be en duly appointed to that 
post by the Government of Andhra; and  
(b) if, immediately before the appointed day, he is not holding any post in any such area, be 
appointed by the Government of Andhra to a post in connection with the affairs of that State.  19 63. Provisions relating to other Services .—(1) The President may by general order require all 
persons who immediately before the appointed day are serving in connection with the affairs of the 
State of Madras in the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or in the transferred territory 
and who under the terms of their appointments or their conditions of service are not normally liable to 
be transferred outside the said territories or territory in which they are serving, to serve as from the 
appoi nted day in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra or the State of Mysore, as the case 
may be, and all allocations so made by the President shall be final.  
(2) The President may by special order require any person who is serving immediately bef ore the 
appointed day in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras and to whom the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) do not apply, to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Andhra.  
(3) Every person who is required to serve under sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) in connection 
with the affairs of the State of Andhra or the State of Mysore shall, — 
(a) if immediately before the appointed day he is holding any post in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Madras in any area whi ch on that day falls in the State in which he is so 
required to serve, be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to that post by the 
Government of, or by other appropriate authority in the State concerned in connection with the 
affairs of that  State; and  
(b) if immediately before the appointed day he is not holding any post in any such area, be 
appointed by the Government of, or by other appropriate authority in, the State concerned, to a 
post in connection with the affairs of that State.  
(4) All persons who are required by the President under sub -section ( 2) to serve in connection 
with the affairs of the State of Andhra shall be classified by him into the f ollowing two categories, 
namely :— 
(i) officers whose allocation to the State of Andhra is final (hereinafter referred to in this 
section as “allotted officers ”), and  
(ii) officers required by the President to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of 
Andhra for a limited period as  provided in sub -section ( 5) (hereinafter referred to in this section as 
“transferred officers ”). 
(5) The period for which a transferred officer may be required to serve in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Andhra shall be two years:  
Provided tha t the Government of Andhra may return any such officer to the State of Madras at 
any time before the expiration of the said period after giving three months' notice to him and to the 
Government of Madras.  
(6) An officer shall be classified under sub -sectio n (4) as an allotted officer or a transferred officer 
according as he is, or is not, in the opinion of the President, suitable for final allotment to the State of 
Andhra.  
(7) A transferred officer shall, during the period he is required to serve in connect ion with the 
affairs of the State of Andhra, — 
(a) continue to be in the service of the State of Madras and be deemed to be on deputation to 
the State of Andhra, and  
(b) be entitled in addition to the remuneration which he would have drawn if he had continu ed 
during such period to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Madras, to such 
allowances as the President may by general or special order determine.  
(8) A transferred officer shall not be dismissed, removed or reduced in rank except with th e 
previous concurrence of the Government of Madras, and if the Government of Madras does not 
concur in any such proposal of the Government of Andhra, then the Government of Andhra shall 
notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5) return the offic er concerned to the State of 
Madras.  20 (9) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 7) and ( 8), the conditions of service of a transferred 
officer shall be the same as they would have been if he had continued to serve in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Madras during the period he is required to serve in connection with the affairs of 
the State of Andhra.  
(10) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the 
provisions of section 61 or section 62 appl y. 
64. Power of President to give directions .—The President may give such directions to the States 
of Madras, Andhra and Mysore as may appear to him to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect 
to the provisions of sections 61, 62 and 63 and ensuring t he proper division of services among those 
States.  
65. Report of the Madras Public Service Commission .—The report of the Madras Public 
Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day shall be pre sented under clause (2) of Article 323 to the Governors of Andhra and 
Madras, and the Governor of Madras shall on receipt of such report cause a copy thereof together with 
a memorandum explaining, as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, where th e advice of the 
Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non -acceptance to be laid before the Legislature 
of the State of Madras and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum to 
be laid before the Legislative Assembly o f the State of Andhra.  
66. Special provisions with regard to Tungabhadra Project .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act but subject to the provisions of paragraph 12  of the Seventh Schedule, all rights 
and liabilities of the State of Madras in  relation to Tungabhadra Project or the administration thereof 
shall, on the appointed day, be the rights and liabilities of the States of Andhra and Mysore subject to 
such adjustments as may be made by agreement entered into by the said States after consu ltation with 
the President or if no such agreement is entered into within two years from the appointed day, as the 
President may by order determine having due regard to the purposes of the Project, and any such 
order may provide for the management of the P roject jointly by the said States or otherwise:  
Provided that the order so made by the President may be varied by any subsequent agreement 
entered into by the States of Andhra and Mysore.  
(2)An agreement or order referred to in sub -section  (1) shall, if there has been an extension or 
further development of the Project after the appointed day, provide also for the rights and liabilities of 
the States of Andhra and Mysore in relation to such extension or further development.  
(3)The rights and liabilities re ferred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include — 
(a) the rights to receive and to utilise water which may be available for distribution as a result 
of the Project,  
(b) the rights to receive and to utilise the power generated as a result of the Project.  
(c) the rights and liabilities in respect of the administration of the Project and the construction, 
maintenance and operation thereof,  
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointed 
day by the Government of Madras with any person other than Government.  
(4) The President may from time to time give such directions as may appear to him to be 
necessary generally in regard to any of the matters specified in the foregoing provisions of this section 
and, in particular, for the completion of the Project and its operation and maintenance thereafter:  21 Provided that no such direction shall be issued or have effect after an agreement has been entered 
into by the States of Andhra and Mysore under sub -section ( 1) or after an order has been made by the 
President under that sub -section, whichever is earlier.  
(5) In this section, the expression “Tungabhadra Project ” or “the Project ” means the project 
agreed to between the Government of Madras and the Government of Hyderabad before the appointed 
day and, so far as the State of Madras is concerned, intended for the supply and distribution of water 
from the Tungabhadra river by means of high -level and low level canals to the districts of Bellary, 
Anantapur, Cuddapah an d Kurnool, and for the generation of electric energy, both hydro -electric and 
thermal, and its transmission and distribution to the said districts and includes any extension or further 
development after that day of that Project for the said purposes.  
67. Allowances and privileges of the Governor of Andnra .—The allowances and privileges of 
the Governor of Andhra shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under 
clause (3) of article 158, be such as the President may, by order, determi ne. 
68. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
69. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giv ing effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may by order do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appear 
to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
  22 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections  8 and 10)  
PART I  
Andhra Members of the Council of States.  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1958.  
1. Sri Punchalapalli  Sundarayya.  
2. Sri PydahVenkatanarayana.  
3. Sri G. Ranganayakulu alias N. G. Ranga.  
       Members whose term of office expir es on the 2 nd April, 1956.  
4. Sri  Kommareddi  Suryanarayana.  
5. Sri S. Sambhu Prasad.  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2 nd April, 1954.  
6. Sri Kotamraju Rama Rao.  
7. Sri Makkineni  Basavapunnaiah.  
8. Sri Neelam  Sanjiva Reddy.  
9. Sri K. N. Rahimatullah.  
  
PART II  
Madras Members of the Council of States  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2 nd April, 1958.  
1. Sri T. Bhaskar  Rao. 
2. Sri M. Mohamed Ismail.  
3. Sri K. L. Narasimham.  
4. Sri G. Rajagopalan.  
5. Sri H. D. Rajah.  
6. Sri V. M. S urendra Ram.  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2 nd April, 1956.  
7. Sri B. V. Kakkilaya.  
8. Sri V. K. Krishna Menon.  
9. Sri Srimati Mona Hensman.  
10. Sri V. M. Obaidullah Sahib.  
11. Sri T. S. Pattabiraman.  
12. Sri A. Ramaswami  Mudaliar.  
13. Sri S. Venkataraman.  23 Members whose term of office expires on the 2 nd April, 1954.  
14. Sri Ezhukuttikkal  Imbichi  Bava.  
15. Sri S. Guruswami.  
16. Sri P. S. Rajagopal Naidu.  
17. Sri K . Sadananda Hegde  
18. Sri T. V. Kamalaswamy.  
  24 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section  12) 
I. MODIFICATIONS  IN THE  DELIMITATION OF  PARLIAMENTARY AND  ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES 
(MADRAS ) ORDER , 1951  
1. In paragraph 1, for “Madras ” substitute “Andhra and Madras ”. 
2. In paragraph 2, for “the State of Madras” substitute “each of the States of Andhra and Madras” . 
3. In Table A, — 
(a) above the entry relating to Pathapatnam constituency insert the sub -heading “Part I -
Andhra” ; 
(b) for the entry in column 2 relating to Nandyal constituency, substitute “The Nandyal, 
Nandikotkur, Markapur, Cumbum, sirvel and Koil kuntla  taluks of the Kurnool District” ; 
(c) for the entry in column 2 relating to Kurnool constituency, substitute “The Kurnool, 
Dhone, Pattikonda,Alur and Adonitaluks and Banganapalle sub-taluk of the Kurnool District” ; 
(d) omit the entry relating to Bellary constituency;  
(e) for the entry in column 2 relating to Anantapur constituency, substitute “The Gooty, 
Kalyandrug, Tadpatri, Rayadrug and Anantapurtaluks (excluding Bukkacherlafirka  of the 
Anantapurtaluk) of the Anantapur district” ; 
(f) for the entry in column 2 relating to Penukonda constituency, substitute “The 
Bukkacherlafirka of the Anantapur taluk, and the Dharmavaram, Penukonda, Madakasira, 
Hindupur and Kadiritaluks of the Anant apur District”; and   
(g) above the entry relating to Madras constituency, insert the sub -heading “Part II —Madras”.  
4. In Table B, — 
(a) above the sub -heading “Srikakulam District” insert the sub -heading “PART I —
AND HRA”.  
(b) after the entry relating to Kurnool constituency, insert the following entry, namely: — 
“Adoni                          The Alur and Adonitaluks                    2          1                       ….”. 
(c)after the entry relating to Anantapur constituency, insert the following entry, namely:— 
“Rayadrug                     The Rayadrug                                   taluk                                1….” ; 
(d) omit the sub-heading “Bellary District” and all entries relating to Adoni, Siruguppa, 
Bellary, Rayadrug, Hospet, Kudligi and H arpanahalli constituencies thereunder; and  
(e) above the sub -heading, “Madras City” insert the sub -heading “PART II - MADRAS”.  
5. In the Appendix, omit the whole of item (14).  
II. MODIFICATIONS  IN THE  DELIMITATION  OF PARLIAMENTARY  AND  ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES  
(MYSORE ) ORDER , 1951  
1. In Table A, add the following entry at the end, namely: — 
“Bellary       The Bellary district          1”                         25  
2. In Table B, add the following entries at the end, namely: — 
        “Bellary District  
Bellary  The Bellary taluk  1 — 
Siruguppa  The Siruguppataluk  1 — 
Hospet  The Hospet and Sandurtaluks  1 — 
Kudligi  The Kudligi  taluk  the Chigateri  firka  
of the Harpanahalli taluk,  and  the  
Ittigi  firka  (excluding  Hampasagara  
Yenigi, Bannical,  Yenigi  Basapur,   
G. Kodhihalli,  Kodlabal,  Byasigideri,  
Hagaribomma -nahalli  and C hintra -
palli villages ) of the Hadagalli  taluk . 1 — 
Harpanahalli  The Harpanahalli, Arsikere and           
Teligi  firkas of the Harpanahalli  
taluk;  and the Hirehadagalli, 
Hadagalli, and Tambarahalli  firkas 
and Hampasagara  Yenigi, Bannical, 
Yenigi  Basapur, G. Kodihalli,  
Kodlabal, Byasigideri, Hagari -
bommanahalli and Chint -rapalli 
villages of Ittigi, firka of the 
Hadagalli  taluk .”   1 — 
 
 
 
  26 THE  THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section  20) 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE  DELIMITATION OF  COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  (MADRAS ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table — 
(a) for the sub -heading “Graduates' Constituencies ” substitute “Graduates' Constituency ”; 
(b) omit the entry relating to the Madras North (Gradu ates) Constituency;  
(c) in column 1 for “Madras South (Graduates) ” substitute “Madras (Graduates) ”; 
(d) for the sub -heading “Teachers' constituencies ” substitute 'Teachers' Constituency ”; 
(e) omit the entry relating to the Madras North (Teachers) Constituency;  
(f) in column 1, for “Madras South (Teachers) ” substitute “Madras  (Teachers) ”; and  
(g) omit the entries relating to the following Local Authorities' Constituencies:  
(i) Srikakulam -cum-Visakhapatnam cum -East Godavari (Local Au thorities);  
(ii) West Godavari -cum-Krishna -cuin-Guntur (Local Au thorities);  
(iii) Nellore -cum-Chittoor (Local Authorities); and  
(iv) Ceded Districts (Local Authorities).  
 
  27 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section  21) 
LIST OF MEMBERS  OF THE MADRAS  LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL  
(a) Elected by Local Authorities’ constituencies  
1. Sri Rangaswami Naidu     ….20 th April, 1958     
2. Sri K. N. Palaniswami  Goundar    ….20 th April, 1958   
3. Sri P. B. K. Thiagaraja  Reddiar    ….20 th April, 1958  
4. Sri A. Somasundarm      ….20 th April, 1956 
5. Sri  C. Marudavanam  Pillai     ….20 th April, 1956  
6. Sri Abdul Salam      ….20 th April, 1956  
7. Sri S. O. S p. Odayappa     ….20 th April, 1956  
8. Sri  P. Sivasubramania  Nadar     ….20 th April, 1956  
9. Sri T. S. Sankaranarayana  Pillai    ….20 th April, 1956  
10. Sri C. Perumalswamy Reddy                 ….20 th April, 195 4 
11. Sri Nathamani Naidu                  ….20 th April, 195 4 
12. Sri Purushothaman       ….20 th April, 195 4 
13. Sri S. Narasappayya       ….20 th April, 195 4 
14. Sri Thurutheelakath  Thottinakara     
Puthia  Purayil  Kunnhipocker    ….20 th April, 195 4 
(b) Elected by  the Madras (Graduates)  constituen cy 
15. Sri A. Lakshmanaswami  Mudaliar    ….20 th April, 1958  
16. Sri P. V. Cherian      ….20 th April, 1958  
17. Sri K. Balasubramania  Iyer    ….20 th April, 1956  
18. Sri R. Bhashyam      ….20 th April, 1956  
(c) Elected by  the Madras (Teachers)  constituen cy 
19. Sri V. R. Ranganathan     ….20 th April, 1956  
20. Sri Alexander Gnanamuthu     ….20 th April, 1956  
21. Sri G. Krishnamurthi     ….20 th April, 1954  
22. Sri E. H. Parameswaran     ….20 th April, 1954  28 (d) Elected by  the Madras Legislative Assembly  
23. Sri T. M. Narayanaswami  Pillai    ….20 th April, 1958  
24. Sri B. V. Subrahmanyam     ….20 th April, 1958  
25. Sri M. Bhaktavatsalam     ….20 th April, 1958  
26. Sri V. Chakkarai  Chetty     ….20 th April, 1958  
27. Sri V. G. Rao      ….20 th April, 1958  
28. Sri S. B. Adityan      ….20 th April, 1956  
29. Sri M. P. Govinda  Menon     ….20 th April, 1956  
30. Sri S. Srinivasa  Rao                 ….20th April, 1956  
31. Sri  Arcot  Gajapathi  Nayagar    ….20th April, 1956  
32. Sri N. Nallasenapathi  Sarkarai  Manradiar               ….20th April, 1956  
33. Sri Mohammad Raza Khan                 ….20th April, 1956  
34. Sri A. M. Alla  Pichai     ….20th April, 1956  
35. Sri M. Ethirajulu      ….20th April, 1956  
36. Sri N. Annamalai  Pillai     ….20th April, 1954  
37. Srimati  Manjubhashini     ….20th April, 1954  
38. Sri V. K. John      ….20th April, 1954  
39. Sri T. G. Krishnamoorthi     ….20th April, 1954  
40. Sri M. P. Sivagnana  Gramani    ….20th April, 1954  
 
(e) Nominated by the Governor  
41. Sri V. Bhashyam  Ayyangar                  ….20th April, 195 8 
42. Sri O. P. Ramaswamy  Reddiar    ….20th April, 1958  
43. Srimati R. S. Subbulakshmi  Ammal                 ….20th April, 1958  
44. Sri Chakravarthi Rajagopalachari    ….20th April, 1956  
45. Sri T. M. Daivasikhamani  Achariar                ….20th April, 1956  
46. Sri G. Venkatachalam     ….20th April, 1956  
47. Sri M. Satyanarayana     ….20th April, 1956  
48. Sri Muhammad Usman     ….20th April, 1954  
49. Dr. S . Muthulakshmi  Reddi                 ….20th April, 1954  
50. Sri P. M. Marthandam  Pillai                 ….20th April, 1954  
51. Mrs. M. N. Clubwala     ….20th April, 1954  
 29 PROVISIONS  FOR DETERMINING THE TERMS OF OFFICE OF  MEMBERS  
1. Except as provided in the succeeding paragraphs the term of office of every member shall 
expire on the date specified against his name in the above list.  
2. The term of office of — 
(a) One of the six members specified against serial num bers 4 to 9,  
(b) One of the two members specified against serial num bers 19 and 20, and  
(c) Two of the eight members specified against serial numbers 28 to 35,  
shall be increased so as to expire on the 20th April, 1958.  
3. The term of office of one of the four members specified against serial Nos. 44 to 47 shall be 
reduced so as to expire on the 20th April, 1954.  
4. The members whose terms of office are to be in creased under paragraph 2 and the member whose 
term of office is to be reduced under paragraph 3 shall be determined as soon as may be  after the ap -
pointed day by lot drawn in such manner as the Chair man of the Legislative Council of Madras may 
direct. 
 
 
 
  30 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section  22) 
MODIFICATION IN THE  DELIMITATION  OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  (MYSORE ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table, for the entry relating to the Chitaldrug (Local Authorities) constituency, substitute the 
following: — 
“Chitaldrug -cum-Bellary                Chitaldrug District (including Davangere City)                                2.” 
(Local Authorities) .            and Bellary District.  31 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section  24) 
I.—MODIFICATIONS  IN THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
1. For paragraph 4 , substitute the following: — 
“4. Any reference in the Schedule to this order — 
(a) to the State of Madras, Andhra or Mysore or to a district or other territorial division of 
any of these States shall be construed as a reference to that State or to that district or other 
territorial divi sion as constituted on the 1st day of October, 1953; and  
(b) to any  other State or to a district or other territo rial Division thereof shall be construed 
as a reference to that state or to that district or other territorial division as constituted on the 
26th day of January, 1950.”  
2. In the Schedule — 
(a) for the sub-heading “Part V —Madras” and for the words “Throughout the State” 
thereunder, substitute “Part V —Madras and Andhra” and “Throughout e ach of the States” 
respectively;  
(b) for the entry under the sub -heading “Part XII —Mysore” substitute the following: — 
“1. Throughout the State except in Bellary district; — 
1. Adidravida  
2. Adikarnataka  
3. Banjara or Lambani  
4. Bhovi  
5. Koracha  
6. Korama  
2. In Bellary district: — 
1. Adi Andhra  
2. Adi  Dravida  
3. Adikarnataka  
4. Ajila  
5. Arunthathiyar  
6. Baira  
7. Bakuda  
8. Bandi  
9. Bariki  
10. Bavuri  
11. Bellara  32 12. Byagari  
13. Chachati  
14. Chakkiliyan  
15. Chalavadi  
16. Chamar  
17. Chandala  
18. Cheruman  
19. Dandasi  
20. Devendrakulathan  
21. Dom or Dombara,  
 Paidi, Pano  
22. Ghasi or Haddi,  
 Relli  Sachandi  
23. Godagali  
24. Godari  
25. Godda  
26. Gosangi  
27. Hasla  
28. Holeya  
29. Jaggali  
30. Jambuvulu  
31. Kadan  
32. Kalladi  
33. Kanakkan  
34. Karimpalan  
35. Kodalo  
36. Koosa  
37. Koraga  
38. Kudubi  
39. Kudumban  
40. Kuravan  
41. Kurichchan  
42. Madari  
43. Madiga  33 44. Maila  
45. Mala (including Agency Malas)  
46. Mala Dasu  
47. Malasar  
48. Matangi  
49. Mavilan  
50. Moger  
51. Muchi  
52. Mundala  
53. Nalakeyava  
54. Nayadi  
55. Pagadai  
56. Painda  
57. Paky  
58. Pallan  
59. Pambada  
60. Pamidi  
61. Panan  
62. Panchama  
63. Panniandi  
64. Paraiyan  
65. Paravan  
66. Pulayan  
67. Puthirai  Vannan  
68. Raneyar  
69. Samagara  
70. Samban  
71. Sapari  
72. Semman  
73. Thoti  
74. Tiruvalluvar  
75. Valluvan  
76. Valmiki  
77. Vettuvan” . 34 II. MODIFICATIONS  IN THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
1. For paragraph 3, substitute the following: — 
“3. Any reference in the Schedule to this order — 
(a) to the State of Madras, Andhra or Mysore or to a district or other territorial division of 
any of these States shall be construed as a reference to that State or to that district or other 
territorial divi sion as constituted on the 1st day of October, 1953; and  
(b) to any other State or to a district or other territo rial Division thereof shall be construed 
as a reference to that state or to that district or other territor ial division as constituted on the 
26th day of January, 1950.”  
2. In the Schedule — 
(a) for the sub -heading “Part V —Madras” and for the words “Throughout the State” 
thereunder, substitute “Part V —Madras and Andhra” and “Throughout e ach of the States” 
respec tively:   
(b) for the entry under the sub -heading “Part XII —Mysore” substitute the following: — 
“1. Throughout the State except in Bellary district :— 
1. Hasalaru  
2. Iruliga  
3. Jenu  Kuruba  
4. Kadu -Kuruba  
5. Maleru  
6. Soligaru  
 2. In Bellary district: — 
1. Aran adan 
2. Bagala  
3. Bhottadas —Bodo  Bhottada, Muria  Bhottada and Sano Bhottada  
4. Bhumias —Bhuri  Bhumia and Bodo  Bhumia  
5. Chenchu  
6. Gadabas —Boda  Gadaba, Cerllam  Gadaba, Franji  Gadaba, Jodia  Gadaba, Olaro  Gadaba, Pangi  
Gadaba and Pranga  Gadaba  
7. Gondi —Modya  Gond and Rajo  Gond  
8. Goudus -Bato, Bhirithya  Dudhokouria, Hato, Jatako and Joria  
9. Kosalya  Goudus —Bosothoriya  Goudus, Chitti  Goudus, Dangayath  Goudus, Dodd Kamariya, 
Dudu  Kamaro, Ladiya  Goudus and Pullosoriya  Goudus  
10. Magatha  Goudus —Bernia  Goudu, Boodo  Magatha, Dongayath  Goudu, Ladya  Goudu, Ponna  
Magatha and Sana Magatha.  
11. Holva  35 12. Jadapus  
13. Jatapus  
14. Kammara  
15. Kattunayakan  
16. Khattis -Khatti, Kommarao and L ohara 
17. Kodu  
18. Kommar  
19. Konda  Dhoras  
20. Konda  Kapus  
21. Kondareddis  
22. Kondhs —Desaya Kondhs,  Dongria  Kondhs, Kuttiya  Kondhs , Tikiria  Kondhs and Yenity  
Kondhs  
23. Kota  
24. Kotia —Bartika  Bentho O riya, Dhulia or Dulia, Holva  Paiko, Putiya, Sanrona and Sidho  Paiko  
25. Koya or Goud, with its sub -sects —Raja or Rasha  Koyas, Lingadhari  Koyas  (ordinary) and 
Kottu  Koyas  
26. Kudiya  
27. Kurumans  
28. Manna Dhora  
29. Maune  
30. Mukha  Dhora —Nooka  Dhora  
31. Muria  
32. Paigarapu  
33. Palasi  
34. Paniyan  
35. Porjas —Bodo  Bonda, Daruva, Didua, Jodia, Mundili, Pengu  Pydi and Saliya  
36. Reddi  Dhoras  
37. Savaras —Kapu  Savaras,  Khutto  Savaras and Maliya  Savaras  
38. Sholaga  
39. Toda  
40. Inhabitants of the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi “Islands who, and both of whose parents, 
were born in th ese Islands.”  
  36 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections  47(1), 48( 3), 51,  52 and 66( 1)] 
PROVISIONSAS TO  APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES BETWEEN MADRAS, ANDHRA AND 
MYSORE  
1. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Schedule, all land and all stores, articles and other 
goods shall remain the property of, or as the case  may be, pass to, the State in which they are situated.  
(2) In this paragraph, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any 
rights in or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, bank notes and 
currency notes.  
2. (1) A sum equivalent to the proceeds of any public loan raised by the Government of Madras 
between the 1st day of July, 1953 and the appointed day , or such portion thereof as the President may 
determine, shall be allocated between the States of Madras and Andhra in such proportion as may be 
fixed by the President having regard to the terms on which the loan was raised.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -paragraph ( 1) of this paragraph, the total o f the cash balances 
in all treasuries of the State of Madras and the credit balances with the Reserve Bank of India 
immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of Madras, Andhra and 
Mysore in the proportion of 62 ⅔: 36 : 1 ⅓. 
Provided that for the purpose of such division there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances 
of the three States in the books of the Reserve Bank of  India on the appointed day.  
Explanation .—In this paragraph “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury.  
3. Any unissued stores of any class shall be divided between the States of Madras, Andhra and 
Mysore in proportion to the total indents for stores of that class  made in the three years immediately 
preceding the 1st day of April, 1953, for the areas respectively comprised in the States of Madras and 
Andhra and the transferred territory excluding the indents relating to the Secretariat and offices of 
Heads of Depar tments located in the City of Madras:  
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to stores held for specific purposes, such as, 
for the use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops and electrical undertakings or on specific 
works under  construction.  
4. The State of Andhra shall be entitled to 36/100th share of the printing machinery in the 
Government Press at Madras. This share shall, as far as practicable, be given to that State in the form 
of machinery which can be removed and utilised by it, and to the extent to which this is not 
practicable, an adjustment shall be made in cash on the basis of the book value of the machinery less 
depreciation where such depreciation is adjusted in the accounts of the Press.  
5. The right to reco ver arrears of taxes including land revenue shall belong to the State in which 
the taxed property is situate or the taxed transactions took place.  
6. (1) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day by the State of 
Madras to any  local body (other than the District Board of Bellary), society, agriculturist or other 
person in an area within the State shall belong to the State in which that area is included on the 
appointed day.  
(2) If immediately before the appointed day any sums a re due from the District Board of Bellary 
to the State of Madras on account of loans or advances made before that day, such part thereof as is 37 due on account of any loan or advance utilised in or for the benefit of Alur and Adonitaluks, or, in or 
for the b enefit of Rayadrugtaluk shall be a debt due to the State of Andhra by the District Board of 
Kurnool or, as the case may be of Anantapur, and the remaining part shall be a debt due to the State of 
Mysore by the District Board of Bellary.  
(3) The right to re cover any loans or advances made before the appointed day by the State of 
Madras to any pers on, firm or institution outside the State, shall belong to the State of Madras:  
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be divi ded between 
the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 62⅔: 36: 1 ⅓. 
7. (1) The balance of the States' share of the taxes on income and of the Union duties of excise 
payable to the State of Madras in respect of the financial year 1953 -54 shall be shared between the 
States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the proportion of 62⅔: 36: 1⅓. 
Explanation .—The balance referred to in this sub -paragraph shall be taken to be one -half of the 
amount payable to the State of Madras as constituted immediately before the appointed day out of the 
States' share of taxes on income or of Union duties o f excise, as the case may be in accordance with 
the Budget Estimates of the Central Government in respect of the financial year 1953 -54. 
(2) The States’  share of the taxes on income or of the Union duties of excise payable to the State 
of Madras as constit uted immediately before the appointed day in respect of each of the financial 
years commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1954, shall, until other provision is made by law, 
be also shared between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the propor tion of 62⅔: 36: 1 ⅓. 
8. The sums at the credit of the Central Road Fund due to the State of Mad ras immediately before 
the appointed day shall be allocated between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in the 
proportion of 62⅔: 36 : 1 ⅓. 
9. The shares held  immediately before the appointed day by the State of Madras in the Travancore 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited, the Madras Radio and Electrical Limited and the Madras Industrial 
Invest ment Corporation shall be divided between the States of Madras, Andhr a and Mysore in the 
proportion of 62⅔: 36 : 1 ⅓. 
10. The securities held in respect of investments made from any depreciation reserve fund shall 
accrue to the State in whose area the undertaking for which the depreciation reserve fund is 
maintained is situa te. 
11. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 12, the assets and liabilities relating to commercial or 
industrial undertakings shall in the case when the undertakings are situate in the transferred territory, 
pass to the State of Mysore and, in other case s, pass to the State in which the undertakings are situate.  
12. ( 1) The public debt of the State of Madras attributable to loans raised by the issue of 
Government securities which are outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day 
shall a s from such day be the debt of the State of Madras; and the States of Andhra and Mysore shall 
be liable to pay to the State of Madras their shares of the sums due from time to time for the servicing 
and repayment of the debt. For the purpose of determining  the said shares, the debt shall be deemed to 
be apportioned between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore as if it were a debt referred to in 
sub-paragraph ( 2) of this paragraph, and the shares of the States of Andhra and Mysore shall be 
determined acco rdingly:  
Provided that the liability for any public loan or portion thereof referred to in sub -paragraph ( 1) of 
paragraph 2 shall, for the purposes of this sub -paragraph, be deemed to be apportioned between the 38 States of Andhra and Madras in the same proportion as may be fixed under sub -paragraph ( 1) of 
paragraph 2 in regard to the allocation of the proceeds of such loan or portion thereof.  
Explanation .—In this sub -paragraph, the expression “Government securities ” has the same 
meaning as in c lause (a) of section 2 of the Indian Securities Act, 1920 ( 10 of 1920)  
(2) The remaining public debt of the State of Madras that is to say, the debt attributable to loans 
taken from the Central Government, the Reserve Bank of India or any other Bank before the 
appoi nted day, shall be apportioned between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore in proportion 
to the total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred in the territories of the 
States of Madras and Andhra and the transferred territor y up to the commencement of the appointed 
day, including the terms dealt with in paragraph 9 of this Schedule:  
Provided that any loan taken from the Central Government before the appointed day in connection 
with the construction of buildings, roads or othe r works for the temporary capital of the State of 
Andhra or for purposes incidental thereto shall to the extent of the expenditure so incurred until that 
day be wholly the liability of the State of Andhra.  
(3) For the purposes of the allocation under sub -paragraph ( 2) of this paragraph, only expenditure 
on assets for which capital accounts have been kept (excluding the Buckingham Canal and any 
buildings for which such accounts have been kept) shall be taken into account:  
Provided that the amount of public d ebt on account of the expenditure on the Tung abhadra Project 
referred to in s ection 66 shall be reallocated on such basis as may be agreed upon between the States 
concerned, or, if no agreement is entered into within two years from the appointed day, as ma y be 
fixed by order of the President.  
(4) All sinking funds for loans raised before the appointed day by the Government of Madras shall 
remain with the State of Madras and the net amount of such funds shall be taken into consideration in 
allocating the due s on account of such loans between the States of Madras, Andhra and Mysore.  
(5) In order to compensate the State of Andhra finally for its relatively smaller share of buildings, 
its share in the liability on account of debt to be apportioned between the St ates of Andhra and 
Madras under sub -paragraph ( 2) of this paragraph shall be reduced by 230.4 lakhs of rupees and the 
share of the State of Madras in such liability shall be correspondingly increased.  
13. Civil deposits and local fund deposits shall pass t o the Sta te in whose area the deposits have 
been made, and the liability to pay them shall also fall on that State.  
14. The securities held in the Zamindari Abolition Fund shall be allocated between the States of 
Madras, Andhra and Mysore in proportion to the estimated amount of compensation payable in the 
territories com prised within the State of Madras as constituted on the appointed day, in the territories 
forming the State of Andhra and the transferred territory.  
15. The liability in respect of the und isbursed amounts in the Madras Road Fund as they stand 
immediately before the appointed day shall be taken over by the State in which the local bodies to 
whom they are payable exist.  
16. Each St ate shall take over the liabilities in respect of the Providen t Fund accounts of the 
Government servants permanently allotted to it.  
17. ( 1) Subject to the adjustment mentioned in sub -paragraph ( 3) of this paragraph, each State 
shall, in respect of pensions granted by the State of Madras before the appointed day, pay  the pensions 
drawn in its treasuries and sub -treasuries.  39 (2) Subject to the said adjustment, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in 
connection with the affairs of the State of Madras who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to 
retirement before the appointed day but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately 
before that day shall be the liability of the State of Madras.  
(3) There shall be computed in respect of the part of the financial year 1953 -54 commencing on 
the appoi nted day, and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in each 
State in  respect of pensions referred to  in sub -paragraphs ( 1) and ( 2) of this paragraph; and each of the 
States of Andhra and Mysore shall receive from, or pay to,  the State of Madras the amount by which 
the total payments in the State of Andhra or the State of Mysore, as the case may be, for that part of 
the year or for that year exceed or, as the case may be, fall short of 36 per cent . in the case of the State 
of Andhra and 1 ⅓ per cent . in the case of the State of Mysore, of the total payments made in the 
States of Andhra, Mysore and Madras for that part of the year or for that year.  
(4) The liability in respect of pensions of officers retiring on or after the appo inted day shall be 
that of the State granting the pension. The portion of the pension attributable to the service of any 
such officer before the appointed day shall be allocated between the States of Madras, Andhra and 
Mysore in the proportion of 62 ⅔: 36: 1⅓, and the State which has granted the pension shall be entitled 
to receive from the other two States their shares of this liability. In respect of any officer whose 
services after the appointed day were partly in one of the States of Madras, Andhra and M ysore as 
granted the pension and partly in one or both of the other two States, such other State or each of such 
other States, as the case may be, shall reimburse the State by which the pension is granted an amount 
which bears to the portion of the pension  of such officer attributable to his service after the appointed 
day the same ratio as the period of qualifying service of that officer after the appointed day under the 
State bears to the total qualifying service of such officer after the appointed day re ckoned for the 
purposes of pension.  
Explanation .—Any reference in this paragraph to pension shall be construed as including a 
reference to the commuted value of such pensions.  
18. If and in so far as any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an as set or liability of the 
nature referred to in the foregoing paragraphs, it shall be dealt with in accordance with provisions of 
the relevant paragraph.  
19. The benefit or burden of any assets or liabilities not dealt with in the foregoing paragraphs or 
in section 48 or section 49 or section 50 or section 66 shall be apportioned between the State of 
Madras and the States of Andhra and Mysore in such manner as the President may by order direct:  
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be taken as prohibi ting the apportionment of  such 
benefit or burden in any other manner if the States concerned so agree.   40 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
[See section  59] 
Part I 
Jails and other institutions in the State of Madras: — 
(1) The Presidency Jail for Women, Vellore.  
(2) The Senior Certified School, Chingleput.  
Part II 
Jails and other institutions in the transferred territory :— 
(1) The Junior Certified School, Bellary.  
(2) The Central Jail, Bellary.  
(3) The Alipuram Jail, Bellary.  
(4) The Borstal School, Bellary.  
  41 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
(See section  60) 
Part I 
Institutions in the State of Madras: — 
(1) The King Institute, Guindy.  
(2) The Irrigation Research Station, Poondi.  
(3) The Police Training College, Vellore.  
(4) The Finger Print Bureau, Vellore.  
(5) The Government Press, Madras.  
(6) The Government Textile Institute, Madras.  
(7) The Government College of Indigenous Medicine, Madras.  
(8) The Madras Fire Services State Training School, Madras.  
(9) The Veterinary College, Madras.  
(10) The Serum Institute, Ranipet.  
(11) The Bar nard Institute of Radiology, Madras.  
(12) The Chemical Examiner's Department Madras.   
(13) The Central Survey Office, Madras.  
(14) The Government Lady Willingdon Leprosy Sanatorium, Tirumani.  
Part II 
Institutions in the transferred territory :— 
(1) Rayalaseema Polytechnic, Bellary.  
(2) The Government Wellesley Tuberculosis Sanatorium, Bellary.  
 
--------------------------The Calcutta High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction) Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE CALCUTTA HIGH COURT (EXTENSION OF JURISDICTION) ACT, 1953  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Extension of jurisdiction of Calcutta High Court to Chandernagore and Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands . 
3. Effect of certain orders.  
4. Power to make rules.  
  2 
 THE CALCUTTA HIGH COURT (EXTENSION OF JURISDICTION) ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1953  
[18th December , 1953 .] 
An Act to extend the jurisdiction of the High Court at Calcutta to Chande rnagore and the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Calcutta High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction) Act, 
1953.  
2. Extension of jurisdiction of Calcutta High Court to Chande rnagore and Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands .—The jurisdiction of the High Court at Calcutta shall extend to Chande rnagore and 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and shall, as from the 2nd day of May, 1950, be de emed to have 
extended to Chande rnagore , and the said High Court shall, for all purposes be deemed to be the High 
Court for Chande rnagore and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
3. Effect of certain orders .—Any order made — 
(i) by the highest court of appeal in relation to Chande rnagore  before the 2nd day of May , 
1950, or in any proceeding pending before that Court on that day; or  
(ii) by the Chief Commissioner of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands before the 
commencement of this Act in the discharge of his functions as the High Court for t hose Islands,  
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that Court, or as the case may be, of the 
Chief Commissioner, but also as if it were an order made by the High Court at Calcutta.  
4. Power to make rules .—Subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, the 
High Court at Calcutta may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act and for the purpose of 
effectively exercising its jurisdiction in or in relation to Chandernagore and  the Anda man and Nicobar 
Islands.    
_____  
--------------------------The Coir Industry Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE COIR INDUSTRY ACT, 1953  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION  
______  
SECTIONS  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMANARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COIR BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Coir Board.  
5. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman.  
7. Vice -Chairman.  
8. Executive and other Committees.  
9. Secretary and staff.  
10. Functions of the Board.  
11. Dissolution of the Board.  
CHAPTER III  
CONTROL  OVER THE EXPORT OF COIR FIBRE COIR YARD AND  PRODUCTS  
12. Control of export of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
13. Imposition of a duty of customs on export of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products.  
14. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Board.  
14A. Grant by the Central Government to the Board.  
15. Constitution of Fund.  
16. Borrowing powers of Board.  
17. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
18. General control over acts and proceedings of the Board.  
19. Report and returns.  2 
 CHPTER VI  
MISCELLANOUS  
20. Penalties.  
21. Offences by companies.  
22. Previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution.  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
24. Power to delegate.  
25. Suspension of operation of Act.  
26. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
27. Power of Board to make by -laws.  
  3 
 THE COIR INDUSTRY ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 45 OF 1953  
[23rd December,  1953 .] 
1[An Act to provide for the establishment of a  Board for the development of the Coir Industry 
and for that purpose to levy a customs duty on coir fiber, coir yarn and coir products exported 
from India and for matters connected therewith.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMANARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coir Industry                  
Act, 1953.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the coir industry,  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Coir Board constituted under section 4;  
(b) “cess” means the customs duty imposed by section 13;  
(c) “coir” or “coir fiber ” means the fiber extracted from the husk of the coconut;  
(d) “coir products ” means mats and mattings, rugs and carpets, ropes and other articles 
manufactured wholly or partly from coir or coir yarn;  
(e) “coir yarn ” means yarn obtained by the spinning of coir;  
(f) “export ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means to take out of the 
territories to which this Act extends by land, sea or air to any place outside India other than a country 
or territory notified in this behalf by the Central Government by no tification in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “Fund ” means the Coir Fund referred to in section 15;  
(h) “husks ” means coconut husks, both raw and ret ied; 
(i) “member ” means a member of the Board;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COIR BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Coir Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be 
established  for the purposes of this Act a Board to be called the Coir Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and  shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members not exceeding forty as 
the Central Government may think expedient, to be appointed by that Government by notification in the 
Official Gaze tte from among persons who are in its opinion capable of representing — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1964, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 6 -6-1964).  
2. 9th February, 1954, vide notification  No. S.R.O. 470 , dated 9th February, 1954, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part I,                 
s. 3(ii). 
 4 
 (a) growers of coconuts and producers of husks and coir yarn;  
(b) persons engaged in the production of husks, coir and yarn and in the manufacture of coir 
products;  
(c) manufacturers of  coir products;  
(d) dealers in coir, coir yarn and coir products, including both exporters and internal traders;  
(e) parliament;  
(f) the Governments of the principal coconut growing States;  
(g) such other persons or class of persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought 
to be represented on the Board.  
(4) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in              
sub-section ( 3), the term of office, of the procedure to be followed in the discharge o f their functions by, 
and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by that Government in this behalf shall have 
the right to attend meetings o f the Board and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled 
to vote.  
5. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings .—No act or proceeding taken by the 
Board under this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of — 
(a) the existence of any vacancy in the Constitution of, the Board ; or 
(b) any omission, defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman .—The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be su bject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund 
and other matters as may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government.  
7. Vice -Chairman .—The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice -Chairman, who shall 
exerci se such of the powers and discharge such of the duties of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as 
may be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
8. Executive and other Committees .—(1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Board for 
the purpose of exercisi ng such of the powers and performing such of the duties of the Board as may be 
prescribed or as the Board may delegate to it.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall consist of — 
(i) the Chairman,  
(ii) the Vice -Chairman, and  
(iii) five other members elected by the members of the Board, from among themselves of whom 
not more than two shall be Government officials and one shall be from among the members 
representing persons engaged in the production of husks, coir and coir yarn and in the manufacture of 
coir produ cts. 
(3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may constitute other 
standing committee s or ad hoc  committes for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Board 
or for enquiring into or reporting and advising on any matter which the Board may refer to them.  
(4) A Standing Committee shall consist exclusively of members of the Board.  
(5) An ad hoc  Committee may include persons who are not members of the Board, but their number 
shall be less than one -half of its strength.  
9. Secretary and staff .—(1) The Central Government shall, after consulting the Board appoint a 
Secretary to the Board who shall e xercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as 
may be delegated to him by the Board or the Chairman.  5 
 (2) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may appoint such officers 
and employees as may be nece ssary for the efficient performance of its functions and pay them such 
salaries and allowances as it may determine from time to time.  
(3) The Chairman, Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall not undertake any 
work unconnected with th eir duties under this Act except with the permission of the Central Government.  
10. Functions of the Board .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote by such measures as it 
thinks fit the development under the control of the Central Government of th e coir industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may relate to — 
(a) promoting exports of coir yarn and coir products, and carrying on propaganda for that 
purpose ; 
(b) regulating  under the supervision of the Central Government the production of husks, coir yarn 
and coir products by registering coir spindles and looms for manufacturing coir products as also 
manufacturers of coir products, licensing exporters of coir, coir yarn and coir products and taking 
such other appropriate steps as may be prescribed;  
(c) undertaking, assisting or encouraging scientific technological and economic research and 
maintaining  and assisting in the maintenance of one or more research institutes;  
(d) collecting statistics from manufacturers of, and dealers in, coir products and from such other 
persons as may be prescribed, on any matter relating to the coir industry; the publication of statistics 
so collected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;  
(e) fixing grade standards and arranging when necessary for inspection of coir fibre, c oir yarn and 
coir products;  
(f) improving the marketing of coconut husk, coir fibr e, coir yarn and coir products in India and 
elsewhere and preventing unfair competition;  
1[(ff) setting up or assisting in the setting up of factories for the production of coir products with 
the aid of power;]  
(g) promoting co -operative organisation among producers of husk, coir fibr e and coir yarn and 
manufacturers of coir products;  
(h) ensuring remunerative returns to producers of husks, coir fibr e and coir yarn and 
manufacturers of coir products;  
(i) licensing of retting places and warehouses and otherwise regulating the stocking and sale of 
coir fibr e, coir yarn and coir products both for the internal market and for exports;  
(j) advising on all matters relating to the development of the coir industry;  
(k) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with and subject to such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
11. Dissolution of the Board .—(1) The Central Government may, if the Board does any act 
exceeding the powers conferred upon it or acts in a manner contrary to the rules or prejudicial to the 
interests  of the industry or acts  2* * * contrary to the directions given by the Central Government, call 
upon the Board to show cause why the Board should not be dissolved and if no explanation is offered or 
if the Central Government is dissatisfied with the explanation given it may suspend or dissolve the Board 
from such date and for such period as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) When the Board is dissolved under the provisions of sub -section ( 1)— 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
2. The words “or fails to act” omitted by Act 45 of 195 3, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 17 -5-1957).  6 
 (a) all members shall, from the date of dissolution,  vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, vest in 
the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
CONTROL  OVER THE EXPORT OF COIR FIBRE COIR YARD AND  PRODUCTS  
12. Control of export of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products .—No coir fibr e, coir yarn or coir 
products shall be exported otherwise than under a licence issued by or on behalf of the Board in the 
prescribed manner, and the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878  (VIII of 19887),  shall have effect as 
if the provisions made by this section had been made by notification issued under Section 19 of that Act:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall apply to any coir product dispatched out of the territories 
to which this Act extends by post or carried in a passenger ’s luggage for his personal use:  
Provided further that the Central Government may exempt from the operation of this section either 
absolu tely or subject to specified conditions, the export of any coir fib re, coir yarn or coir product to any 
foreign settlement bounded by India.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
13. Imposition of a duty of customs on export of coir fibre, coir yarn and coir products .—(1) 
With effect from such date as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette, there shall be levied and collected as a cess for t he purposes of this Act a duty of customs on all 
coir fibr e, coir yarn and coir products which are exported  1[at such rate not exceeding two rupees per 
quintal] as the Central Government may, by the same or a like notification from time to time, fix.  
(2) The cess levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to any other duty leviable under the 
Indian Tariff Act, 1934  (XXXII of 1934),  or any other law for the time being in force and shall be 
collected by such agencies and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
14. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Board .—The proceeds of the cess levied under sub -section 
(1) of section 13 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may 
thereafter from time to time pay to the Board from and out of such proceeds such sums of money as it 
may think fit after deducting the expenses of collection.  
2[14A. Grant by the Cen tral Government to the Board. —The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants, such sums of 
money as the Central Government may consider necessary.]  
15. Constitution of Fund .—(1) There shall be formed by the Board a Fund to be called the Coir 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) the proceeds of the cess made over to the Board by the Central Government;  
(b) any other fee that may be levied and collected under this Act or  the rules made thereunder;  
3[(c) any sum of money that may be paid by way of grants under section 14A.]  
(2) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Board and the cost of the measures 
referred to in section 10.  
16. Borrowing powers of  Board .—Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Board 
shall have power to borrow on the security of the Fund or any other asset for any purposes for which the 
Fund may be applied.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 1960, s. 9, f or the words “at such rate not exceeding one rupee per hundred weight” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1960).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1964, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  7 
 1[17. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts , including the profit and loss account and the balance -sheet 
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be prescribed by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audi t as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with audit of 
Government accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the o ffices of the Board.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government  and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.]  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
18. General control over acts and proceedings of the Board .—(1) All acts and proceedings of the 
Board shall be subject to the  control of the Central Government which may cancel, suspend or modify as 
it thinks fit any action taken by the Board.  
(2) The Board shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it by the Central Government for the 
efficient administration of this A ct. 
(3) The records of the Board shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by any officer 
authori sed in this behalf by the Central Government.  
19. Report and returns .—2[(1) The Board shall submit to the Central Government and such other 
authority , as may be prescribed, an annual report on its activities and the working of this Act for the 
preceding year; and a copy of every such report shall, as soon as may be after it is received by the Central 
Government, be laid before each House of Parliament. ] 
(2) The Board shall prepare and submit such other returns relating to the coir industry as may be 
required by that Government from time to time.  
CHPTER VI  
MISCELLANOUS  
20. Penalties .—(1) If any person contravenes the provisions of section 12, he shall be  punishable 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of section 12 
shall be deemed to have contravened those provisions.  
21. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under section 12 is a 
company, every person who at the time the contravention was committed was incharge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall 
be de emed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was commit ted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under section 12 has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that th e offence has been committed with the consent or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1964, s. 6 , for section 17  (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
2. Subs. by 41 of 1994, s. 2, for sub -section  (1) (w.e.f. 8 -7-1994).  8 
 connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to b e guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
22. Previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence 
punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder.  
24. Power to delegate .—The Central Gover nment may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised in such cases and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order by such officer or authority as may be  specified 
therein.  
25. Suspension of operation of Act .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be 
imposed or if it considers it n ecessary or expedient so to do in the public interest the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent either indefinitely or for 
such period as may be specified in the notification the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Where the operation of any provisions of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may at any time while this Act remains in force be 
removed by  the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
26. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, make rules  or carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In pa rticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution of the Board, the number of persons to be appointed as members from each of 
the categori es specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 4, the term of office and the other conditions of 
service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling  vacancies among, the members 
of the Board;  
(b) the circumstances in which, and the authority  by which, members may be removed;  
(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings every year;  
(d) the pay and allowances and other conditions of service of the secretary;  
(e) the maintenance of records of all business transacted at meetings of the Board a nd the 
submission of copies of such records to the Central Government;  
(f) the preparation of budget estimate of the receipts and expenditure of the Board and the 
authority by which such estimate s should be sanctioned;  
(g) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be made by or on 
behalf of the Board;  
(h) the powers of the Board and the Executive Committee and the Chairman, in regard to the 
incurring of expenditure; and the re -appropriation of estimated savings in any budget hear d to another 
such head;  
(i) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow;  9 
 (j) the form and the manner in which accounts should be kept by the Board;  
(k) the registration of coir spindles and looms for the manufacture of coir products as also the 
registration of manufacturers of coir products and the conditions for such registration; the grant or 
issue of licences under this Act; the fees to be levied in respect of such registration and licences; and 
the suspension and cancellation of such registra tion and licences;  
(l) the form of applications for registration and licences under this Act and the fee, if any, to be 
paid in respect of any such applications;  
(m) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of the coir industry;  
(n) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if  2[before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both  Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyt hing previously 
done under that rule.]  
27. Power of Board to make by -laws .—(1) The Board may make by -laws consistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, to provide for ,— 
(a) the dates, times and places of its meetings and of the meetings of the Ex ecutive and other 
Committees and the quorum for such meetings, and the procedure thereat;  
(b) the delegation of powers and duties to the Executive or any other Committee, or to its 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman, Secretary or any other of its officers;  
(c) the tr avelling allowances of members and of members of Committees;  
(d) the appointment, promotion and dismissal of its officers and other employees other than the 
Secretary and the creation and abolition of their posts;  
(e) the conditions of service of its officers and other employees other than the Secretary including 
their pay, leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate allowances and travelling 
allowances and the establishment and maintenance of a provident fund for them;  
(f) the mainten ance of its accounts;  
(g) the persons by whom, and the manner in which payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on its behalf;  
(h) the custody of moneys required for its current expenditure and the investment of moneys not 
so required;  
(i) the prepar ation of statements showing the sums allotted to departments of the Central and 
State Governments and other institutions.  
(2) No by -law shall take effect until it has been confirmed by the Central Government and published 
in the Official Gazette; and the C entral Government in confirming a by -law may make any change therein 
which appears to it to be necessary.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, cancel any by -law which it 
has confirmed and thereupon the by -law shall cease  to have effect.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1964, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for the words “before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
successive sessions aforesaid” (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  10 
 1[(4) Every by -law made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more su ccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the by -law or both Houses agree that the by -law should not be made, the by -law shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that by -law.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule , (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Collection of Statistics Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS ACT, 1953  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Collection of statistic . 
4. Appointment of statistics authority . 
5. Power of statistics authority to call for information or returns . 
6. Right of access to records or documents . 
7. Restriction on the publication of information and returns . 
8. Penalties . 
9. Offences by companies.  
10. Penalty for improper disclosures of information or returns . 
11. Cognizance of offences . 
12. Power of Centr al Government to give directions.  
13. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
14. Power to make rules . 
15. [Repealed .] 
  2 
 THE COLLECTION OF STATISTICS ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1953  
[18th September, 1953.]  
An Act to facilitate the collection of statistics of certain kinds relating to industries, trade and 
commerce.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may he called the Collection of Statistics  
Act, 1953.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, u nless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means— 
(i) the Central  Government in relation to the collection of statistics under a direction issued 
by it under section 3,  and 
(ii) the State Government in relation to the collection of statistics under a direction issued by 
it under that section.  
(b) “commercial  concern” means a public limited company or a co -operative society or a firm or 
any other person or body of persons engaged in trade or commerce, and includes — 
(i) a concern engaged in banking or insurance;  
(ii) a financial corporation;  
(iii) a concern eng aged in shipping and navigation;  
(iv) a concern engaged in the business of brokers dealing in shares , stocks and securities and 
commodities;  
(v) a concern engaged in the business of advertising consultants;  
(vi) a light railway;  
(vii) a concern engaged in road transport service;  
(viii) a concern engaged in air transport service;  
(ix) a rubber, tea, coffee or chincona plantation;  
(x) a concern engaged in the business of forwarding and clearing agents;  
(xi) any other concern which, in the opinion of the Centr al Government, is a commercial 
concern and is declared to be such by that Government by notification in the Official Gazette, but 
does not include an industrial concern;  
(c) “factory” means a  factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories A ct, 1948                
(63 of 1948) ; 
(d) “industrial concern ” means a public limited company or co -operative society or a firm or any 
other person or body of persons engaged in the manufacture, assembling, packing, preservation or 
processing of goods or in  mining or in the generation or distribution of electricity or any other form of 
power;  
                                                           
1. 10th November, 1956, vide notification No. 1P( A)-1(22)/56, dated 10th November, 1956, see Gazette of I ndia, Extraordinary, 
Part I, sec. 3( i). 3 
 (e) “owner” in relation to commercial or an industrial concern means the person who, or the 
authority which has the ultimate control over the affairs of the concern, and where the said affairs are 
entrusted to a manager, managing director or managing agent, such mana ger, managing director or 
managing agent shall be deemed to be the owner of the concern;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act or in any form laid down by such 
rules.  
3. Collection of statistic .—The appropriate Government may, by n otification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that statistics shall be collected relating to any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) any matter relating to any industry or class of industries ; 
(b) any matter relating to any commercial or industrial concer n or class of commercial or 
industrial concerns, and in particular, any matter relating to factories;  
(c) any of the following matters so far as they relate to welfare of labour and conditions of labour, 
namely:— 
(i) price of commodities;  
(ii) attendance;  
(iii) living conditions including housing, water supply and sanitation;  
(iv) indebtedness;  
(v) rents of dwelling houses;  
(vi) wages and other earnings;  
(vii) provident and other funds provided for labour;  
(viii) benefits and amenities provided for labour;  
(ix) hours of work;  
(x) employment and unemployment;  
(xi) industrial and labour disputes;  
(xii) labour turnover;  
(xiii) trade unions;  
and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to those statistics : 
Provided  that— 
(a) nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authori se a State Government to issue any 
direction under this Act with respect to the collection of statistics relating to any matter falling under 
any of the entries specified in List I in the Sevent h Schedule to the Constitution;  or 
(b) where the Central Government has issued any direction under this section for the collection of 
statistics relating to any matter, no State Government shall, except with the previous approval of the  
Central Government,  issue any similar direction for so long as the collection of statistics by the 
Central Government remains to be completed; or  
(c) where a State Government has issued a direction under this section for the collection of 
statistics relating to any matter, t he Central Government shall not issue any similar direction for so 
long as the collection of statistics by the State Government remains to be completed, except in cases 
where statistics have to be collected with reference to two or more States.  
4. Appointm ent of statistics authority .—The appropriate Government may appoint an officer to be 
the statistics authority for the purpose of collecting any statistics directed by it to be collected.  
5. Power of statistics authority to call for information or returns .—(1) The statistics authority 
may serve or cause to be served on the owner of an industrial or commercial concern or on any other 4 
 person a notice requiring him to furnish such information or returns as may be prescribed relating to any 
matter in respect of which statistics are to be collected.  
(2) The form in which, and the person to whom, or the authorities to which, such information or 
returns should be furnished, the particulars which they should contain and the intervals within which such 
information or returns should be furnished shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be served by post.  
6. Right of access to records or documents .—The statistics authority or any person authori sed by 
him in writing in this beh alf shall, for the purposes of the collection of any statistics under this Act, have 
access to any relevant record or document in the possession of any person required to furnish any 
information or return under this Act and may enter at any reasonable time  any premises where he believes 
such record or document to be and may inspect of take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any 
question necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished under this Act.  
7. Restriction on the publica tion of information and returns .—(1) No information, no individual 
return and no part of an individual return with respect to any particular industrial or commercial concern, 
given for the purposes of this Act shall, without the previous consent in writing  of the owner for the time 
being of the industrial or commercial concern in relation to which the information or return was given or 
made or his authori sed agent, be published in such manner as would enable any particulars to be 
identified as referring to a particular concern . 
(2) Except for the purposes of a prosecution under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code                  
(45 of 1860) , no person who is not engaged in the collection of statistics under this Act shall be permitted 
to see any informa tion or individual return referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
8. Penalties .—If any person — 
(a) required to furnish any information or return — 
(i) wilfully  refuses or without lawful excuse neglects to furnish such information or return as 
may be required under this Act; or  
(ii) wilfully furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to 
be false; or  
(iii) refuses to answer or wil fully gives a false answer to any question necessary for obtaining 
any information required to be furnished under this Act; or  
(b) impedes the right  of access to relevant records or documents or the right of entry conferred by 
section 6;   
he shall for each  such offence be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the 
case or a continuing offence to a further fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for each day after 
the first during which the offence continues.  
9. Offences by c ompanies .—(1) If the person guilty of an offence under section 8 is a company, 
every person who at the time the offence wa s committed was in charge of, and was responsible to , the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything containe d in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary o r other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
  5 
 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
 (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
10. Penalty for improper disclosures of information or returns .—If any person engaged in 
connection with the collection of statistics under this Act wilfully disclose s, any information or the 
contents of any return given or made under this Act otherwise than in the execution of his duties under 
this Act or for the purp oses of the prosecution of an offence under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) , he shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
11. Cognizance of offences .—No prosecution for an offence under section 8 shall be instituted 
except by or with the sanction of the statistics authority and no prosecution for an offence under section 
10 shall be instituted except by or with the  consent of the appropriate Government.  
12. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to  a State Government as to the carrying into execution of this Act in the State.  
13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
appropriate Government, the statistics authority, or any other person acting under the authority of the 
appropriate Government or of the statistics authority in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or directions issued thereunder.  
14. Power to make r ules.—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication , by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may be made under this section 
for all or any of the following matters, nam ely:— 
(a) the form and manner in which the information and returns may be furnished, the particulars 
which they should contain , the intervals within which and the authority to which such information 
and returns may be furnished;  
(b) the manner in which the  right of access to documents and the right of entry conferred by 
section 6 may be exercised; and  
(c) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately fo llowing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may  be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as it is made, 
before the State Legislature.  
15. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 ( 36 of 1957 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule  
(w.e.f . 17-9-1957 ). 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 4 of 19 86, s. 2 and the Schedule , for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f . 15-5-1986). 
 
--------------------------The Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT ACT, 1953  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Salaries, etc., of officers of Parliament . 
4. Residence for officers of Parliament . 
5. Sumptuary allowance . 
6. Travelling and daily allowances to officers of Parliament.  
7. Medical facilities to officers of Parliament.  
7A. Family pension, etc., to spouse of Speaker dying in office . 
8. Advances to officers of Parliament for purchase of motor -cars. 
9. Officers of P arliament not to draw salary or allowances as Members of Parliament . 
10. Notification respecting appointment, etc., of officers of Parliament to be conclusive evidence 
thereo f. 
10A. Exemption from liability to pay income -tax on daily allowance received by the Chairman and 
certain perquisites received by an officer of Parliament . 
11. Power to make rules.  
  2 
 THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF O FFICERS OF PARLIAMENT ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1953  
[16th May , 1953.]  
An Act to provide for the salaries and allowances of certain officers of Parliament.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of 
Officers of Parliament Act, 1953.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force  on the first day of May, 1953.  
2. Definition .—In this Act “ officer of P arliament” means any of the following officers, namely, the 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy Spea ker of the 
House of the People.  
1[3. Salaries , etc., of officers of Parliament .—2[(1) There shall be paid to the Chairman of the 
Council of States a salary of  3[ four lakh rupees]  per mensem.]  
(2) Each officer of Parliament, other than the Chairman of the Council of States , shall be entitled to 
receive a salary per mensem and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as such officer at 
the same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salaries , Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954  (30 of 1954)  with re spect to members of Parliament.  
(3) Each officer of Parliament, other than the Chairman of the Council of States, shall be entitled to 
receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is specified under section 8 of the said Act wi th 
respect to members of Parliament.]  
4. Residence for officers of Parliament .—4[(1)] Each officer of Parliament shall be entitled without 
payment of rent to the use of a furnished residence throughout his term  of office and for a period of 5[one 
month] immediately thereafter, and no charge shall fall on the officer personally in respect of the 
maintena nce of such residence.  
6[(2) In the event of the death of an officer of Parliament, his family shall be entitled to the use of the 
furnished residence occu pied by the officer of Parliament — 
(a) for a period of one month immediately after his death,  without payment of rent and no charge 
shall fall on the family of the officer of Parliament in respect of the mai ntenance of such residence, 
and 
(b) for a further  period of one month, on payment of rent at such rates as may be p rescribed by 
rules made in this behalf under section 11 and also charges in respect of electricity and water 
consumed in that residen ce during such further period.]  
Explanation .—For the purp oses of this section, “residence ” includes the staff quarters and other 
buildings appurtenant thereto and the garden thereof, and “maintenance”  in relation to a residence 
includes the payment of local rates and taxes and the prov ision of electricity and water.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 75 of 1985, s. 2, for section 3 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1998, s. 2 for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 140, for “ one lakh twenty -five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2016).  
4. Section 4 re -numbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 49 of 1970, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1969).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “fifteen days” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1969).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1969).  3 
 1[5. Sumptuary allowance .—There shall be paid to 2*** the Speaker of the House of the People a 
sumptuary allowance of one thousand rupees per mensem and to the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy 
Speaker a sumptuary allowance of f ive hundred rupees per m ensem: ] 
3[Provided that on and from the 17th day of September, 2001, the sumptuary allowance shall be paid 
to— 
(a) the Speaker of the House of the People at the same rate at which the sumptuary allowance is 
payable, under section 5 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952  (58 of 1952) , to every 
other Minister who is a member of the Cabinet;  
(b) the Deputy Cha irman and the  Deputy Speaker at the same rate at which the sumptuary 
allowance is payable, under section 5 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952  
(58 of 1952), to a Minister of State.]  
6.Travelling and daily allowa nces to officers of Parlia ment .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this 
behalf under section 11, an officer of P arliament shall be entitled to — 
(a) travelling allowances for himself and the members of his family and for the transport of his 
and h is family ’s effects — 
(i) in respect of the journey to Delhi from his usual place of residence outside  Delhi for 
assuming office, and  
(ii) in respect of the journey from Delhi to his usual place of residence outside Delhi on 
relinquishing office; and 
(b) travelling and daily allowanc es in respect of tours undertaken by him in the discharge of his 
official duties , whether by sea, land or air.  
4[(1A) On and from the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament 
and Leaders of Opposition in Parliament (Second Amendment) Act, 2002  (56 of 2002) , an officer of 
Parliament and his family, whether travelling together or separately, shall be entitled to travelling 
allowance at the same rates and for the same number of return journeys as admissible to a Minister  
and hi s family under sub -section ( 1A) of section 6 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 
1952  (58 of 1952) .] 
(2) Any travelling allowance under this section may be paid in cash or free official transport m ay be 
provided in lieu thereof.  
7. Medical facili ties to officers of Parliament .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf under 
section 11, an officer of Parliament and the members of his family shall be entitled free of charge to 
accommodation in hospitals maintained by the Government  and also to medical treatment.  
5[7A. Family pension, etc., to spouse of Speaker dying in office .—(1) With effect from the 
commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Second Amendment) Act, 2002  
(31 of 2002) , there shall be paid a family pens ion, to the spouse of the Speaker of the House of the People 
who dies while holding such office at the rate of fifty per cent. of the salary last drawn by him for the 
remainder of lif e of such spouse f rom the date of death of the Speaker:  
Provided that the spouse of such Speaker shall not be entitled to receive pension available to the 
spouse of any member of Parliament who dies during his term of office as such member for a period of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 75 of 1985, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
2. The words “the Chairman of the Council of States and” omitted by Act 26 of 1998, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e. f. 17-9-2001).  
4. Subs. by Act 56 of 2002, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1A) (w.e.f. 17 -9-2001).  
5. Ins. by Act 31 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -3-2002).  4 
 five years from the date of death of the member under su b-section ( 1A) of section 8A of the Salary, 
Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954  (30 of 1954) . 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 and subject to any 
rules made in this behalf under sec tion 11, such spouse shall be entitled to the use of unfurnished 
residence without payment of licence fee for the remainder of her life.  
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 11, — 
(a) such spouse, for the remainder of her life; and  
(b) the minor children of such Speaker,  
shall be entitled to medical attendance and treatment, free of charge. ] 
8. Advances to officers of Parli ament for purchase of motor -cars.—There may be paid to any 
officer of Parliament by way of a repayable advance such sum of money as may be determined by rules 
made  in this behalf under section 11 for the purchase of a motor -car in order that he may be able to 
discharge conveniently and eff iciently the duties of his office.  
9. Officers of Parliament not to draw salary or allowances as Members of Parl iament .—No 
officer of Parliament in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum 
out of funds provided by Parliament by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership  of either 
House of Parliament.  
10. Notification respecting appointment , etc., of officers of Parliament to be conclusive evidence 
thereof .—The date on which any person became or cease d to be an officer of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette and any such notification shall be conclusive evidence of the fact that he 
became, or ceased to be, an officer of Parliament on that date fo r all the purposes of this Act.  
1[10A. Exemption fr om liability to pay income -tax on daily allowance received by the Chairman 
and certain perquisites receiv ed by an officer of Parliament .—Notwithstanding anything contai ned in 
the Income -tax Act , 1961  (43 of 1961) ,— 
(a) in computing the total in come of a previous year of the Chairman of the Council of States, any 
income by way of an allowance referred to in sub -section ( 1) of s ection 3 shall not be included;  
(b) the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided t o an 
officer of Parliament under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his 
income chargeable under the head “Salaries ” under section 1 5 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  
(43 of 1961) .] 
11. Power  to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the C hairman and 
the Speaker, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
2[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be  comprised in one session or in  two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessi ons aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1990, s. 3, for section 10A (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 20 05, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
--------------------------The Salt Cess Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE SALT CESS ACT, 1953  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess on salt . 
4. Application of proceeds of cess . 
5. Validation of charges levied on salt before the commencement of this Act . 
6. Power to make rules . 
  2 
 THE SALT CESS ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1953  
[26th December,  1953 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on salt for the purpose of raising funds to 
meet the expenses incurred on the salt organisation maintained by Government and on the 
measures taken by Government in connection with the manufacture, supply and distribution 
of salt.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Salt Cess Act, 1953.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1* * *. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the  context otherwise require — 
(a) „manufacture ‟ in relation to salt includes collection, removal, preparation, steeping , 
evaporation, boiling or any one or more of these processes, the separation or purification of salt 
obtained in the manufacture of saltpeter , the separation of salt from earth or other substance so as to 
produce alimentary salt, and the excavation or removal of natural saline deposits or efflorescence; and 
the word „manufacturer ‟ shall be construed accordingly and shall include not on ly a person who 
employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of sal t but also any person who engages in its 
production or manufacture on his own account if the salt is intended for sale.  
Explanation. —In this clause, „saltpeter ‟ includes rasi, saffi and all other substances manufactured 
from saline earth, and Kharinun and every from  of sulphate or carbonate of soda;  
(b) „salt‟ includes swamp salt, spontaneous salt, and salt or saline solutions made or produced 
from any saline substances or fr om salt  earth;  
(c) „salt factory ‟ includes— 
(i) a place used or intended to be used in the manufacture of salt and all embankments, 
reservoirs, condensing and evaporating pans, buildings, and waste places situated within the 
limits of such place, as defined from time to time for the purposes of the Central Excises and Salt 
Act, 1944 (I of 1944);  
(ii) all drying grounds and storage platforms and store -houses appertaining to any such place;  
(iii) land on which salt is spontaneously produced;  3* * * 
4*                         *                       *                        *                             *                      *  
(e) „prescribed ‟ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
5[3. Levy and collection of cess on salt .—There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may 
be prescribed, a cess in the nature of an excise duty at the rate of fourteen naye paise  per forty kilograms 
on all salt manufactured in India in any salt factory, whether owned by Government or not .] 
(a) in the case of salt manufactured in a private salt factory, at the rate of two annas per standard 
maund;  
                                                           
1. The w ords “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Schedule ( w.e.f. 1 -11-1956 ). 
2. 2nd January, 1954, vide notification No. S.R.O. 2378, dated 29th December, 1953 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1953, 
Part II, s. 3 . 
3. The words “and a „private salt factory  is one not solely owned or not solely worked by the Central Government ” omitted by  
Act 34 of 1961,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -8-1961 ). 
4. Omitted by s. 2 ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -8-1961 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 3 , ibid., for section 3  (w.e.f. 29 -8-1961).  3 
 (b) in the case of salt manufactured in a salt factory solely owned or solely worked by the Central 
Government at the rate of three and a half annas per standard maund.  
4. Application of proceeds of cess .—The proceeds of the duty levied under this Act, reduced by the 
cost of collection as determined by the Central Government, shall , if Parliament by appropriation made by 
law in this behalf so pro vides, be utilised on all or any of the following objects, namely: — 
(a) meeting the expenditure incurred in connection with the salt organisation maintained by the 
Central Government;  
(b) meetingthe cost of measures taken in connection with the manufacture , supply and 
distribution of salt by Union agencies and the regulation and control of the manufacture, supply and 
distribution of salt by other agencies ; and in particular, measures for — 
(i) the establishment and maintenance of research stations and model salt farms;  
(ii) the establishment, maintenance and expansion of salt factories;  
(iii) fixing the grades of salt;  
(iv) promoting and encouraging co -operative effort among manufacturers of salt; and  
(v) promoting the welfare of labour employed in the salt i ndustry.  
5. Validation of charges levied on salt before the commencement of this Act .—The charge in 
respect of the manufacture or production of salt imposed by the rule made by the Central Government 
under section 37 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 ( 1 of 1944) and published with the notification 
of the former Finance Department (Revenue Division) No.  3, dated the 29 th March, 1947, shall be 
deemed to have been levied under this Act as if this Act was in force on the day on which the charge was 
so imposed and accordingly, — 
(a) any sum paid or payable by way of such charge shall be deemed to have been paid or payable 
in accordance with law; and  
(b) no claim shall lie in any court for the refund of any sum so paid.  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for ,— 
(a) the assessment and col lection of the cess levied under this Act; 
(b) the determination of the cost of collection of the cess;  
(c) the manner in which accounts relating to the proceeds of the cess shall be maintained;  
(d) the manner in which the proceeds of the cess may be applied on the objects specified in 
section 4;  
(e) the exemption from the whole or any part of  the cess levied under this Act,— 
(i) in respect of salt exported from India;  
(ii) in respect of salt manufactured by any specified categories of small manufactur ers; and  
(iii) in respect of salt utilised in the manufacture of any other product of industry.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or  2[in two successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree in 
making  any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 34 of 1961,  s. 4, sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 29 -8-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 to 1986, s. 41, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
 
--------------------------The Scheduled Areas (Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHEDULED AREAS (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1953  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Assimilation of laws.  
4. Transitional provisions . 
5. Savings.  
6. Provision for removal of difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE SCHEDULED AREAS (ASSIMILATION OF LAWS) ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1953  
[6th May , 1953 .] 
An Act to assimilate certain laws in force in the scheduled areas to the laws in force in the 
districts of Nowgong and Sibsagar in the State of Assam.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Areas (Assimilation 
of Laws) Act, 1953.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “law” means so much of any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, rule, order or bye -law as relates to 
any of the matters enumerated in List s I and III in the Seve nth Schedule to the Constitution.  
(c) “scheduled areas”  mean the areas specified in the Schedule . 
3. Assimilation of laws.—(1) All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or are 
in force in, the scheduled areas shall on that day cease to  be in force in the scheduled areas except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before that day, and for the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 ( 10 of 1897) shall apply in relation to such cess er 
as it applies in relation to the repeal of an enactment by a Central Act.  
(2) All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or are in force in, the district of 
Nowgong in the State of Assam shall as from that day extend to, or, as the c ase may be, come into force 
in, the areas specified in paragraph 1 of the Schedule.  
(3) All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or are in force in, the district of  
Sibsagar in the State of Assam shall as from that day extend to, or, as the case may be, come into force in, 
the areas specified in paragraph 2 of the Schedule.  
4. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central 
Government o r the Government of the State of Assam may, by order, direct that during such period, not 
exceeding twelve months from the appointed day, as may be specified in the order, any law which 
immediately before the appointed day was in force in the scheduled area s, shall be deemed to have 
continued to be in force therein or any specified part thereof, and may further likewise direct that any law 
which would have extended to, or come into force in, the scheduled areas on the appointed day, shall not 
be deemed to ha ve extended thereto or come into force therein or any specified part thereof.  
5. Savings .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, all suits, cases and other legal 
proceedings between parties all of whom belong to the Scheduled Tribes specified in item 2 of Part      
I—Assam, of the Schedule annexed to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 or such other 
tribe or tribes, as may be specified in this behalf, shall be tried and continue to be tried under the Rules for 
                                                           
1. 1st September , 195 3, vide notification No. S. R.O. 1624 , dated  26th August , 195 3, see Gazette of  India, Part II, s. 3.  3 
 the Administration of Jus tice and Police in the Sibsagar and Nowgong  Mikir Hills Tracts as if this Act has 
not been passed.  
6. Provision for removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition under 
section 3 from one law or group of laws to another law or group of laws, the Central Government may, by 
order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provision as it considers necessary for the  removal of the 
difficulty.  
______  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section  2(c)] 
1. (a) Portion of Gobha  Mauza that was originally in the Mikir Hills Tracts, including Sonaikuchi 
Reserved Forest.  
(b) Kholahat Reserved Forest.  
(c) Portion of Lumding  Reserved Forest falling in Lanka Mauza in original Mikir Hills Tracts.  
(d) Portion of Lumding  Mauza west of the line described below: — 
From the point where the eastern bou ndary of Namati  Mauza meets the K aki Jan, the line runs 
up the Kaki Jan to its source; thence in a south easterly direction in a straight line across the hill 
ridges to the confluence of Panpri stream with the Lanka Jan; thence up the Lanka Jan to its source; 
thence in a southerly directi on along the eastern boundary of the Lumding Reserved Forest to the 
junction of Lankanasang  Nadi with the Bara Langpher river, thence in a straight line due south till 
that line meets the southern boundary of the Lumding  Mauza.  
(e) Dabaka Reserved Forest.  
(f) Suang Reserved Forest.  
(g) Diju Valley South Reserved Forest.  
(h) Bagser Reserved Forest.  
2. (a) Panbari Reserved Forest.  
(b) Upper Daigurung Reserved Forest.  
(c) Lower Daigurung Reserved Forest.  
(d) Village lands of Ghatiani  Pathar, Dokhara  Pathar  and Murphuloni of Mauza  Marangi in original 
Mikir Hills Tracts.  
(e) Portion of Barpathar  Mauza east of Dhansiririver and north -east of Garampani  Kaliani Road.  
(f) Portion of Ghiladhari  Mauza in original Mikir Hills Tracts.  
(g) Portion of Sarupathar  Mauza  east of Dhansiri  river.  
______  
 
--------------------------The Tea Act, 1953--------------------------
1 
 THE TEA ACT, 1953  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title, extent and commencement . 
2.  Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3.  Definitions . 
CHAPTER  II 
THE TEA BOARD  
 4.  Establishment and cons titution of the Tea Board . 
 5. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings . 
 6. Salary and allowances of Chairman.  
 7. Vice -Chairman . 
 8. Executive and other Committees.  
 9. Secretary and staff . 
10. Functions of the Board . 
11. Dissolution of th e Board . 
CHAPTER  III 
CONTROL OVER THE EXTENSION OF TEA CULTIVATION  
12. Method of control of extension of tea cultivation . 
13. Limitations to the extension of tea cultivation . 
14. Grant of permission to plant tea . 
15. Grant of permission to plant tea in spe cial circumstances . 
16. Tea nurseries.  
CHAPTER  IIIA 
MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF TEA UNDERTAKINGS OR TEA UNITS BY THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT IN 
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES  
16A. Definitions . 
16B. Power to cause investigation to be made in relation to a tea undertaking or  tea unit.  
16C. Power of Central Government on completion of investigation . 
 2 
 SECTIONS  
16D. Power of Central Government to assume management or control of tea undertaking or tea unit in 
certain cases . 
16E. Power to take over tea undertaking or tea unit with out investigation under certain circumstances . 
16F.  Contracts in bad faith, etc. , may be cancelled or varied . 
16G. Application of Act 1 of 195 6. 
16H. Power of Central Government to cancel notified order under section 16D or 16E.  
16-I. Power of Central Gov ernment to authorise, with the permission of the Court , persons to take 
over management or control of tea undertakings or tea units.  
16J. Power of Central Government to make certain declarations in relation to tea undertakings or tea 
units . 
16K. Power of C entral Government to call for report on the affairs and working of a managed tea 
undertaking or tea unit . 
16L. Preparation of an inventory of the assets and liabilities and list of members and creditors of 
managed tea undertaking or tea unit . 
16LL. Debts i ncurred and investments made by the authorised person to have priority.  
16M. Bar of suits and other proceedings in relation to the tea undertakings or tea unit s. 
16N. Rules made under Act 65 of 1951 to apply . 
CHAPTER  IV 
CONTROL OVER THE EXPORT OF TEA AND T EA SEED  
17. Control of export of tea and tea seed . 
18. Tea or tea seed for export to be covered by licence or permit.  
19. Export allotment . 
20. Export quota and licences . 
21. Right to export licences . 
22. Special Export Licences . 
23. Board to maintain acco unts of quotas . 
24. Limitation of application of chapter . 
CHAPTER  V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
25. Imposition of  cess on tea produced In India . 
26. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Board . 
26A. Grant and loans by the Central Government to the Board . 
27. Constitution of Fund . 3 
 SECTIONS  
28. Borrowing powers of Board . 
28A. Writing off of losses . 
29. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER  VI 
CONTROL  BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
30. Power to control price and distribution of tea or tea waste . 
31. General control over acts a nd proceedings of the Board . 
32. Appeal to Central Government . 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Licensing brokers, tea manufacturers, etc . 
34. Power of inspection.  
35. Power of Board to call for returns . 
36. Penalty for illicit export . 
37. Penalty for making false return . 
38. Penalty for obstructing an officer or member of the board in the discharge of his duties and for 
failure to produce books and records . 
39. Penalty for illicit cultivation . 
40. Removal of tea planted without permission . 
41. Penalty for con travention of order relating to control of price and distribution . 
42. Other penalties . 
43. Offences by companies . 
44. Jurisdiction of courts . 
45. Previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution.  
46. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
47. Po wer to delegate . 
48. Suspension of operation of Act . 
49. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
50. Power of Board to make by -laws . 
51. Repeals and savings . 
 
 
 4 
 THE TEA ACT, 1953  
ACT NO. 29 OF 19531 
[28th May , 1953.]  
An Act to provide for the control by  the Union of the Tea industry, including the control, in 
pursuance of the International Agreement now in force, of the cultivation of tea in, and of the 
export of tea from, India and for that purpose to establish a Tea Board and 2[levy a duty of 
excise on  tea produced in India.]  
BE it enacted by parliament as follows: ― 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Tea Act, 1953.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which the 
provis ions of this Act relate to the control of the export of tea from, and the cultivation of tea in, India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expedie ncy of control by the Union .―It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that Union should take under its control the tea industry.  
3. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―  
(a) “Board ” means the Tea Board constituted under section 4;  
(b) “broker ” means a broker of tea;  
(c) “cess” means 4[the duty of excise] imposed by section 25;  
5[(d) “Commissioner of Customs ” means a Commissioner of Customs as specified in clause ( b) of 
section 3 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962);]  
(e) “dealer ” means a dealer in tea;  
(f) “export ” means to take out of India by land, sea or air to any place outside India other than a 
country or territory notified in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette;  
(g) “export allotment ” means the total quantity of tea which may be exported during any one 
financial year;  
(h) “Fund ” means the Tea Fund referred to in section 27;  
(i) “manufacturer ” means a manufacturer of tea;  
(j) “member ” means a member of the Board;  
(k) “owner ”― 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended with modifications to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963. s. 3 and Sch.  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1967, s. 2, for “levy a customs duty on tea exp orted from India ” (w.e.f.13 -8-1967).   
3. 1st April, 195 6; see notification No. S.R.O. 943, dated the 17 th March 1954, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1954,   Part II,             
s. 3. 
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1967, s. 3, for “the customs -duty”. 
5. Subs. by Ac t 22 of 1995, s.  86, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  5 
 (i) with r eference to a tea estate or garden or a sub -division there of the possession of which 
has been transferred by lease, mortgage or otherwise, means the transferee so long as his right to 
possession subsists; and  
(ii) with reference to a tea estate or a garde n or a sub -division for which an agent , is 
employed means the agent if , and in so far as, he has been duly authorized by the owner in that 
behalf;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “standard export figure ” means such quant ity as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify pursuant to any international agreement in this behalf.  
(n) “tea” means the plant Camellia Sinensis (L) O. Kuntze  as well as all varieties of the product 
known commercially  as tea made from the leaves of the plant Camelia Sine nsis (L) O. Kuntze  
including green tea;  
(o) “tea seed ” includes seed s, roots, stumps, cuttings, buds, and any living portion of the plant 
Camellia Sinensis (L) O. Kuntze  which may be used to propagate t hat plant.  
CHAPTER  II 
THE TEA BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Tea Board .―(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purpos es of this Act a Board to be called the Tea Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contrac t, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such number of other members not exceeding forty as 
the Central Government may think expedient, to be appointed by that Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette from among persons who are in its opinion capable of representing,―  
(a) owners of tea estate s and gardens and  growers of tea;  
(b) persons employed in tea estates and gardens;  
(c) manufacturers of tea;  
(d) dealers including both exporters and intern al traders of tea;  
(e) consumers;  
(f) Parliament;  
(g) the Government s of the principal tea -growing States;  
(h) such other persons or class of persons, who, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought 
to be represented on the Board.  
1[(3A) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or for being , a member of either House of Parliament.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 52 of 1954, s. 2 (w.e.f.  25-12-1954).  
 6 
 (4) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in sub -
section ( 3), the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and 
the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) Any officer of the Central Government when de puted by that Government in this behalf shall have 
the right to attend meetings of the Board and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled 
to vote.  
5. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings .―No act done or proceeding taken by the 
Board under this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
defect in the constitution of the Board.  
6. Salary and allowances of Chairman .―The Chairman shall be entitled to su ch salary and 
allowances and such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters 
as may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government.  
7. Vice -Chairman .―The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice -Chairm an who shall 
exercise such of the powers and discharge such of the duties of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as 
may be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
 8. Executive and other Committees .―(1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Board 
constit uted in the manner prescribed.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the 
Board as may be prescribed, or as the Board may delegate to it.  
(3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescr ibed, the Board may constitute other 
Standing Committee or ad hoc  Committees for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the 
Board or for enquiring into or reporting and advising on any matter which the Board may refer to them.  
(4) A Standing Commi ttee shall consist exclusively of members of the Board.  
(5) An ad hoc  committee may include persons who are not members of the Board, but their number 
shall not exceed one half of its strength.  
9. Secretary and staff .―(1) The Central Government shall appoi nt― 
1[(a) a Deputy Chairman to the Board who shall assist the Chairman in the performance of his 
duties and exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties as may be prescribed or as may 
be delegated to him by the Board or by a Committee constit uted by the Board under section 8 or by 
the Chairman;  
2[(aa)] a Secretary to the Board who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may 
be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Board or the chairman.  
(b) all other officers of the Boa rd drawing   3[a salary exceeding rupees one thousand seven 
hundred per month.]  
(2) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may appoint such other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of i ts functions and pay them 
such salaries and allowances as it may determine from time to time.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1977, s. 2  (w.e.f.12 -8-1977).  
2. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f.12 -8-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  7 
 (3) The Chairman, 1[Deputy Chairman, Secretary and other employees] of the Board shall not 
undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act except with the permission of the 
Central Government.  
10. Functions of the Board .―(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote , by such measures as it 
thinks fit, the development under the control of the Central Government of the tea industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measure s referred to 
herein may provide for―  
(a) regulating the production and extent of cultivation of tea;  
(b) improving the quality of tea;  
(c) promoting co -operative efforts among growers and manufacturers of tea;  
(d) undertaking, assisting or encouraging sci entific, technological and economic research and 
maintaining or assisting in the maintenance of demonstration f arms and manufacturing stations;  
(e) assisting in the control of insects and other pests and diseases affecting tea;  
(f) regulating the sale and export of tea;  
(g) training in tea testing and fixing grade standards of tea;  
(h) increasing the consumption in India and elsewhere of tea and carrying on propaganda for that 
purpose;  
(i) registering and licensing of manufacturers, brokers, tea waste deale rs and persons engaged in 
the business of blending tea;  
(j) improving the marketing of tea in India and elsewhere;  
2[(jj) subscribing to the share capital of, or entering into any agreement or other arrangement 
(whether by way of partnership, joint venture  or in any other manner) with, any body corporate for 
the purpose of promoting the development of tea industry or for promotion and marketing of tea, in 
India or elsewhere;  
(k) collecting statistics from growers, manufacturers, dealers and such other perso ns as may be 
prescribed on any matter relating to the tea industry; the publication of statistics so collected or 
portions thereof or extracts therefrom;  
(l) securing better working conditions and the provisions and improvement of amenities and 
incentives for workers;  
(m) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with and subject to such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
11. Dissolution of the Board .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the Board shall be dissolved from such date and for such period as may be specified in 
the notification.  
(2) When the Board is dissolved under the provisions of sub -section (1)― 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1977, s. 2, for “Secretary and other employees ” (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1980, s. 2  (w.e.f. 27 -12-1980) . 
 8 
 (a) all members shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Governmen t may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, vest in 
the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted in accordance  
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER  III 
CONTROL OVER THE EXTENSION OF TEA CULTIVATION  
12. Method of control of extension of tea cultivation .―(1) No one shall plant tea on any land not 
planted with tea on the date of commencement of this Act unless permission has been granted to him in 
writing by or on behalf of the Board.  
(2) No tea area shall be replaced by planting in tea on area not planted  with tea unless permission has 
been granted in writing by or on behalf of the Board.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the infilling or supplying of vacancies on land planted with 
tea on the date of commencement of this Act or the replanting of t ea upon ― 
(i) land planted with tea on the 31st day of March, 1950, from which original bushes have been 
uprooted, or  
(ii) land plant with tea on the 31st day of March, 1948, from which the original bushes have been 
uprooted.  
13. Limitations to the extension of te a cultivation .―(1) Subject to the provisions contained in 
sections 15 and 16, the total area of land in respect of which the permission referred to in section 12 may 
be granted, shall not exceed such area as may be determined by the Board under the general  instructions 
of the Central Government.  
(2) The total area of land in any State in respect of which such permission may be granted shall be 
such as may be determined by the Board:  
Provided  that the Board may vary the total area so determined for any State  in order to increase or 
diminish for another State the area in respect of which such permission may be granted by an amount 
corresponding to the extent to which the area in the first mentioned State has been diminished or 
increased.  
(3) The Board shall pu blish the total area determined for India as well as the total areas determined 
for the various States by notification in the Official Gazette of the Central Government as soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act and shall in like manner publish a ny subsequent variation of such 
total areas.  
14. Grant of permission to plant tea .―(1) application for permission to plant tea on any land not 
planted with tea on the date of commencement of this Act shall be made to the Board and shall contain a 
clear statement of all special circumstances justifying the application.  
(2) The Board may  require an applicant to supply such information as it thinks necessary to enable the 
Board to deal with the application.  9 
 (3) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may by order grant or 
refuse the permission applied fo r, or may in like manner grant it in part only or may call for further 
information from the applicant.  
(4) No order by the Board under sub -section ( 3) shall be called in question by any court.  
 15. Grant of permission to plant tea in special circumstances. ―(1) Where any land which was on 
the 31st day of March 1933, planted with tea (including land planted with tea on the 31st day of March 
1931, from which the original bushes had been uprooted and which had not been replanted with tea on the 
said 31st day of  March 1933), or where any land planted with tea after the 31st day of March, 1933―  
(a) has since become wholly incapable of carrying tea through circumstances due to war, or 
through subsidence, flood, erosion, earthquake or other irresistible superhuman c ause, or  
(b) has since been compulsorily acquired under the provisions of the land Acquisition Act, 1894  
(1 of 1994) , or of any other law for the time being in force and no longer carries tea, or  
(c) has since been transferred to the Central or a State Gov ernment or to a local authority and no 
longer carries tea, or  
(d) has since been resumed by the lessor under the terms of any lease and no longer carries tea, 
wherever  of the tea estate in which such land is situated may apply to the Board for permission t o 
plant tea on land not planted with tea.  
Explanation .―Land taken for purposes connected with the prosecution of war on which tea bushes 
have been allowed to remain for protective purposes though no longer cultivated shall be deemed for the 
purposes of thi s section to be incapable of carrying or no longer to carry tea.  
(2) Upon such application being made and upon proof to the satisfaction of the Board that the 
applica tion is entitled to the benefit of sub -section ( 1) the Board may by order grant permission  to plant 
tea on land not planted with tea:  
Provided  that the area of land in respect of which such permission is granted shall be within the same 
or an adjacent district and shall belong to the same or an adjacent tea estate and shall not exceed in extent  
the area of the land incapable of carrying tea or compulsorily acquired, transferred or resumed, as the case 
may be.  
(3) All areas of land in respect of which permission to plant tea is granted under this section shall be 
excluded when computing for the p urpose of section 13 the total area of land in respect of which the 
permission referred to in section 12 may be granted.  
(4) If any land falling within the Explanation  to sub -section ( 1) is subsequently restored to the tea 
estate from which it was substrac ted, the owner of the estate shall either uproot the tea planted thereon, or 
uproot any tea planted by him in pursuance of a permission granted under sub -section ( 2). 
16. Tea nurseries .―(1) The owner of a tea estate may establish nurseries on land not prev iously 
planted with tea for the growing of plants intended for infilling or supplying vacancies or for replanting 
land planted with tea within the area of the estate or for any other purpose approved by the Board.  
(2) All area of land utilised for nurserie s in accordance with this section shall be excluded when 
computing for the purpose of section 13 the total area of land in respect of which the permissions referred 
to in section 12 may be granted.  10 
 1[CHAPTER  IIIA 
MANAGEMENT OR CONTROL OF TEA UNDERTAKINGS O R TEA UNITS BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  IN 
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES  
16A. Definitions .―(1) In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,―  
(a) “authorised person ” means the person or body of persons authorised, or appointed , by the 
Central Government un der this Act to take over the management of any tea undertaking or                   
tea unit s; 
(b) “company ” means a company within the meaning of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 
of 1956) ; 
(c) “district average yield ” means the average yield of te a in the district in which one or more tea 
units are located, as published by the Board;  
(d) “notified order ” means an order notified in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “tea undertaking ” means an undertaking engaged in the production or manufacture, or both, of 
tea through one or more tea units;  
(f) “tea unit ” means a tea estate or garden including a sub -division thereof, which has a distinct 
entity for which accounts are kept and has a factory of its own for the production and manufacture             
of tea.  
(2) Reference s to an industrial undertaking in such of the provisions of the Industr ies (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), as apply to a tea undertaking or tea unit by virtue of the 
provisions of this Chapter, shall be construed as reference s to a tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case 
may be, and references in the Act aforesaid to any provision of that Act, as applicable to a tea undertaking 
or tea unit, in relation to which a corresponding provision has been made in this Act, shall be con strued as 
references to such corresponding provision.  
16B. Power to cause investigation to be made in relation to a tea undertaking or tea unit .―(1) 
Where the Central Government is of opinion in respect of a tea undertaking or a tea unit that―  
(a) the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, the tea unit, has made losses in three out of five 
years immediately preceding the year in which such opinio n is formed; or  
(b) the average yield of the tea undertaking, or, as the case may be, the tea unit s, during three 
years out of five years immediately preceding the year in which such opinion is formed, has been 
lower than the district average yield by twen ty-five per cent, or more; or  
(c) the persons owning the tea undertaking, or, as the case may be, the tea unit, have habitually 
made default in the payment of wages, or provident fund dues of workers and other employees, or 
rent of the land, or duties of e xcise, or such other dues as they are under an obligation to pay under 
any law for the time being in force; or  
(d) the tea undertaking, or, as the case may be, the tea unit, is being managed in a manner highly 
detrimental to the tea industry or to public i nterest,  
the Central Government may make , or cause to be made, a full and complete investigation into the affairs 
of the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, the tea unit, by such person or body or persons as it may 
appoint for the purpose.  
(2) Where a company owning a tea undertaking is being wound up by or under the supervision of the 
Court and the business of such company is not being continued, the Central Government may, if it is of 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 75 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  11 
 opinion that it is necessary, in the interests of the general publi c, and, in particular, in the interest of 
production, supply or distribution of tea, to investigate into the possibility of running or restarting  the tea 
undertaking, make an application to the Court praying for permission to make, or cause to be made, an 
investigation into such possibility by such person or body or persons as that Government may appoint for 
the purpose; and, where such an application is made, the Court shall, notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or in any other law for the time being in force, grant the 
permission prayed for.  
(3) The person or body of persons appointed to make any investigation under sub -section ( 1) or, as 
the case may be, sub -section ( 2), shall have the same powers as are specified in section 18 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
16C. Power of Central Government on completion of investigation .―(1) If, after making or 
causing to be made any such investigation as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 16B, the Central 
Government is satisfied that action under this section is desirable, it may issue such directions to the tea 
undertaking or tea unit concerned, as may be appropriate in the circumstances, for all or any of the 
following purposes, name ly:―  
(a) regulating the production of tea by the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, tea unit and 
fixing the standards of production;  
(b) requiring the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, tea unit to take such steps as the Central 
Government consid ers necessary to stimulate the production, manufacture or plantation, of tea;  
(c) prohibiting the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, tea unit from resorting to any act or 
practice which might reduce its production, capacity or economic value;  
(d) cont rolling the prices, or regulating the distribution, of tea produced or manufactured by the 
tea undertaking or, as the case may be, tea unit.  
(2) Where a case relating to any tea undertaking or tea unit is under investigation, the Central 
Government may iss ue, at any time, any direction of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) to the tea 
undertaking or the tea unit concerned and any such direction shall have effect until it is varied or revoked 
by the Central Government.  
16D. Power of Central Government to assume management or control of tea undertaking or tea 
unit in certain cases .―(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that —  
(a) a tea undertaking or tea unit, to which directions have been issued in pursuance of section 16C 
has failed to comply with such directions, or the tea undertaking or, as the case may be , the tea unit,  
has made losses in three out of five years immediately preceding the year in which such opinion is 
formed; or  
(b) the average yield of the tea undertaking, or, as the case may be, the tea unit, during three years 
out of five years immediately preceding th e year in which such opinion is formed, has been lower 
than the district average yield by twenty five per cent or more; or  
(c) the persons owning the tea undertaking, or, as the case may be, the tea unit, have habitually 
made default in the payment of wage s, or provident fund dues of workers and other employees, or 
rent of the land, or duties of excise, or in the payment of such other dues as are obligatory under any 
law for the time being in force; or  
(d) the undertaking, or, as the case may be , the tea un it, is being managed in a manner highly 
detrimental to the tea industry or to public interest,  12 
 the Central Government may, by notified order, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the 
management of the whole or any part of the tea undertakin g or tea unit, as the case may be , or to exercise 
in respect of the whole or any part of the tea undertaking or , as the case may be, tea unit, such functions 
of control as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Any notified order issued under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect for such period, not exceeding 
five years as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it is expedient in the public interest that 
any such notified order should continue to have effect after  the expiry of the period of five years 
aforesaid, it may from time to time issue directions for such continuance for such period, not exceeding 
one year at a time, as may be specified in the direction, so, however, that the total period of such 
continuanc e (after the expiry of the said period of five years) does not exceed 1[six years]; and where any 
such direction is issued a copy thereof shall be laid, as soon as may be, before both Houses of Parliament.  
(3) Any notified order issued under sub -section ( 1) shall have the same effect as if it were an order 
made under sub -section ( 1) of section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951              
(65 of 1956) , and the provisions of section 18B of that Act shall apply accordingly.  
(4) Notw ithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no person, who cease s 
to hold any office by reason of the provisions contained in clause ( a), or whose contract of management is 
terminated by reason of the provisions contained in clau se (b), of section 18B of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1965) , as applicable to a tea undertaking or tea unit by 
virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 3), shall be entitled to any compensation for the loss of office or 
for the premature termination of his contract of management:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the right of any such person to recover 
from the tea undertaking or the tea unit, as the case may be, monies recoverable otherwise than b y way of 
such compensation.  
16E. Power to take over tea undertaking or tea unit without investigation under certain 
circumstances .—(1) Without prejudice to any other provision of this Act if , from the documentary or 
other evidence in its possession, the Ce ntral Government is satisfied, in relation to a tea undertaking or tea 
unit, that — 
(a) the persons in charge of such tea undertaking or tea unit have, by reckless investment or 2[by] 
creation of incumbrances on the assets of the tea undertaking or tea unit , or by diversion of funds, 
brought about a situation which is likely to affect the production of tea manufactured or produced by 
the tea undertaking or tea unit , and that immediate action is necessary to prevent such a situation ; or 
(b) it has been closed  for a period of not less than three months (whether by reason of the 
voluntary winding up of the company owning the tea undertaking or tea unit or for any other reason) 
and such closure is prejudicial to the concerned tea undertaking or tea , unit and that  the financial 
condition of the company owning the tea undertaking or tea unit and the plant and machinery of such 
tea undertaking or tea unit are such that it is possible to restart the tea undertaking or tea unit and such 
restarting is necessary in the i nterests of the general public,  
it may, by notified order, authorise any person or body of persons to take over the management of the 
whole or any part of the tea undertaking or tea unit or to exercise in respect of the whole or any part of the 
tea undert aking or tea unit such functions of control as may be specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 8 of 1983, s. 2, for “two years ” (w.e.f. 7 -10-1983).   
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  13 
 1[Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section, “incumbrances ” includes any liability which may 
be recovered or satisfied from the assets of the tea undertaking or, as the ca se may be, tea unit or the 
person owning the tea undertaking or tea unit.]  
(2) On the issue of a notified order under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a tea undertaking or  tea unit, — 
(a) the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 16D, and the provisions of section 
16G, shall apply to a notified order made under sub -section ( 1) as they apply to a notified order made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 16D; and  
(b) the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 18AA of the Industries (Develop ment and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951), shall apply to the tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case may be, 
to the same extent as they apply to an industrial undertaking.  
16F.  Contracts in bad faith, etc. , may be cancelled or varied .—Without prejudic e to the 
provisions of section 18B of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951), as 
applicable to a tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case may be , the person or body of persons authorised 
under section 16D, or, as the case may be , section 16E, to take over the management of a tea undertaking 
or tea unit may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, make an application to any court 
having jurisdiction in this behalf for the purpose of cancelling or varying any contract  or agreement 
entered into, at any time before the issue of the notified order under section 16D or section 16E, between 
the tea undertaking or the tea unit and any other person; and the court may, if satisfied after due inquiry 
that such contract or agree ment had been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of the 
tea undertaking or tea unit, make an order cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject to such 
conditions as it may think fit to impose) that contract or agreeme nt, and the contract or agreement shall 
have effect accordingly.  
16G. Application of Act 1 of 195 6.—(1) Where the management of a tea undertaking or tea unit 
owned by a company has been taken over by any person or body of persons authorised by the Central 
Government under this Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act or in the 
memorandum or articles of association of such company, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such company or any other person to nominate or 
appoint  any person to be a director of the company;  
(b) no resolution passed in a meeting of the shareholders of such company shall be given effect to 
unless approved by the Central Government;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such company of for the appoi ntment of receiver in 
respect thereof shall lie in any court except with the consent of the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), and to the other provisions contained in this 
Act, and subject to such other excepti ons, restrictions and limitations , if any, as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette , specify in this behalf, the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , 
shall continue to apply to such company in the same manner as it applied thereto  before the issue of the 
notified order.  
 16H. Power of Central Government to cancel notified order under section 16D or 16E .—If, at 
any time, it appears to the Central Government on the application of the owner of a tea undertaking or tea 
unit or otherwis e that the purpose of the order made under section 16D or section 16E, has been fulfilled 
or that for any other reason it is not necessary that the order should remain in force, the Central 
Government may, by notified order, cancel such order and, on the c ancellation of any such order, the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1980, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  14 
 management or control, as the case may be, of the tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case may be, shall 
vest in the owner of that undertaking or unit.  
16-I. Power of Central Government to authorise, with the permission o f the Court , persons to 
take over management or control of tea undertakings or tea units .—(1) If the Central Government is 
of opinion that there are possibilities of running or restarting a tea undertaking or tea unit in relation to 
which an investigation has been made under sub -section ( 2) of section 16B, and that such tea undertaking 
or tea unit should be run or restarted for maintaining or increasing the production, supply or distribution 
of tea, that Government may make an application to the Court by wh ich the company owning such tea 
undertaking or tea unit has been ordered to be wound up , praying for permission to appoint any person or 
body of persons to take over the management of the tea undertaking or, as the case may be, tea unit, or to 
exercise in respect of the whole or any part of the tea undertaking or tea unit, such functions of control as 
may be specified in the application.  
(2) Where an application is made under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 18FA of the Ind ustries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951),  shall apply to the tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case may be, 
subject to the modification that for the words “twelve years ” occurring in the second proviso thereto, 
the words  1[six years] s hall be substituted;  
(b) the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) to ( 10) (both inclusive) of section 18FA of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951),  shall apply to the tea undertaking or tea unit 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), to th e same extent as they apply to an industrial undertaking.  
16J. Power of Central Government to make certain declarations in relation to tea undertakings 
or tea units. —The Central Government may, if it is satisfied in relation to a tea undertaking, tea unit or 
any part thereof, the management or control of which has been taken over under section 16D or under 
section 16E or under section 16 -I, that it is necessary so do in the interests of the general public with a 
view to preventing fall in the volume of the production of tea, exercise in relation to such tea undertaking 
or tea unit or part thereof the same powers as are exercisable by it in relation to an industrial undertaking 
under section 18FB of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of  1951), , and the said 
section and the Third Schedule referred to therein shall apply to a tea undertaking or tea unit accordingly.  
16K. Power of Central Government to call for report on the affairs and working of a managed 
tea undertaking or tea unit .—(1) Where the management or control of a tea undertaking or tea unit, as 
the case may be, has been taken over under section 16D or under section 16E or under section 16 -I, the 
Central Government may, at any time during the continuance of such management or con trol, call for a 
report from the authorised person on the affairs and working of the tea undertaking or tea unit, and in 
submitting the report the authorised person shall take into account the inventory and list of members and 
creditors prepared under section 16L.  
(2) On receipt of the report submitted by the authorised person, the Central Government may exercise 
all or any of the powers conferred on it by sections 18FD, 18FE and 18FF of the Industries (Development 
and regulation) Act, 1951  (65 of 1951),  to the same extent and subject to the same conditions, limitations 
or restrictions as are specified in the said sections, and the provisions of the said sections shall become 
applicable to a tea undertaking or tea unit, as the case may be.  
 16L. Preparation of an inventory of the assets and liabilities and list of members and creditors 
of managed tea undertaking or tea unit. —For the purposes of this Act, the authorised person shall, as 
soon as may be after taking over the management of a tea undertaking or te a unit, prepare a complete 
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 38 of 1983, s. 2, for “two years ” (w.e.f. 7 -10-1983).  15 
 inventory of the properties, belongings, liabilities and obligations of such tea undertaking or tea unit, as 
the case may be, and a list of members and creditors of such tea undertaking or tea unit, in accordance 
with the provisi ons of section 18FG of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951                  
(65 of 1951), and the said section shall apply to a tea undertaking or tea unit accordingly.  
1[16LL. Debts incurred and investments made by the authorised person t o have priority. —
Every debt arising out of any loan or any other financial accommodation obtained by the authorised 
person for carrying on the management of, or exercising functions of control in relation to, the whole or 
any part of a tea undertaking or t ea unit, the management of which has been taken over or is purported to 
have been taken over under section 16D or section 16E or section 16 -I,— 
(a) shall have priority over all other debts, whether secured or unsecured, incurred before the 
management of su ch tea undertaking or tea unit was taken over;  
(b) shall be a preferential debt within the meaning of section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956               
(1 of 1956),  
and all such debts shall rank equally among themselves and be paid in full out of the as sets of the tea 
undertaking or tea unit, unless such assets are insufficient to meet them, in which case they shall be 
recoverable from the owner of the tea undertaking or tea unit as arrears of land revenue notwithstanding 
that the period of management or  control has ended due to expiry of the period for which it was taken 
over or due to cancellation of the order under section 16H or in pursuance of the order of any court.]  
16M. Bar of suits and other proceedings in relation to the tea undertakings or tea units.—No 
suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted or continued against a tea undertaking or tea unit in 
respect of which an order has been made under section 16D or section 16E, except with the previous 
permission of the Central Government or o f any officer authorised by that Government in this behalf.  
16N. Rules made under Act 65 of 1951 to apply .—Until any rule is made in relation to any matter 
referred to in this Chapter, the rules made by the Central Government under the Industries (Developm ent 
and Regulation) Act, 1951, in relation to such matter shall, as far as may be, apply, to the extent they are 
not repugnant to any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder and references in such rules to the 
provisions of that Act shall be Cons trued accordingly.]  
CHAPTER  IV 
CONTROL OVER THE EXPORT OF TEA AND TEA SEED  
17. Control of export of tea and tea seed .—(1) No tea shall be exported unless covered by a licence 
issued by or on behalf of the Board.  
(2) No tea seed shall be exported unless cov ered by a permit issued by or on behalf of the Central 
Government.  
(3) No tea or tea seed shall be taken by land, sea or air out of any State to any of the 2*** Portuguese 
Settlements bounded by India, unless covered by a permit issued by or on behalf of t he Board.   
18. Tea or tea seed for export to be covered by licence or permit .—(1) No consignment of tea or 
tea seed shall be shipped or waterborne to be shipped for export or shall be exported until the owner has 
delivered  to the Customs -collector a valid export licence or special export licence or a valid permit issued 
by or on behalf of the Board or the Central Government, as the case may be , covering the quantity to be 
shipped.  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 68 of 1980 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
2. The words “French or ” omitted by the A.O.  (No. 3), 1956 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  16 
 (2) No consignment of tea or tea seed shall be shipped or waterborne to be sh ipped for carriage (or 
shall be taken by land or air) to any of the 1* * * Portuguese Settlements bounded by India until the owner 
has delivered to the Customs -collector a permit issued by or on behalf of the Board covering the quantity 
to be shipped.  
(3) No permit for the passage of any tea or tea seed by land into any of the 1* * * Portuguese 
Settlement bounded by India shall be granted under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Land Customs Act, 
1924 (19 of 1924) , unless the application for such permit is  accompanied by a permit granted in this 
behalf by the Board covering the quantity to be passed.  
19. Export allotment .—The Central Government shall, after consulting the Board and paying due 
regard to all interests concerned and to the standard export figu re, declare by notification in the Official 
Gazette, the export allotment for each financial year:  
Provided that the Central Government may by subsequent notification at any time during , the 
financial year alter the export allotment and thereupon the expor t allotment as so altered shall be the 
export allotment for that year.  
20. Export quotas and licences .—(1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any tea estate 
or any sub -division of a tea estate shall have the right to receive under this Act an  export quota for each 
financial year.  
(2) The export quota of a tea estate, or a sub -division of a tea estate, that is, the total quantity of tea 
which may be exported by the owner of a tea estate or a sub -division of a tea estate during the financial 
year, shall be an amount determined by the Board in accordance with such principles as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that when an export allotment is altered under the provisions of section 19, the export quota 
shall be liable to be altered accordingly.  
(3) The  total export quotas allotted to tea estates and to sub -divisions thereof at any time during any 
financial year shall not exceed the export allotment for the time being for that year.  
21. Right to export licences .—(1) The owner of a tea estate or a sub -division of a tea estate to which 
an export quota has been allotted for any financial year shall have the right to obtain at any time export 
licences during that year to cover the export of tea up to the amount of the unexhausted balance of the 
quota, that is , up to the amount of the quota less the amount for which the export licences have already 
been issued against it.  
(2) The right of the owner of a tea estate or a sub -division of a tea estate under this section may be 
transferred subject to such conditions  as may be prescribed, and the transferee of any such right may 
again transfer the whole or any part of his right to the owner of a tea estate, or a sub -division of a tea 
estate but not to any other person:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall o perate to restrict the issue of licences for the export of 
tea expressed to be sold with export rights.  
(3) The owner of any tea estate or any sub -division of a tea estate to which an export quota has been 
allotted or any person to whom he has transferred his rights may at any time before the 21st day of March 
of the financial year to which the quota relates apply in writing to the Board for an export licence to cover 
the export of tea up to the amount of the amount of the unexhausted balance of the quota.  
                                                           
1. The words “French or ” omitted by the A.O. (No. 3), 1956 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
 17 
 (4) Every licence shall be in duplicate in the prescribed form, shall bear the date of its issue and shall 
be valid up to the end of the financial year in which it is issued:  
Provided that, save as provided in section 22, the Board shall not issue any expo rt licence after the 
end of the financial year in which the application for licence was made.  
22. Special Export Licences .—(1) Where tea in respect of which an export licence has been or could 
have been granted under this Act has not been exported before t he end of the financial year in which the 
licence was or could have been issued, the person to whom the licence was or could have been granted 
may, before the 14th day of April of the following financial year forward an application to the Board for a 
speci al export licence covering the same quantity of tea, and the Board shall, on receipt of the prescribed 
fee, if any, issue a special export licence accordingly.  
(2) A person to whom a special export licence has been issued under sub -section ( 1) may transfer  the 
special export licence with all the rights conferred thereby to a person or persons nominated by him, but a 
licence once so transferred shall not be further transferable.  
(3) A special licence shall be in duplicate in the prescribed form, shall bear t he date of its issue and 
shall be valid up to the 31st day of May of the financial year in which it was issued.  
(4) The quantity of tea covered by a special export licence shall be accounted for against the export 
quota of the year in which the original li cence was or could have been issued under this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections the Board may, with the general 
or special previous sanction of the Central Government, refuse to issue a special export licence or 
postpone for so long as the Central Government may require the issue of any special export licence.  
23. Board to maintain accounts of quotas .—(1) The Board shall maintain an account of every 
export quota showing, in addition to such other particulars as the B oard may think fit, the licences issued 
against it and the unexhausted balance.  
(2) Any owner of a tea estate or a sub -division of a tea estate shall be entitled, on payment of the 
requisite fee, to a copy of the account relating to his quota certified in the manner laid down in the by -
laws made by the Board.  
24. Limitation of application of chapter .—Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to tea — 
(a) proved to the satisfaction of the  1[Commissioner of Customs] to have been imported into 
India from any p art outside India; or  
(b) shipped as stores on board any vessel or aircraft in such quantity as the Customs -Collector 
considers reasonable having regard to the number of the crew and passengers and length of the 
voyage on which the vessel or aircraft is about to  depart; or  
(c) exported by post in packages 2[not exceeding five kilograms] in weight ; or 
(d) exported with the previous sanction of the Central Government, within the limits prescribed in 
this behalf, by a Red Cross Society or by any organisation for pro viding amenities for troops 
overseas ; or 
(e) taken as part of the personal luggage of a passenger.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 22 of 19 95, s. 86, for “Customs Collector ” (w.e.f. 26-5-1995). 
2.  Subs . by Act 4 0 of 1960, s. 8,  for “not exceeding ten pounds avoirdupois ” (w.e.f.1 -10-1960).  18 
 CHAPTER  V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
1[25. Imposition Of Cess On Tea Produced In India. —(1) There shall be levied and collected as a 
cess for the purposes o f this Act a duty of excise of all tea produced in India 2[at such rate not exceeding 
fifty paise per kilogram as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix]:  
3[Provided that different rates may be fixed for different varietie s or grades of tea having regard to the 
location of, and the climatic conditions prevailing in, the tea estates or gardens producing such varieties or 
grades of tea and any other circumstances applicable to such production.]  
(2) The duty of excise levied u nder sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to the duty of excise leviable 
on tea under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944), or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
(3) The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) , and the rules made 
thereunder, including those relating to refund and exemption from duty, shall so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the levy and collection of the duty of excise under this section as they apply in relation to the 
levy and collection of the duty of excise on tea under the said Act.]  
26. Payment of proceeds of cess to the Board .—The proceeds of the cess levied under sub -section 
(1) of section 25 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government 
may th ereafter, from time to time, pay to the Board from and out of such proceeds such sums of money as 
it may think fit after deducting the expenses of collection.  
4[26A. Grants and loans by the Central Government to the Board .—The Central Government 
may, after  due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants 
of loans such sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary.]  
27. Constitution of Fund .—(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Tea Fu nd, and there 
shall be credited thereto :— 
(a) the proceeds of the cess made over to the Board by the Central Government;  
5[(aa) any sum of money including dividend, if any, realised by the Board in carrying out any 
measure referred to in clause ( jj) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10; ] 
6[7(ab)] any sum of money that may be paid to the Board by way of grants of loans under                
section 26A;  
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of licences, permits and permissions issued under this 
Act; and  
(c) any other fee that may be levied and collected under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Board and the cost of the measures 
referred to in section 10.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 21 of 1967, s. 4 , for s. 25  (w.e.f. 13 -8-1967) . 
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1986, s. 2, for “at the rate of four paise per kilogram ” (w.e. f. 15-8-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -8-1986).  
4. Ins. by Act 22 of 1970, s. 2  (w.e.f. 2 3-5-1970).  
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1980, s. 5 , for clause ( aa) (w.e.f. 27 -12-1980) . 
6. Ins. by Act 22 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23 -5-1970).  
7. Cla use ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( ab) by Act 68 of 1980, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27 -12-1980).  19 
 28. Borrowing powers of Board .—Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Board 
shall have power to borrow on the security of the Fund or any other asset for any purposes for which the 
Fund may be applied.  
1[28A. Writing off of losses .—Subject to such conditions as may be spe cified by the Central 
Government, where the Board is of opinion that any amount due to, or any loss, whether of money or of 
property, incurred by the Board is irrecoverable, the Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, sanction the writing off finally of the said amount or loss:  
Provided that no such approval of the Central Government shall be necessary where such 
irrecoverable amount or loss does not exceed in any individual case and in the agree gate in any year such 
amounts as may be prescribed.]  
29. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall cause accounts to be kept of all money s received and 
expended by it.  
(2) The accounts shall be audited every year by auditors appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government and such auditors s hall disallow every item, which in their opinion is not authorized by this 
Act or any rule made or direction issued thereunder.  
(3) The Board may, within three months from the date of communication to it of the disallowance of 
any item, as aforesaid appeal  against such disallowance to the Central Government whose decision shall 
be final.  
CHAPTER  VI 
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
30. Power to control price and distribution of tea or tea waste .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by order notified in the Offic ial Gazette, fix in respect of tea of any description specified therein — 
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price or the maximum and minimum prices which may 
be charged by a grower of tea, manufacturer or dealer, wholesale or retail, whether for the Indi an 
market or for export;  
(b) the maximum quantity which may in one transaction be sold to any person.  
(2) Any such order may for reasons to be specified therein — 
(a) fix prices for such tea differently in different localities or for different classes of de alers, or for 
growers of tea or manufacturers;  
(b) instead of specifying the price or prices to be charged, direct that price or prices shall be 
computed in such manner and by reference to such matters as may be provided by the order.  
(3) The Central Gover nment may, by general or special order — 
(a) prohibit the disposal of tea or tea waste except in such circumstances and under such 
conditions as may be specified in the order;  
(b) direct any person growing, manufacturing or holding in stock tea or tea waste  to sell the whole 
or a part of such tea or tea waste so grown or manufactured during any specified period, or to sell the 
whole or a part of the tea or tea waste so held in stock, to such person or class of persons and in such 
circumstances as may be spec ified in the order;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1986).  20 
 (c) regulate by licences, permits or otherwise the production, storage, transport or distribution of 
tea or tea waste.  
(4) Where in pursuance of any order made with reference to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3), any person 
sells the whole or a part of any quantity of tea or tea waste, there shall be paid to him as price therefore — 
(a) where the price can be fixed by agreement consistently with the order, if any, relating to the 
fixation of price issued under sub -section ( 1), the price so ag reed upon;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to any such order 
as is referred to in clause ( a); 
(c) where neither clause ( a) nor clause ( b) applies, the price calculated at the market rate 
prevailing in the loc ality at the date of sale.  
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the power s conferred by sub -section ( 1) and ( 3), any order 
made thereunder may provide — 
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply or distribution of, or trade and 
comme rce in, tea or tea waste to maintain and produce for inspection such books, accounts and 
records relating to their business and to furnish such information relating  there to as may be specified 
in the order;  
(b) for such other matters, including in particul ar the entering and search of premises, vehicles, 
vessels and aircraft, the seizure by a person authorized to make such search, of tea or tea waste in 
respect of which such person has reason to believe that a contravention of the order has been, is being 
or is about to be committed, the grant or issue of licences, permits or other documents and the 
charging of fees therefor.  
31. General control over acts and proceedings of the Board .—(1) All acts and proceedings of the 
Board shall be subject to the control of the Central Government which may cancel, suspend or modify as 
it think s fit any action taken by the Board.  
(2) The Board shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central 
Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
(3) The records of the Board shall be open to inspection at all reasonab le times by any officer 
authoris ed in this behalf by the Central Government.  
32. Appeal to Central Government .—Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board under section 
14, section 15 or section 20 may appeal to the Central Government within sixty days from the date thereof 
and the Central Government may cancel, modify or suspend any such order.  
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Licensing brokers, tea manufacturers, etc .—The Central Government may whenever it thinks 
it necessary so  to do, by notification in the Official Gazette require that no person shall on and from such 
date as may be specified in the notification engage himself as a broker, manufacturer or dealer in tea 
waste or engage himself in the business of blending tea except under and in accordance with the 
provisions of a licence issued by the Board in accordance with the rules made under this Act; and any 
person who on and after such date so engages himself without  obtaining a licence issued by the Board 
shall be deemed to have contravened the provisions of this section.  
34. Power of inspection .—Any person authorized in this behalf by the Central Government or by the 
Board or any member so authorized by the Chairman  in writing or any officer of the Board may enter at 21 
 all reasonable times any tea estate or any place or premises where tea or tea waste is stored, kept or 
exposed for sale and may require the production for his inspection of any book, register, record or other 
paper kept therein and ask for any information relating to the production, storage or keeping for sale of 
tea or tea waste.  
35. Power of Board to call for returns .—(1) The Board may serve by registered post a notice upon 
the owner of any tea estate o r any sub -division of a tea estate or upon his manager, requiring him to 
furnish, within such period as it may specify in the notice , such returns relating to the production, sale and 
export of tea produced on the estate or to any other matter as it may de em necessary.  
(2) Where the owner of any tea estate or any sub -division of a tea estate or his manager being 
required under sub -section ( 1) to furnish any return fails to furnish such return within the period specified 
in the notice or furnishes a return c ontaining any particular which is false and which he knows to be false 
or does not believe to be true, the Board may refuse to allot an export quota to that estate or sub -division 
under section 20, or where an export quota has already been allotted, may ca ncel the unexhausted balance 
of that quota and refuse to issue any further export licences against that quota or recognise or give effect 
to any transfer of quota under section 21.  
(3) The Board may serve by registered post a notice upon any manufacturer, broker, dealer or dealer 
in tea waste, requiring him to furnish, within such period as it may specify in the notice, such returns  
relating to the manufacture , stock, purchase, sale or export of tea or tea waste as it may deem necessary.  
36. Penalty for ill icit export .—A breach of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 18 shall be punishable as if it were an offence under item No. 8 of section 167 of the Sea Customs 
Act, 1878  (8 of 1878) , and the provisions of section 168 and of Chap ter XVII of that Act shall apply 
accordingly.  
37. Penalty for making false return .—Any person who being required by or under this Act to 
furnish any return fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false 
and whic h he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.  
 38. Penalty for obstructing an officer or member of the board in the discharge of his duties and 
for failure to produce books and records .—Any person who — 
(a) obstructs a member authorized by the Chairman in writing or an officer of the Board or a 
person authorized in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Board in the exercise of any 
power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty imposed, on him by or under this Act, or  
(b) having the control or custody of any account book or other period, fails to produce such book 
or record when require d to do so by or under this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may exten d to one year , or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both.  
39. Penalty for illicit cultivation .—Whoever knowingly plants tea or causes tea to be planted on any 
land in contravention of section 12 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees for the first offence, and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for any subsequent 
offence.  
40. Removal of tea planted without permission .—Where any person has been convicted of any 
offence under section 39, the convicting Court may direct that the tea in respect of which the offence was 
committed shall be removed from the land within a specified time, and in the event of the order not being 22 
 duly complied with, may cause the tea to be removed and may recover t he cost from the person convicted 
as if it were an arrear of land revenue due on the tea estate on which the offence was committed.  
41. Penalty for contravention of order relating to control of price and distributi on.—(1) If any 
person contravenes any orde r made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of section 30, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees, or with both, and the property in respect of which the  order has been contravened 
or such part thereof as to the Court may seem fit shall be forfeited to the Central Government.  
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of, any order under                         
sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 3) of section 30 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.  
42. Other penalties .—Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder other than the provisi ons, punishment for the 
contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 36, 37, 38, 39 and 41 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both, and in the case  of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to five 
hundred  rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first 
such contravention.  
43. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committin g an offence under this Act, or the rules 
thereunder is a company, every person, who at the time the contravention was committed was in charge 
of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company, s hall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act or the 
rules thereunder has been committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed 
with the consent or connivance of , or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director or manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other than associat ion of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
44. Jurisdiction of courts .—No Court inferior to that a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the 
First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
45. Previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution .—No prosecution for any offence 
punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
46. Protection of action taken in good faith .—1[(1)] No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act 
of  2[any rule of order] made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Section  46 re -numbered as sub -section (1) thereof by  Act 68 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 27 -12-1980) .   
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the rules ” (w.e.f. 27-12-1980) . 23 
 1[(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Centr al Government for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder.]  
47. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by order notified in the Offi cial Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised in such cases and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order by such officer or authority as may be specified 
therein.  
48. Suspension of op eration of Act.—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances 
have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act should cease to be 
imposed or if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the pu blic interest, the Central Government 
may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to a specified extent either indefinitely or for 
such period as may be specified in the notification the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Where the operation of any provisions of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may at any time while this Act remains in force be 
removed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
49. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, make rule for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the g enerality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution of the Board, the number of persons to be appointed as members from each of 
the categories specified in sub -section ( 3) of secti on 4, the term of office and the other conditions of 
service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members 
of the Board;  
(b) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members may be removed;  
(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the Board every year;  
(d) the pay, allowances and other conditions of service of the  2[Deputy Chairman, Secretary] and 
other officers appointed by the Central Government;  
(e) the maintenance of records of all b usiness transacted at meetings of the Board and the 
submission of copies of such records to the Central Government;  
(f) the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be made by or on behalf 
of the Board;  
(g) the preparation of budge t estimate of the receipts and expenditure of the Board and the 
authority by which such estimates shall be sanctioned;  
(h) the powers of the Board and the Executive Committee and the Chairman, in regard to the 
incurring of expenditure and the re -appropriat ion of estimated savings in any budget head to another 
such head;  
(i) the conditions subject to which the Board may incur expenditure;  
(j) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 27-12-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1977, s. 3, for “Secretary ” (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).    24 
 1[(ja) the amounts for the purposes of the provision to section  28A;]  
(k) the form and the manner in which accounts should be kept by the Board;  
(l) the basis on which the export quota of a tea estate or a sub -division of a tea estate shall be 
determined;  
(m) the conditions subject to which export quota, export licenc es and special export licences shall 
be transferable;  
(n) the conditions subject to which permits for the planting of tea on land not carrying tea shall be 
granted;  
(o) the collection of any information or statistics in respect of the tea industry and the tea trade;  
(p) the fees to be levied in respect of licences, permits and permissions issued under this Act;  
(q) the procedure for the grant or issue of licences, permits and permissions under this Act, the 
time within which such licences, permits or permis sions shall be granted or issued including, in 
particular, the publication of notices calling for applications and the holding of such inquiry in regard 
thereto as may be necessary in the circumstances;  
(r) the form of application for licences, permits or permissions under this Act;  
(s) the manner in which a broker or a dealer in tea waste or a manufacturer shall be licensed under 
this Act and the levy of fees in respect of such licence;  
(t) the matters which may be taken into account in the granting or iss uing of any licence, permit 
or permission under this Act including in particular the previous consultation with the Central 
Government by the Board in regard to the grant or issue of any such licences, permits or permissions;  
(u) the conditions which may b e included in any licences, permits or permissions;  
(v) the returns to be furnished by owners of tea estates, or sub -divisions thereof, manufacturers, 
dealers and brokers relating to the production, manufacture, stock , sale and export of tea and tea 
waste and the form and manner in which such returns are to be furnished;  
(w) the fees to be charged for granting certified copies of accounts of quotas;  
(x) any other fee that may be necessary for the Board to levy in order to determine or redetermine 
the basis on which export quota may be fixed;  
  (y) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
2[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the sessions or the successive sessions aforesaid] both houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
50. Power of Board to make by -laws .—(1) The Board may make by -laws consistent with this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, to provide for — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1970, s. 4, for su b-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 23 -5-1970).    
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1977, s. 3,  for “ in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following, ” (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).    25 
 (a) the dates, times and places of its meetings and of the meetings of the Executive and other 
Committees and quorum for such me etings, and the procedure there at; 
(b) the delegation of powers and duties to the Executive or any other Committee, or   its 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman,  1[Deputy Chairman , Secretary] or a ny other of its officers;  
(c) the travelling allowances of members and of members of Committees;  
(d) the appointment, promotion and dismissal of its officers and other employees other than those 
appointed by the Central Government and the creation and abol ition of their posts;  
(e) the conditions of service of its officers and other employees other than those appointed by the 
Central Government, including their pay, leave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, compassionate 
allowances and travelling allowa nces and the establishment and maintenance of a provident fund for 
them;  
(f) the maintenance of its accounts;  
(g) the persons by whom, and the manner in which payments, deposits and investments may be 
made on its behalf;  
(h) the custody of moneys required for its current expenditure and the investment of moneys not 
so required;  
(i) the preparation of statements showing the sums allotted to Departments of the Central and 
State Governments and other institution s.  
(2) No by -law shall take effect until it has been confirmed by the Central Government and published 
in the Official Gazette, and the Central Government, in confirming a by -law may make any change 
therein which appears to be necessary.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, cancel any by -law which it 
has confirmed and thereupon the by -laws shall cease to have effect.  
2[(4) Every rule made by this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a to tal period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifica tion 
in the by -law or both Houses agree that the by -law should not be made, the by -law shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without pre judice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that by -law.]  
 51. Repeals and savings .—(1) The Indian Tea Control Act, 1938  (8 of 1938) , and the Central Tea 
Board Act, 1949  (13 of 1949) , are hereby repealed.  
(2) All moneys and other property and all rights and interests, or whatever kind, owned by, vested in, 
used, enjoyed or possessed by, or held in trust by or for, the Indian Tea Licensing Committee constituted 
under the Indian Tea Control Act, 1938  (8 of 1938) , and the Central Tea Board constit uted under the 
Central Tea Board Act, 1949  (13 of 1949) , as well as all liabilities  legally subsisting against that 
Committee or that Board shall pass to the Board with effect from the commencement of this Act.  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by Act 32 of 1977 , s. 3, for “Secretary”  (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977) . 
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  26 
 (3) All officers and other employees of the I ndian Tea Licensing Committee and the Central Tea 
Board who hold office as such immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to 
have been appointed as officers or other employees of the Board with effect from the commencement of 
this Act  and, notwithstanding anything contained in any contract of service entered into by any such 
officer or other employee with the Indian Tea Licensing Committee or the Central Tea Board, shall be 
entitled to such pay and allowances and to such conditions of service in respect of other matters as may be 
determined by the Board with the approval of the Central Government.  
(4) Any proceedings taken by the Indian Tea Licensing Committee or the Central Tea Board before 
the commencement of this Act may be continued  by the Board after such commencement.  
(5) Until action in that behalf is otherwise taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, all licences, permits and permissions issued or granted, all export quotas allotted 
and a ll fees fixed under the provisions of the Indian Tea Control Act, 1938  (8 of 1938) , shall unless 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been issued, granted, allotted or fixed 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(6) Any offence punishable under the Indian Tea Control Act, 1938  (8 of 1938) , or the Central Tea 
Board Act, 1949  (13 of 1949) , shall be punishable and may be dealt with as if it were an offence 
punishable under the corresponding pro visions of this Act.  
(7) Any other thing or action done or taken before the commencement of this Act by the Indian Tea 
Licensing Committee or the Central Tea Board shall so long as it is not inconsistent with any of the 
provisions of this Act, be as valid and effectual as if it had been done or taken by the Board after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(8) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions contained in                                 
sub-section ( 2) to ( 7) inclusive shall be w ithout prejudice to the general application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) . 
(9) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may as occasion may arise, by order, do anyth ing which appears to be necessary for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty.  
 
 
 
