--------------------------The Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE ABSORBED AREAS (LAWS)  ACT, 1954  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Extension of laws.  
THE SCHEDULES . 
  2 
 THE ABSORBED AREAS (LAWS)  ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1954  
[30th April , 1954 .] 
An Act to extend certain laws to the areas which, p rior to the commencement of the 
Constitution, were administered as excluded or partially excluded areas and which, on 
such commencement, were absorbed in certain States.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Absorbed Areas (Laws) Act, 1954.   
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “absorbing State ”, in relation to an absorbed area means a State specified in the heading of 
the Schedule in which that ab sorbed area is specified;  
(b) “absorbed area ” means an area specified in column 2 of the Schedule.  
3. Extension of laws.—The Acts specified in column 1 of each of the Schedules and all rules, 
notifications, orders, schemes, forms and bye -laws made thereunder, as in force in the absorbing State 
specified in the heading of that Schedule, are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in the absorbed 
areas s pecified in column 2 of that Schedule.  
THE SCHEDULES  
(See Sections 2 and 3)  
SCHEDULE I  
BIHAR  
Name of the Act  
1 The absorbed areas  
2 
    The Requisitioned Land (Apportionment               
of Compensation) Act 1949 , (L1 of 1949)  1. Hazaribagh and Manbhum  Districts.  
2. Sadar Sub -Division of the Palamau District.  
3. Dhalbhum Sub -Division of the Singh bhum 
District.  
4. Godda and Deoghar Sub -Division s of the 
Santal  Parganas District.  
 
SCHEDULE II  
BOMBAY  
Name of the Act  The absorbed areas  
1 2 
1. The  Indian  Extradition Act , 1903 (XV of 
1903)  1. Shahda, Nandurbar and TalodaTaluka s of the 
West  Khandesh District.  
2. The Whipping Act , 1909 (IV of 1909).  2. The  Dohad  Taluka and the Jhalod  Mahal of the 
Panch  Mahal District.  
3. The Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act , 
1922 (XXII of 1922) .  3 
 4. The Cotton Transport Act , 1923 (III of 192 3).  
5. The Port  Haj Commitees Act , 1932 (XX of 
1932).   
6.  The Seaward  Artillery  Practice  Act, 1949  
(VIII of 1949).    
 
SCHEDULE III  
ORISSA  
Name of the Act  The absorbed areas  
1 2 
1. The Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (I of 1889) . Angul . 
2. The White  Phosphorus  Matches Prohibition Act , 
1913 (V of 1913) .  
3. The Indian Emigration Act , 1922  (VII of 1922) .  
4. The  Coal  Grading Board Act , 1925 (XXXI of 
1925) .  
5. The Coal Mines Provi dent Fund and Bonus 
Schemes Act , 1948 (XL VI of 1948).   
 
SCHED ULE IV 
UTTAR  PRADESH  
Name of the Act  The absorbed areas  
1 2 
1. The Indian Power Alcohol Act , 1948 (XXII 
of 1948) . Jaunsar  Bawar  Parganas in Dehra Dun District 
and the areas  of south of Kaimpur range in the 
Mirzapur District.  
2. The Employees State Insurance Act , 1948 
(XXXIV of 1948).   
        
SCHED ULE V  
WEST BENGAL  
Name of the Act  The absorbed areas  
1 2 
1. The Requisitioned  Land (Apportionment  of 
Compensation) Act , 1949  (LI of 1949) . Darjeeling District.  
2. The West Bengal Raw Jute Futures Act , 1948 
(West Bengal Act No. XXV of 1948 ).  
 
--------------------------The Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE CHANDERNAGORE (MERGER) ACT, 1954  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Chandernagore to form part of West Bengal . 
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution . 
5. Representation of Chandernagore in the House of the People . 
6. Representation of Chandernagore in the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal . 
7. Electoral roll of the Chandernagore assembly constituency . 
8. Election to fill the seat allotted to the Chandernagore Assembly constituency . 
9. Consequences of alteration in the extent of certain Assembly constituencies . 
10. Representation of Chandernagore in the Legislative Council of West Bengal . 
11. Amendment of section 9, Act 81 of 1952.  
12. Conferment of Indian citizenship on French citizens domiciled in  Chandernagore . 
13. Property and assets.  
14. Rights, liabilities and obligations.  
15. Subordinate Courts . 
16. Existing authorities and officers to continue in Chandernagore . 
17. Extension of laws to Chandernagore . 
18. Repeal of corresponding laws and savings . 
19. Power to remove difficulties . 
 
  2 
 THE CHANDERNAGORE (MERGER) ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1954  
[29th September,  1954 .] 
An Act to provide for the merger of Chandernagore into the State of West Bengal and for the 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Chandernagore (Merger)           
Act, 1954.  
(2) It shall come into force on the 2 nd day of October, 1954.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 2 nd day of October, 1954.  
(b) “Assembly constituency ”, “Council constituency ” and “Parliamentary constituency ” have 
the same     meanings as in the Representati on of the People Act, 1950 ( 43 of 1950);  
(c) “Chandernagore ” means the whole of the territory which immediately before the 9thday of 
June, 1952 was comprised in the Free Town of Chandernagore;  
(d) “law” means so much of any enactment, Ordinance, Regulation, order, rule, scheme, 
notification,   bye-law or any other instruments having the force of law as relates to matters 
enumerated in List I and List III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
(e) “sitting member ”, in relation to the House of the People or either House of the Legislature 
of the State of West Bengal means a person who immediately before the appointed day is a 
member of the House;  
(f)  “State Government ” means the Government of West Ben gal; 
(g) “Union purposes ” means the purposes of government relatable to any of the matters 
mentioned in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
3. Chandernagore to form part of West Bengal .—(1) As from the appointed day 
Chandernagore sh all form part of the state of West Bengal and the boundaries of that State shall be so 
altered as to comprise within them the territory of Chandernagore.  
(2) Without prejudice to the power of the State Government to alert hereafter the extent, limits 
and names of districts and sub -divisions, Chandernagore shall form part of the district of Hooghly in 
the state of West Bengal and the State Government shall be order in the Offic ial Gazette, provide for 
the administration of Chandernagore by constituting it into a new sub -division of the said district 
whether with the addition of such areas of that district as may be specified in the order or without such 
addition.  
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—In the First Schedule to the 
Constitution, Part A, in the description of the territories of States, in the last paragraph, after the 
words, “as if they formed part of that Province ”, the following shall  be inserted, namely: — 
“and in the case of the state of West Bengal shall also comprise the territory of 
Chandernagore as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, ” 
5. Representation of Chandernagore in the House of the Pe ople.—(1) Until otherwise 
provided by law, as from the appointed day — 
(a) Chandernagore  shall be included in, and become part of, the Hooghly Parliamentary 
constituency formed by the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies (West 
Bengal) Order, 1951 and that order shall have effect subject to the following modifications, 
namely:— 3 
 In Table A — 
(i) for the entry in column 2 relating to Serampore constituency, the following 
entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Bhadreswar, Singur, Serampore, Uttarpara, Chanditala and Jangipara police 
stations of  Hooghly District and Domjur and Ba lly pol ice stations of Howrah 
District;.  
(ii) for the entry in column 2 relating to Hooghly constituency, the following 
entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Pandu a, Dhaniakhali, Chinsura (excluding Ward No.  1 of Bansbaria 
Municipality), Polba, Haripal, Ta rakeswar, Arambagh, Khanakul and Pursura 
police stations of Hooghly District and Chandernagore ”; 
(b) the sitting member of he House of the People representing the Hooghly Parliamentary 
constituency shall be deemed to have been elected by that constituency as modified by this Act.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the electoral roll of the Hooghly Parliamentary 
constituency   shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 ( 43 of 1950), and the rules made thereunder and the roll so prepared shall come into force 
immediately upon its final publication.  
6. Representation of Chandernagore in the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal .—Until 
otherwise provided by law, — 
(a) There shall  be an additional constituency of the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal (to 
be known as the Chandernagore Assembly   constituency) comprising the entire area of 
Chandernagore, whether with the addition of such areas of other constituencies as may be 
deter mined by the President or without such addition   and the said constituency shall be 
represented in that Assembly by one member to be chosen by direct election;  
(b) the President shall, as soon as may be after the appointed day and after consulting the 
Election Commission, amend by order the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951 so as to include therein the Chandernagore assembly 
constituency and the particulars relating thereto as required by section 9 of the Re presentation of 
the People Act, 1950 ( 43 of 1950);  
(c) the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of 
West Bengal shall be increased from 238 to 239;  
(d) in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the people A ct, 1950 ( 43 of 1950), in the 
part relating to Part A, States, for the entry in column 2 against „West Bengal ‟, the entry „239‟ 
shall be substituted.  
7. Electoral roll of the Chandernagore assembly constituency .—The electoral roll of the 
Chandernagore  Assembly constituency shall be prepared and published in accordance with the 
provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, ( 43 of 1950), and the rules made thereunder 
and come into force immediately upon its final publication.  
8. Election to f ill the seat allotted to the Chandernagore Assembly constituency .—As soon as 
may be after the delimitation of the Chandernagore Assembly constituency under the provisions of           
clause ( b) of section 6, there shall be held an el ection to fill the sea t allotted to the Chandernagore 
assembly constituency in the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal;   and for that purpose the election 
Commission shall , by notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the Chandernagore Assembly 
constituency to elect a per son for the purpose of filling that seat before such date as may be specified 
in the notification and the provisions of the Representation of the people Act, ( 43 of 1951), and the 
rules and orders made there under shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to such election.  
9. Consequence s of alteration in the extent of certain Assembly constituencies .—If in 
consequence of the addition of areas to Chandernagore for the purpose of constituting the 4 
 Chandernagore  Assembly constituency, the extent of any existing Assembly constituency is altered, 
then— 
(a) the electoral roll of the existing Assembly constituency as so altered shall, until it is 
prepared   afresh in accordance with the provisions of the Representatio n of the People Act, 1950 
(43 of 1950), and the rules made thereunder, be deemed to consist of so much of the electoral roll 
as relates to the areas comprised within that constituency as so altered;  
(b) every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of W est Bengal representing the 
existing Assembly constituency shall be deemed to have been elected to that Assembly by that 
constituency as so altered.  
10. Representation of Chandernagore in the Legislative Council of West Bengal .—(1) Until 
otherwise provided  by law , as from the appointed day — 
(a) Chandernagore shall be included, in and become part of, the following Council 
constituencies formed by the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951, 
namely:— 
(i) The West Bengal South (Graduat es) constituency;  
(ii) the Burdwan Division (Teachers) constituency;  
(iii) the Hooghly -Howrah (Local Authorities) Constituency;  
(b) any reference in the said order to West Bengal, Burdwan Division or Hooghly District 
shall be   construed as including therei n Chandernagore;  
(c) every sitting member of the West Bengal South (Graduates constituency, the Burdwan 
Division (Teachers) constituency or the Hooghly -Howrah (Local Authorities) constituency, the 
extent of which is by virtue of the provisions of clause ( a) altered, shall be deemed to have been 
elected to the said Council by that constituency as so altered.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day the electoral rolls of the West Bengal South 
(Graduates) constituency, the Burdwan Division (Teachers) con stituency and the Hooghly -Howrah 
(Local Authorities) constituency shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 ( 43 of 1950 and the rules made there under and the rolls so 
prepared shall come into the for ce immediately upon their final publication.  
11. Amendment of section 9, Act 81 of 1952 .—In sect ion 9 of the Delimitation Commission 
Act, 1952, in sub -section ( 3), for the words “and the orders made under any of the said Act ”„ the 
words , brackets and figures “the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and the orders made under any of 
the said acts ” shall be substituted.  
12. Conferment of Indian citizenship on French citizens domiciled in Chandernagore .—
Subject to the provisions of article III o f the Treaty of Cession of the Territory of the free Town of 
Chandernagore all French subjects and citizens of the French Union domiciled in the said Territory on 
the 9 th day of June, 1952, shall be deemed to have become citizens of India on that day.  
13. Property and assets .—(1) All property and assets within Chandernagore which, immediately 
before the appointed day, are vested in the Central Government for the purposes of the 
administration  of Chandernagore shall, as from that day, vest in the State Gove rnment unless the 
purposes,  for which such property or assets are held immediately before that day, are Union purposes.  
(2) A certificate of the Central Government signed by a Secretary to that Government shall be 
conclusive as to whether the purposes for which any property or assets are held immediately before 
the appointed day are Union purposes.  
14. Rights, liabilities and obligations .—(1) All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central 
Government arising out of, or in relation to , the administrat ion of Chandernagore shall, as from the 5 
 appointed day be rights, liabilities and obligations of the State Government unless such rights, 
liabilities and obligations are relatable to Union purposes.  
(2) A certificate of the Central Government signed by a Secretary to that Government shall be 
conclusive as to whether any rights, liabilities or obligations arising out of, or in relation to, the 
administration of Chandernagore are relatable to Union purposes.  
15. Subordinate Courts .—All Courts  which immediately before the appointed day are exercising 
lawful powers, authority and jurisdiction in Chandernagore under the superintendence and control of 
the High Court at Calcutta shall, until further provision is made by a competent legislature  or 
authority, continue to exercise their respective powers, authority and jurisdiction in Chandernagore 
under the superintendence and control of that High Court.  
16. Existing authorities and officers to continue in Chandernagore .—Without prejudice to the 
powers of the State Government to appoint from time to time such officers as may be necessary for 
the administration of Chandernagore, the Administrator of Chandernagore , all judges, magistrates and 
other officers of Chandernagore who, immediately before t he appointed day, are exercising lawful 
functions in Chandernagore or any part thereof, shall, until other provision is made by the State 
Government, continue to exercise in connection with the administration of Chandernagore their 
respective functions in the same manner and to the same extent as before the appointed day.  
17. Extension of laws to Chandernagore .—All laws which immediately before the appointed 
day extend to, or are in force in the State of West Bengal generally shall, as from that day, extend  to 
or, as the case may be come into force in, Chandernagore.  
18. Repeal of corresponding laws and savings .—(1) Any law in force in Chandernagore 
immediately before the appointed day  (hereafter in this act referred to as the “corresponding law ”) 
which corresponds to any law referred to in section 17, whether such corresponding law in force in 
Chandernagore by virtue of the Chandernagore (Application of Laws) Order, 1950 or by virtue of is 
any notification issued under the Chandernagore (Administ ration) Regulation, 1952 (Reg.  I of 1952) 
or otherwise, shall, as from that day, stand repealed in Chandernagore.  
(2) The repeal by sub -section ( 1) of any corresponding law shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any such law; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation, or liability acquired accrued or incurred under any such 
law; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any such law; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remed y in respect of such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, 
legal proceeding or remad y may be instituted, continued, or enforce, and any such penalty, 
forfeiture, or punishment m ay be imposed as if this Act had not been passed.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), anything done or any action taken (including any 
appointment or delegation made, notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, form, by law 
or scheme framed, certificate, patent, permit, or licence granted, or registration effect), under s uch 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of 
the law as extended to , or inverse, in Chandernagore on and from the appointed day and shall contrive 
in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under such law.  
19. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition from 
any corresponding law to any law which by virtue of section 17 shall, as from the appointed day, 
extend to o r come into force in, Chandernagore, the Central Government may , by order in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.  
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision s of this act (otherwise than in relation 
to the transition from any corresponding law) or in connection with the administration of 
Chandernagore as a part of West Bengal, the State Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, 6 
 make such provisions not  inconsistent with the purposes of this act, as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty.  
(3) No power under sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be exercised by the Central 
Government, or, as the case may be, the State Gov ernment after the expiry of three years from the 
appointed day.  
(4) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be made so as to be 
retrospective to any date not earlier than the appointed day.  
--------------------------The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954--------------------------
1 THE DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS  (PUBLIC LIBRARIES) ACT, 1954  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Delivery of books of public libraries . 
3A. Delivery of newspapers to public libraries . 
4. Receipt for books delivered.  
5. Penalty . 
6. Cognizance of offences . 
7. Application of Act to books and newspapers published by Government . 
8. Power to make rules.  
  2 THE DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND NEWSPAPERS  (PUBLIC LIBRARIES) ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1954  
[20th May , 1954 .] 
An Act to provide for delivery of books to the National Library and other public libraries.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Delivery of Books  1[and Newspapers]  
(Public Libraries) Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: — 
(a) “book”  includes every volume , part or division of a volume a nd pamphlet, in any language, 
and every sheet of music , map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed, but does not include a 
newspaper published in conformity with the provisions of section 5 of the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867(XXV of  1867):  
2[(aa) „newspaper ‟ means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on 
public news published in conformity with the provisions of section 5 of the Press and Registration of 
Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867) .] 
(b) “public libraries ” means the National Library at Calcutta and any three other libraries which 
may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.  
3. Delivery of books of public libraries .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be ma de under this Act, 
but without prejudice to the provisions contained in Section 9 of the Press and Registration o f Books Act, 
1867 (XXV of 1867) , the publisher of every book published is the territories to which this Act extends 
after the commencement of this act, shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, deliver at his 
own expense a copy of the book to the National Library at Calcutta and one such copy to each of the other 
three public libraries within thirty days from the date of its publicat ion. 
(2) The copy delivered to the National Library shall be a copy of the whole book with all maps and 
illustrations belonging thereto , finished and colo ured in the same manner as t he best copies of the same, 
and shall be bound, sewed or stitched  together  and on the best paper on which any copy of the book is 
printed.  
(3) The copy delivered to any other public library shall be on the paper on which the largest number 
of copies of the books is printed for sale, and shall be in the like condition as the book  prepared for sale.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any second or subsequent edition of a book in 
which edition no additions or alterations either  in the letter -press or in the maps, book prints or other 
engravings belongings to the  book have been made, and a copy of the first or some preceding edition of 
which book has been delivered under this Act.  
3[3A. Delivery of n ewspapers to public libraries.  —Subject to any rules that may be made under 
this Act, but without prejudice to the p rovisions contained in the Press and Registration of Books Act, 
1867 (25 of 1867.), the publisher of every newspaper, published in the territories to which this Act 
extends, shall deliver at his own expense one copy of each issue of such newspaper as soon as it is 
published to each such public library as may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette.]  
4. Receipt for books delivered .—The person in charge of a public library (whether called a librarian 
or by any other name) or any other person authorised by him in this behalf to whom a copy of a book is 
delivered under Section 3 shall give to the publisher a receipt in writing therefor.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1956).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -12-1956).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 29-12-1956).  3 5. Penalty .—Any publisher who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees1[and, if the contravention is in 
respect of a book, shall also be punishable with fine which shall be equivalent to the value of the book], 
and the court trying the offence may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall 
be paid, by way of compensation, to the public library  to which the book 2[or newspaper, as the case m ay 
be] ought to have been delivered.  
6. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act save on complaint made by an officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government by a 
General or special orde r. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
3[7. Application of Act to books and newspapers published by Government .—This Act shall also 
apply to books and newspapers published by or under the authority of the Government but shall not apply 
to books meant for official use only.]  
8. Power to make rules .—4[(1)] The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, makes rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
5[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one  session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule sho uld not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that  rule.]  
___________  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1956, s. 6, for “and the value of the book” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1956).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -12-1956).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 7 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1956).  
4. Section 8 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
5. Added by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
--------------------------The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS)                 
ACT , 1954  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment  of certain diseases and disorders . 
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs . 
5. Prohibition of advertisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and disorders . 
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from, India of certain ad vertisements.  
7. Penalty . 
8. Powers of entry, search, etc . 
9. Offences by companies . 
9A. Offences to be cognizable.  
10.  Jurisdiction to try offences.  
 10A. Forfeiture.  
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants . 
12. Indemnity . 
13. Other laws not affected . 
14. Savings.  
15. Power to exempt from application of Act . 
16. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE DRUGS AND MAGIC REMEDIES (OBJECTIONABLE ADVERTISEMENTS)                 
ACT , 1954  
ACT NO. 21 OF 19541 
An Act to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases, to prohibit the advertisement for 
certain purposes of remedies alleged to possess magic qualities and to provide for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to 
persons domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by Notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) „advertisement ‟ includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document, and any 
announcement made orally or by any means of producing or transmitting light, sound or smoke;  
(b) „drug‟ includes — 
(i) a medicine for the internal or external use of human beings or animals;  
(ii) any  substance intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or 
prevention of disease in human beings or animals;  
(iii) any article, other than food, intended to affect or influence in any way the structure or 
any organic function of  the body of human beings or animals;  
(iv) any article intended for use as a component of any medicine , substance or article, referred 
to in sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii); 
(c) „magic remedy ‟ includes a talisman, mantra, kavacha , and any other charm of any kind which 
is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or 
prevention of any disease in human beings or animals or for affecting or influencing in any way the 
structure or any organic function of the body  of human beings or animals;  
3[(cc) „registered medical practitioner ‟ means any person, — 
(i) who holds a qualification granted by an authority specified in, or notified under        
section  3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 1916) specified in  the Schedules to the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956); or  
(ii) who is entitled to be registered as a medical practitioner under any law for the time being 
in force in any State to which this Act extends relating to the registration of medica l practitioner;]  
(d) „taking any part in the publication of any advertisement ‟ includes— 
(i) the printing of the advertisement,  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, sec. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963), and extended to the State of 
Sikkim, vide S.O. 949 (E), dated 20th October, 1988.  
2. 1st April, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 511, dated 26th February, 1995, see Gazette of India, 1955, P art II,                       
s. 3. 
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f.  7-12-1963) . 
 3 
 (ii) the publication of any advertisement outside the territories to which this Act extends by or 
at the instance of a person re siding within the said territories;  
1*                           *                          *                           *                            *                                 *  
3. Prohibition of advertisement of certain drugs for treatment of certain diseases and 
disorders. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any 
advertisement referring to any drug in terms which suggest or are calculated to lead to the use of that drug 
for— 
(a) the procure ment of miscarriage in women or prevention of conception in women; or  
(b) the maintenance or improvement of the capacity of human beings for sexual pleasure; or  
(c) the correction of menstrual disorder in women; or  
2[(d) the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, tr eatment or prevention of any disease, disorder or condition 
specified in the Schedule, or any other disease, disorder or condition (by whatsoever name called) 
which may be specified i n the rules made under this Act : 
Provided that no such rule shall be made  except— 
(i) in respect of any disease, disorder or condition which requires timely treatment in 
consultation with a registered medical practitioner or for which there are normally no accepted 
remedies; and  
(ii) after consultation with the Drugs Technical Advisory Board constituted under the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), and if the Central Government considers necessary, with 
such other persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Ayurvedic or 
Unani systems of medicin es as that Government deems fit.]  
4. Prohibition of misleading advertisements relating to drugs. —Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, no person shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement relating to a drug if the 
advertisement contains a ny matters which — 
(a) directly or indirectly gives a false impression regarding the true character of the drug; or  
(b) makes a false claim for the drug; or  
(c) is otherwise false or misleading in any material particular.  
5. Prohibition of advertisement of magic remedies for treatment of certain diseases and 
disorders. —No person carrying on or purporting to carry on the profession of administering magic 
remedies shall take any part in the publication of any advertisement referring to any magic remedy which 
directly or indirectly claims to be efficacious for any of the purposes specified in section 3.  
6. Prohibition of import into, and export from, India of certain advertisements. —No person 
shall import into, or export from, the territories to which this Act extends any document s containing an 
advertisement of the nature referred to in section  3 or in section  4 or section  5, and any document 
containing any such advertisements shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been 
prohibited under section  19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 ( 8 of 1878), and all the provisions of that Act 
shall have effect accordingly, except that section  183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word „shall ‟ 
therein the word „may‟ were substituted.  
7. Penalty. —Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act  3[or the rules made thereunder ] 
shall, on conviction, be punishable — 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( e) omitted by Act 42 of  1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 17 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -12-1963).  4 
 (b) in the case of a s ubsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both.  
1[8. Powers of entry, search, etc. —(1) Subject to the provisions of any rules made in this behalf, any 
Gazetted Officer authorised by the State Government may , within the local limits of the area for which he 
is so authorised, — 
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistants, if any, as he considers necessary, 
any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been  or is being 
committed;  
(b) seize any advertisement which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Act:  
Provided that the power of seizure under this clause may be exercised in respect of any document, 
article or thing which conta ins any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such 
document, article or thing, if the advertisement cannot be separated by reason of its being embossed 
or otherwise , from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, uti lity or saleable 
value thereof;  
(c) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause (a) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to search or seizure made under the authority of a 
warrant issued under section  98 or the said Code.  
(3) Where an y person seizes anything under c lause (b) or clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as 
soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]  
9. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person contravening any of the provisions of this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against, a nd punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this act if he proves th at the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company a nd it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer of th e company, shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) „company ‟ means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) „director ‟ in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
2[9A. Offences to be cognizable. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ), an offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 5, for s. 8 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  5 
 10. Jurisdiction to try offences. —No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
1[10A. Forfeiture. —Wher e a person has been convicted by any Court for contravening any provision 
of this Act or any rule made thereunder, the Court may direct that any document  (including all copies 
thereof), article or thing, in respect of which the contravention is made, inclu ding the contents thereof 
where such contents are seized under clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8, shall be forfeited to the 
Government.]  
11. Officers to be deemed to be public servants. —Every person authorized under section  8 shall be 
deemed to be  a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
12. Indemnity. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
13. Other laws not affected. —The provisions of this Act are in addition to, and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
2[14. Savings. —Nothing in this Act shall apply to — 
(a) any signboard or notice displayed by a registered medical practitioner on his premises 
indicating that treatment for any disease, disorder or condition specified in section  3, the Schedule or 
the rules made under this Act is undertaken in those premises; or  
(b) any treatise or book dealing  with any of the matters specified in section  3 from a bonafide 
scientific or social standpoint; or  
(c) any advertisement relating to any drug sent confidentially in the manner prescribed under 
section 16 only to a registered medical practitioner; or  
(d) any advertisement relating to a drug printed or published by the Government; or  
(e) any advertisement relating to a drug printed or published by any person with the previous 
sanction of the Government granted prior to the commencement of the Drugs and Magic  Remedies 
(Objectionable Advertisements) Amendment Act, 1963 (42 of 1963):  
Provided that the Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw the sanction 
after giving the person an opportunity of showing cause against such withdrawal.]  
15. Power to exempt from application of Act. —If, in the opinion of the Central Government, public 
interest requires that the advertisement of any specified drug or class of drugs 3[or any specified class of 
advertisement s relating to drugs] should be permitted, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
direct that the provisions of sections  3,4,5 and 6 or any one of such provisions shall not apply‟  or shall 
apply subject to such conditions as may be specified in the  notification to or in relation to the 
advertisement of any such drugs or class of drugs 3[or any such class of advertisement s relating to drugs].  
16. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power; such rules may — 
(a) specify any 4[disease, disorder or condition] to which the provisions of section 3 shall apply;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1963, s. 7 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for s ection  14 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -12-1963).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “disease or condition ” (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  6 
 (b) prescribe the manner in which advertisements of articles or things referred to in clause  (c) of 
1* * * section 14 may be sent confidentially.  
2[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before t he expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modifie d 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
 
3[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section s 3(d) and 14]  
 
S. No. Name of the disease, disorder or condition  
 1. Appendicitis.  
 2. Arteriosclerosis.  
 3. Blindness  
 4. Blood poisoning.  
 5. Bright ‟s disease.  
 6. Cancer  
 7. Cataract.  
 8. Deafness.  
 9. Diabetes.  
10. Diseases and disorders of the brain.  
11. Diseases and disorders of the optical system  
12. Diseases  and disorders of the uterus  
13. Disorders of menstrual flow.  
14. Disorders of the nervous system.  
15. Disorders of the prostatic gland.  
16. Dropsy.  
                                                           
1. The words, brackets and figure “sub-section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 42 of 1963, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963) . 
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -12-1963).  
3. Added by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f . 7-12-1963).  7 
 S. No.  Name of the disease, disorder or condition  
17. Epilepsy.  
18. Female diseases (in general)  
19. Fevers (in general).  
 20. Fits. 
21. Forms and structure of the female bust.  
22. Gall stones, kidney stones and bladder stones.  
23. Gangrene  
24. Glaucoma.  
25. Goitre.  
26. Heart diseases.  
27. High or low blood pressure.  
28. Hydrocele.  
29. Hysteria.  
30. Infantile paralysis.  
31. Insanity.  
32. Leprosy.  
33. Leucoderma.  
34. Lockjaw.  
35. Locomotor ataxia.  
36. Lupus.  
37. Nervous debility.  
38. Obsesity.  
39. Paralysis.  
40. Plague.  
41. Pleurisy.  
42. Pneumonia.  8 
 S. No.  Name of the disease, disorder or condition  
43. Rheumatism.  
44. Ruptures.  
45. Sexual impotence.  
46. Smallpox.  
47. Stature of persons.  
48. Sterility in women.  
49. Trachoma.  
50. Tuberculosis.  
51. Tumours.  
52. Typhoid fever.  
53. Ulcers of gastrointestinal tracts.  
                 
54.     
 Venereal diseases, including syphilis, gonorrhea, soft chancre, venereal granuloma and 
lympho granuloma.]  
 
________  
--------------------------The High Court Judges Salaries and Conditions of Service Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (SALARIES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1954  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
LEAVE  
3. Kinds of leave admissible to a judge . 
4. Leave account showing the amount of leave due . 
4A. Leave encashment . 
5. Aggregate amount of leave which may be granted . 
5A. Commutation of leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances . 
6. Grant of leave not due . 
7. Special disability leave . 
8. Extraordinary leave . 
9. Leave allowances . 
10. [Omitted. ] 
11. Combining leave with vacation . 
12. Consequences of overstaying leave or vacation . 
13. Authority competent to grant leave, etc . 
CHAPTER III  
SALARIES AND PENSIONS  
13A. Salaries of the Judges . 
14. Pension payable to Judges . 
14A. Benefit of added years of service.  
15. Special provision of pension in respect of Judges who are members of service . 
16. Power of President to add to the service for pension . 
17. Extraordinary pensions . 
17A. Family pensions and gratuities . 
17B.  Additional quantum of pension  or family pension . 
18. [Omitted. ] 
19. Commutation of Pensions . 
20. Provide nt Fund . 
20A.Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme . 
21. Authority competent to grant pension . 
 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
22. Travelling allowances to a Judge . 
22A. Facility of rent -free houses . 
22B.Conveyance facilities . 
22C. Sumptuary allowance . 
22D.Exemption from liability to pay income -tax on certain perquisites received by a Judge . 
23. Facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of service . 
23A. Vacation of  High Courts . 
23B.  [Omitted .] 
23C. Special provisions in respect of Judges transferred from the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir . 
23D. Medical facilities for retired Judges . 
24. Power to make rules . 
25. [Omitted. ] 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE .—PENSIONS OF JUDGES . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .—INJURY  GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS . 
  3 
 THE HIGH COURT JUDGES ( SALARIES AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1954  
[20th May , 1954.]  
An Act to regulate 1[salaries and certain conditions of service] of the Judges of High Courts  2*** 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follo ws:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the High Court Judges 3[(Salaries and Conditions of Service )] 
Act, 1954.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “acting Chief Justice ” means a Judge appointed under article 223 of the Constitution to 
perform t he duties of the Chief Justice;  
(b) “acting Judge “ means a person 4*** appointed to act as a Judge 5*** 6[under clause ( 2) of 
article 224 of the Constitution];  
(c) “actual service ” includes — 
(i) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge or in the performance of such other functions as 
he may, at the request of the President of India, undertake to discharge;  
(ii) vacations, excluding any time during whi ch the Judge is absent on leave;  
(iii) Joining time on transfer from a High Court to the Supreme Court or from one High Court 
to another or from th e Supreme Court to a High Court;  
(iv) time spent by a Jud ge on d uty as a Judge of a former Indian High Court;  
(v) time spent by a Judge to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court as an ad hoc  Judge under 
article 127 of the Constitution; and  
(vi) vacation  (excluding any time during which the Judge was absent on leave) taken by a 
Judge as a Judg e of a former Indian High Court;  
(d) “additional Judge ” means a person 4*** appointed as an additional Judge 7*** 6[under clause 
(1) of a rticle 224 of the Constitution];  
8*** 
(f) “High Court ” means a High Court 9[for a State] and includes a High Court which was 
exercising Juri sdiction 6[in a Part A State or] in the corresponding Province before the 
commencement of the Constitution;  
(g) “Judge ” means a Judge of a High Court a nd includes the Chief Justice 10[an acting Chief 
Justice, an additional Judge and an acting Judge of the High Court];  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1998, s. 2, for “certain conditions of service” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
2. The words and letter “in Part A States” omitted by the Adap tation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1998, s. 3, for “( conditions of service)” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
4. The words “who was” omitted by the Adap tation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  
5. The words, brackets and figures “under sub -section ( 2) of section 222 of the Government of India Act , 1935 or” omitted by 
Act 13 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
6. The words, brackets and figures “or under clause ( 2) of article 224 of the Constitution” were added by the Adaptation of Laws 
(No.3) Order, 1956.  
7. The words, brackets and figures “ under sub -section ( 3) of section 222 of the Government of India Act, 1935 or” omitted by 
Act 13 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
8. Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
9. Subs. ibid., for “in any Part A State”.  
10. Subs. by Act 46 of 1958, s. 2, for “and acting Chief Justice of a High Court” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  4 
 1[(gg) “pension ” means a pension of any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of a Judge, and 
includes a ny gratuity or other sum or sums so payable by way of  death or retirement benefits;]  
(h) “service for pension ” includes — 
(i) actual service;  
2[(ii) the amount, actually taken, of each period of leave on full allowances at a rate equal to 
the monthly rate of the salary;]  
(iii) joining time on return from leave out of India;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
(2) In the calculation of servic e for the purposes of this Act, 3[service for any period or periods as 
acting Judge or additional Judge ] shall be reck oned as service as a Judge but, save as otherwise expressly 
provided, previous service as an acting Chief Justice shall not be reckon ed as service as Chief Justice.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
LEAVE  
3. Kinds of leave admissible to a judge .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted to 
a Jud ge may be at his option either — 
5[(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave on half allowances into leave or full 
allowances on medical certificate); or]  
(b) leave on half allowances ; or 
(c) leave partly on full allowances  and partly on half allowances.  
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave on full allowances shall be reckoned as 
double that peri od of leave on half allowances.  
6[(3) For t he purposes of this Chapter, casual leave may be admissible to a Judge in a calendar year, 
for such number of days and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.]  
4. Leave account showing the amount of leav e due .—(1) A leave account shall be kept for each 
Judge showing therein the amount of leave due to him in ter ms of leave on half allowances.  
(2) In the leave account of a Judge — 
(a) there shall be credited t o him — 
(i) one -fourth of the time  spent by him on actual serv ice; 7*** 
(ii) where the Judge, by reason of his having been detained for the performance of duties not 
connected with the High Court, cannot enjoy any vacation which would otherwise have been 
entitled to enjoy had he not been so detained, as compensation for the vacation not enjoyed, a 
period equal to double the period by which the vacation enjoyed by him in any yea r falls short of 
one month; and  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1961, s. 2 (retrospectively).  
2. Subs. by Act 57 of 1980, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii). 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
4. Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-4-2016).  
5. Subs. by Act 78 of 1971, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1972).  
6. Ins. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
7. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  5 
 1[(iii) where the Judge had, prior to his appointment as such, held any pensionable post under 
the Union or a State, the period of leave earned by him in the said post, and].  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(b) there shall be debited to  him all leave with all by him.  
3[4A. Le ave encashment .—A Judge shall be entitled in his entire service, including the period of 
service rendered in a pensionable post under the Union or State or on re -employment, if any, to claim the 
cash equivalent of leave salary on his retirement 4[in respect of the period of leave at his credit, calculated 
calculated on full allowances basis, ] to the extent of the maximum period prescribed for encashment of 
such leave under the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 1955.]  
5. Aggregate amount  of leave which may be gran ted.—(1) The aggregate amount of leave which 
may be granted to a Judge during the whole period of his service as such shall not exceed in terms of 
leave on half allowances three years together with the aggregate of the periods, if any, credited to his 
leave account under sub -section ( 2) (a) (ii) of section 4 as compens ation for vacation not enjoyed.  
(2) The aggregate amount of leave on full allowances which may be granted to a Judge during the 
whole period of his service as such shall not exceed one-twenty -fourth of the period spent by him on 
actual service together with one -half of the aggregate periods, if any, credited to his leave account under 
sub-section ( 2) (a) (ii) of section 4 as compens ation for vacation not enjoyed.  
(3) 5[Subject to the  provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 5A, the maximum period of leave which 
may be granted] at one time shall be, in the case of leave on full allowances, five months and in the case 
of leave with allowanc es of any kind, sixteen months.  
6[5A. Commutati on of leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, a Judge may be permitted to commute 
leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances on medical certificate up to a maximum of three 
months during the whole period of his service as a Judge.  
(2) In computing the maximum period of leave on full allowances which may be granted at one time 
to Judge under sub -section ( 3) of section 5, the amount of commuted leave permitted to him under this 
section shall not be taken into account.]  
6. Grant of leave not due .—Subject to the maximum limit specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 5, 
leave on half allowances may be granted to a Judge in excess of the amount at his credit — 
(i) on medical certificate; or  
(ii) otherwise than on medical certificate, for no t more than six months 7[or for two or more 
periods, not exceeding in the aggregate, six months] during the whole period of his service as a Judge : 
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if the Judge is not expected to return to duty at the end of 
such leave and earn the leave granted.  
7. Special disability leave .—The rules for the time being in force with respect to the grant of special 
disability leave in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Class I who has entered service on 
or after the 16th July, 1931 and who may be disabled by injury caused in, or in consequence of, the due 
performance of his official duties or in co nsequence of his official position, shal l apply in relation to a 
Judge.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
2. Omitted by Act 7 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -1-1999).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -1-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 4, for “ in respect of the period of earned leave at his credit” (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
5. Subs. by Act 78 of 1971, s. 4, for “the maximum  period of leave which may be granted” (w.e.f. 15 -1-1972).  
6. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -1-1972).  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1958, s. 3, for “and not more than once” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  6 
 8. Extraordinary leave .—1[Extraordinary leave may be granted to a Judge for a period not 
exceeding six months, or for two or more periods, not exceeding in the aggregate, six months]  during the 
whole period of his service as a Judge in excess of any leave permissible under the foregoing provisions 
of this Chapter, but no salary or allowances shall be payable during, or in respect of, such leave.  
2[9. Leave allowances .—The monthly rate of leave salary payable to a Judge shall be in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 3.]  
10. [Allowances for joining time .] Omitted by  the High Court and the Supreme Court Judges 
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Ame ndment Act, 2016  (13 of 2016 ), s. 6 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016 ). 
11. Combining leave with vacation .—A Judge may be permitted to combine vacation on full salary 
with leave, if. — 
(a) where  the vacation consists of one continuous period, the leave is taken either at the 
commencement or at the end  of the vacation but not a both;  
(b) where the vacation is divided into two separate periods, the leave is taken for the interval, or 
part of the in terval, between the two periods of that vacation, or for the interval, or part of the interval, 
between the second period of that vacation and the commenceme nt of the next ensuing vacation : 
Provided that no such permission to combine vacation with leave sh all be granted if it becomes 
necessary to appoint an acting Chief Justice during the period of vacation or if the Judge is not expected 
to return to  duty at the end of such leave.  
12. Consequences of  overstaying leave or vacation .—If a Judge overstays his leave or any vacation, 
whether combined with leave or not, he shall receive no salary for the period of his absence in excess of 
leave granted to him or beyond the end of t he vacation, as the case may be:  
Provided that if such absenc e is due to circumstances beyond his control, the period thereof may be 
treated as leave and may b e debited to his leave account.  
13. Authority  competent to grant leave, etc .—The authority competent to grant or refuse leave to a 
Judge or revoke or curtail leave granted to a Judge shall be the Governor of the State in which the 
principal seat of the High Court is situate, after consultation with the Chief Justice of that High Court.  
CHAPTER III  
3[SALARIES AND PENSIONS ] 
4[13A. Salaries of the Judges. —(1) There shall be paid to the Chief Justice of a High Court, by way 
of salary, 5[ninety thousand rupees per mensem ]. 
(2) There shall be paid to a Judge of a High Court, by way of salary, 6[eight y thousand rupees per 
mensem ].] 
14. Pension payable to Judges .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Judge shall, on his 
retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the scale and provisions in Part I of the First Schedule : 
Provided that no such pension shal l be payable to a Judge unless — 
(a) he has completed not less than twelve y ears of service for pension; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1958, s. 4, for “Extraordinary leave not exceedin g six months in duration may be granted to a Judge not 
more than once” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 5, for section 9 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1998, s. 4, for “pension” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1996).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 2, for “thirty thousand rupees per mensem” (1 -1-2006).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “twenty -six thousand rupees per mensem” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  7 
 1[(b) he has attained the age of sixty -two years; or;]  
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated by ill -health:  
2[Provided further that if a Judge at the time of his ap pointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a 
disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service in the Union or a State, the pension 
payable under this Act shall be in lieu of, and not  in addition to, that pension.]  
3[Explanation .—In this section “Judge” means a Judge who has not held any other pensionable post 
under the Union or a State and includes a Judge who having held any other pensionable post under the 
Union or a State has  elected to receive the pension payable under Part I of the First Schedule .] 
4[14A. Benefit of added years of service .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a period of ten 
years shall be added and shall be deemed to have been added from the 1st day of April, 2004 for the 
purposes of pension, to the service of  a Judge who is appointed as such Judge under sub -clause ( b) of 
clause ( 2) of article 217 of the Constitution. ] 
15. Special provision of pension in respect of Jud ges who are members of service .—5[(1)] Every 
Judge — 
6*   *   *   *  * 
(b) who 7*** has held any other 8[pensionable post] under the Union or a State, shall on his 
retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the scale and provisions in Part III of the First 
Schedule : 
Provided that every such Judge shall elect to receive the pension p ayable to him either under P art I of 
the First Schedule or, 9*** Part III of the First Schedule, and the pension payable to him s hall be 
calculated accordingly.  
10[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), any Judge to whom that sub -section  
applies and who is in service on or after the 1st day of October, 1974, may, if he has elected under the 
proviso to that sub -section to receive t he pension payable to him under 11*** Part III of the First Schedule 
before the date on which the High Court Ju dges (Conditions of Service) A mendment Act, 1976 (35 of 
1976 ) receives the assent of the President, cancel such election and elect afresh to receive the pension 
payable to him under Part I of the First Schedule and any such Judge who dies before the date o f such 
assent shall be deemed to have elected afresh to be governed by the provisions of the said Part I if the 
provisions of that Part ar e more favourable in his case.]  
16. Power of President to add to the service for pension .—The President of India may f or special 
reasons direct that any period not exceeding three months shall be added to the  service for pension of a 
Judge:  
Provided that the period so added shall be disregarded in calculating any add itional pension under 
Part I or 12*** Part III of the First Schedule.  
17. Extraordinary pensions .—The rules for the time being in force with respect to the grant of 
extraordinary pensions and gratuities in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services, Class I who 
has entered service on or after the 1s t April, 1937 and who may suffer injury or die as a result of violence,   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 7  (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1958, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 7, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
5. Section 15 renumbered as sub -section ( 1), thereof by Act 35 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  
6. Omitted  by Act 13 of 2016, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
7. The words “ is not a member of the Indian Civil Service but” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
8. Subs. by Act 57 of 1980, s. 4, for “pensionable civil post”.  
9. The words and figures “as the case may be, Part II or ” omitted by  Act 13 of 2016, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
10. Ins. by  Act 35 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  
11. The words and figures “ Part II or, as the case may be,” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
12. The words and figures  “Part II or” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  8 
 shall apply in relation to a Judge, subject, however, to the modification that references in those rules to 
tables of injury, gratuities and pensions and of family gratuities and pen sions, shall be construed as 
references to the  tables in the Second Schedule.  
1[17A. Family pensions and gratuities .—2[3[(1)] Where a Judge who, being in service on or after the 
the commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment 
Act, 1986  (38 of 1986) , dies, whether before or after retirement in circumst ances to which section 17 does 
not ap ply, family pension calculated at the rate of 4[fifty per cent . of his salary]  5*** on the date of his 
death shall be payable to the person or persons entitled thereto and the amount so payable shall be paid 
from the day following the date of death of the Judge for a period of seven years or for a period up to the 
date on which the Judge would have attained the age of sixty -five years, had he survived, whichever is 
earlier, 6[and thereafter at the rate of thirty per cent of his salary 7***. 
8[Provided that in no case the amount of family pension calculate d under this sub -section shall exceed 
exceed the pension payable to the Judge under this Act.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of determining the person or persons entitled to family pe nsion under 
this sub -section, — 
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects or is eligible to receive pension under Part I of the First 
Schedule, the rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force with regard to the person or 
persons entitled to family pension in relation to an of ficer of the Central Civil Se rvices, Group „A‟, 
shall apply;  
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension under 9*** Part III of the First Schedule, 
the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge with respect to the per son or 
persons entitled to family pension shall apply and his service as a Judge be ing treated as service 
therein.  
(2) Where any Judge, who has elected to receive the pension payable to him under 9*** Part III of the 
First Schedule, retires,  or dies in circumstances to which section 17 does not apply, gratuity, if any, shall 
be payable to the person or persons entitled thereto under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not 
been appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge being treated as service therein for the purpos e of 
calculating that gratuity. ] 
(3) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force with respect to the grant of deat h-
cum-retirement gratuity bene fit to or in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Servi ces, Cl ass I 
(including the provisions relating to deductions from pension for the purpose) shall apply to or in relation 
to the grant of death -cum-retirement gratuity benefit to or in relation to a Judge who, being in service on 
or after the 1st day of Oc tober, 1974, retires, or dies in circumstances to which section 17 does not apply, 
subject to the modifications that — 
(i) the minimum qualifying service for the purpose of entitlement to the gratuity sha ll be two 
years and six months;  
(ii) the amount of gr atuity shall be calculated on the basis of 10[ten days‟] salary for 11[each 
comple ted six months period]  of service as a Judge;  12*** 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1961, s. 3 (retrospectively).  
2. Section 17A renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 35 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 3, for sub -sections (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2003, s. 2, for “sixty per cent. of the pension admissible to him” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
5. The words “plus fifty per cent. of his dearness pay” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
6. Subs. b y Act 46 of 2005, s. 2, for “and thereafter at the rate of thirty per cent. of his salary subject to a minimum of three 
hundred and seventy -five rupees per months” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
7. The words “plus thirty per cent. of his dearness pay subject to a mini mum of one thousand nine hundred and thirteen rupees 
per month” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
8. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
9.  The words and figures “ Part II or” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
10. Subs. by Act 7 of 1999, s. 4, for “twenty days‟” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
11. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “each completed year” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
12. The word “and” omitted by 20 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1986).  9 
 1*   *   *   *  * 
Explanation .—In 2[sub-section ( 3)], the expression “Judge ” has the same meaning as in section 14.]  
3[17B.  Additional quantum of pension  or family pension .— Every retired Judge or after his death, 
the family, as the case may be, shall be entitled to an additional quantum of pension or family pension in 
accordance with the following scale: — 
Age of Pensioner or family Pensioner  Additional quantum of pension or family pension.  
From eighty years to less than eighty -
five years  Twenty per cent . of basic pension or family 
pension  
From eighty -five years to less than 
ninety years  Thirty per cent . of basic pension or family pension  
From ninety years to less than ninety -
five years  Forty per cent . of basic pension or family pension  
From ninety -five years to less than 
hundred years  Fifty per cent . of basic pension or family pension  
From hundred years or more  Hundred per cent . of basic pension or family 
pension.]  
18. [Conversion o f sterling pension into rupees .] Omitted by the High Court and the Supreme Court 
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2016  (13 of 2016 ), s. 12 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016 ). 
19. Commutation of Pensions .—The Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules for the time being in 
force shall, with necessary modifications, apply to Judges.  
20. Provided Fund. —Every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident F und 
(Central Services):  
Provided that a Judge who 4*** has held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a State 
shall continue  to subscribe to the Provident Fund to which he was subscribing before his appointment as a 
Judge:  
5*    *   *  *   * 
6[20A.  Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme .—The Deposit Linked  Insurance Scheme for the time 
being in force under the General  Provident Fun d (Central Services) Rules, 1960, shall apply to every 
Judge whether he subscribes to the General Provident Fund (Central  Services) or any other Provident 
Fund referred to in section 20].  
21. Author ity competent to grant pension .—Save as may be otherwise expressly provided in the 
relevant rules relating to the grant of extraordinary pensions and gratuities, the authority com petent to 
grant pension to a Judge under the provisions of this Act s hall be the President of India.  
  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-1-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 3, for “sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3)” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
4. The words “ is a member of the Indian Civil Service or” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 13 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
5. The second proviso omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
6. Ins. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 5 -9-1977).  10 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Travelling allowances to a Judg e.—Every Judge shall receive such reasonable allowances to 
reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory of India and shall be 
afforded such reasonable facilities in connection with travelling as may, from time to time, be prescribed.  
1[22A. Facility of rent -free houses .—(1) Every Judge shall be entitled without payment of rent to the 
use of an official residence in accordance with such rules as may, from time t o time, be made in this 
behalf.  
(2) Where a Judge does not avail himself of the use of an official residence, he may be pai d every 
month an allowan ce 2[equivalent to an amount to thirty per cent . of the salary 3***]. 
4[22B.Conveyance facilities .—Every Judge shall be entitled to a staff car and 5[two hundred litres of 
of fuel every month or the actual consumption of fuel] per month, whichever is less.  
6[22C.  Sumptuary allowa nce.—The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges of every High Court 
shall be entitled  to a sumptuary allowance of fifteen thousand rupees per month and twelve thousand 
rupees per month respectively .]] 
 7[22D.  Exemption from liability to pay income -tax on certain perquisites received by a 
Judge .— Notwithstanding anything containe d in the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), — 
(a) the value of rent -free official residence provided to a Judge under sub -section ( 1) of section 
22A or the allowance paid to him under s ub-section ( 2) of that section;  
(b) the value of the conveyance facilities provide d to a Judge under section 22B;  
(c) the sumptuary allowance provided to a Judge under section 2 2C; 
8[(d) the value of leave t ravel concession provided to a j udge and members of his family,]   
shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head “Salaries ” under section 
15 of the Income - tax Act 1961  (43 of 1961) .] 
23. Facilities for medical treatment a nd other conditions of service .—(1) Every Judge and the 
members of his family shall be entitled to such facilities for medical treatment and for accommodation in 
hospitals as may, fr om time to time, be prescribed.  
(2) The conditions of service of a Judge f or which no express provision has been made in this Act 
shall be such as may be determined by rules m ade under this Act.  
(3) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th January, 1950 and any rule made 
under this section may be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than th e commencement 
of this section.  
9[23A. Vacation of High Courts .—(1) Every High  Court shall have a vacation or vacations for such 
period or periods as may, from time to time, be fixed by the President, by order notified in this behalf in 
the Official Gazette, and every such order shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law, rule or order regulating the vacation of the High Court.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 2005, s. 3, for “of ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2004).  
3. The words “plus thirty per cent. of the dearness pay” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 5, for sub -sections 22B and 22C (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1996, s. 4, for “ one hundred and fifty liter s of petrol every month or the actual consumption of Petrol”   
(w.e.f. 11 -1-1996).  
6. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 6, for section 22C (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
7. Subs. by Act 20 of 1988, s. 3, for section 22D (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
8. Ins. by Act 2 of 1994, s. 2 (w. e.f. 1 -4-1986).  
9. Ins. by Act 4 of 1958, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  11 
 23B.  [Special provisions i n respect of continuing Judges .] Omitted by the High Court and the 
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2016  (13 of 2016 ), s. 14 
(w.e.f. 5-4-2016 ).  
1[23C. Special provisions in respect of Judges transferred from the High Court of Jammu and 
Kashmir .—(1) In the calculation of service for pension of a Judge of the High Court of Jammu and 
Kashmir transferred to any other High Court, his service for pension as a Judge of the High Court of 
Jammu and Kashmir shall also be reckoned as service for pension under this Act.  
(2) In the calculation of the amount of leave at the credit of a Judge of the High Court of Jammu and 
Kashmir transferred to any other high Cour t, the amount of leave due to him as a Judge of the High Court 
of Jammu and Kashmir shall be added to the amount of leave at his credit under this Act.]  
2[23D. Medical facilities for retired Judges .—(1) Every retired Judge shall, with effect from the 
date on which the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1976  (35 of 1976)  
receives the assent of the President, be entitled, for himself and his family, to the same facilities as 
respects medical treatment and on the same conditions as a reti red officer of the Central Civil Services, 
Class I, and his family, are entitled under any rules and orders of the Central Government for the time 
being in force.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) but subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as the Central Government may impose, a retired Judge of the High Court for a State may 
avail, for himself and his family, any facilities for medical treatment which the Government of that State 
may extend to him.]  
24. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the followin g matters, namely :— 
(a) leave of absence of a Judge;  
3[(aa) the number of casual leaves and the conditions subject to which it may be allowed under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;]  
 (b) pension payable to a Judge;  
(c) travelling allowances to a Judge;  
4[(ca) use of official residence by a Judge under sub -section ( 1) of section 22A;]  
(d) facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of service of a Judge;  
(e) any other manner which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 5[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1964, s. 3 (retrospectively).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 15 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-10-1974).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974).  12 
 in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
25. [Savings .]Omitted by the High Court and the Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of 
Service) Amendment Act, 2016  (13 of 2016 ), s. 16 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016 ). 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 14 and 15)  
PENSIONS OF JUDGES  
PART I  
1[1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who  has not held any other pensionable post under 
the Union or a State or a Judge who having held any other pensionable post under the Union or a State 
has elected to receive the pension payable under this Part .] 
2[2. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, the pension payable to a Judge to whom this Part 
applies 3*** for p ension  shall be, — 
(a) for service as Chief Justice in any High Court, 4[Rs.43,890] per annum for each completed 
year of service;  
(b) for service as any other Judge in any High Court, 5[Rs.34,350] per annum for each completed 
year of service:  
Provided that the pension under this paragraph shall in no case exceed 6[Rs.5,40,000] per annum in 
the case of a Chief Justice and 7[Rs.4,80,000] per annum in the case of any other Judge ]. 
8*   *   *  *   * 
9[6. A Judge who has rendered service for pension both as Chief Justice and other Judge in any High 
Court may claim that any period of service of less than a completed year rendered by him as Ch ief 
Justice, or any portion of any such period, shall be treated for the purposes of paragraph 2 as service 
rendered by him as other Judge ]. 
7. For the purposes of this Part, service as an acting Chief Justice of a High Court or as an ad hoc  
Judge of the S upreme Court, shall be treated as though it were service rendered as  Chief Justice of a High 
Court.  
10*****  
11[Provided that nothing  in this paragraph shall apply — 
(a) to an a dditional Judge or acting Judge; or  
(b) to a Judge who at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability 
or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Union or a State.]  
12*    *    *    *   *  
13***  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 17, for paragraph 1 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1988, s. 4, for para 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
3.  The words “ and who has completed not les s than seven years of service” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 17 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
4. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 7, for “Rs. 21,945” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “16,725” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
6. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Rs. 2, 70, 000” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
7. Subs. by s. 7,  ibid., for “Rs. 2, 34, 000” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
8. Omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
9. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for para 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
10. Omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 17 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  
11. Added by Act 46 of 1958, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1996).  
12. Omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
13. Part II omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 17 (w.e.f. 5 -4-2016).  13 
 PART III  
1. The provisions of this Part appl y to a Judge who has held any 1[pensionable post] under the Union 
or a State (but is not a member of the Indian Civil Service) and who has not elected to receive th e pension 
payable under Part I.  
2. The pension pa yable to such a Judge shall be — 
(a) the pen sion to which he is entitled under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been  
appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge being treated as service therein for the purpose of a 
calculating that pension; and  
(b) a spec ial additional pension of 2[Rs. 16,020] per annum in respect of each comple ted year of 
service for pension, 3*** 
4[Provided that the pension under clause ( a) and the additional pension under clause ( b) together shall 
shall in no case exceed 5[Rs. 5 ,40, 000] per annum in the case of a Chief Jus tice and 5[Rs.4,80,000] per 
annum in the case of any other Judge.]   
6*    *    *    *         *   
THE SECOND SCHE DULE  
(See section 17)  
INJURY  GRATUITIES AND PENSIONS  
Officer  Gratuity  Annual Pension  
  Higher Scale       Lower Scale  
     Rs.                              Rs.  
    Rs. 
1. Chief Justice  20,000  5,400                                4,700  
2. Any other Judge  13,500  4,700                                4,000  
FAMILY  GRATUTIES  AND PENSIONS  
A. Widow  
Officer  Gratuity  Annual Pension  
     Rs. Rs. 
1. Chief Justice  15,000 5,000                                
2. Any other Judge  13,500  4,000                                
B. Children  
Officer  Annual Pension  
    If motherless                     if not motherless  
           Rs.                                       Rs.  
1. Chief Justice           550                                       320  
2. Any other Judge           550                                       320  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  57 of 1980, s. 6, for “Civil Pensionable post”.  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 7, for “Rs. 7,800” (w.e.f. 23 of 2009).  
3. Certain words omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1996).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 7, for “Rs. 2, 70,000” and “Rs. 2, 34,000” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006).  
6. Omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1986).  
--------------------------The Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE HIMACHAL PRADESH AND BILASPUR (NEW STATE)  
 ACT, 1954  
________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
FORMATION  OF THE NEW  STATE  OF HIMACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Formation of the new State of Himachal Pradesh.  
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
Council of States  
5. Representation in the Council of States.  
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
7. Amendment of section 27A, Act 43 of 1 950. 
House of the People  
8. Representation in the House of the People.  
9. Amendment of the First Schedule, Act 43 of 1950.  
10. Parliamentary constituencies of the new State and their delimitation.  
11. Sitting members.  
Legislative Assembly of the New State  
12—16.[Repealed .] 
Miscellaneous  
17. Amendment of section 13, Act 43 of 1950.  
18. [Repealed .] 
19. Amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order, 1951.  
20. Amendment of section 9, Act 81 of 1952.  
21. Construction of Act 43 of 1950.  
22. Electoral rolls of constituencies.2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Power of Delimitation Commission to revise its orders.  
24. [Repealed. ] 
PART IV  
COURTS  
25. Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the new State.  
26. Subordinate Courts.  
PART V  
ADMINISTRATIVE  AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
27. Existing authorities and officers to continue to function in the new State.  
28. Existing laws to continue.  
29. Power to co nstrue laws.  
30. Existing taxes to continue.  
31. Saving of the powers of the Central Government in relation to the Bhakra -Nangal Project.  
32. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE — MODIFICATION  IN THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTAY  
CONSTITUENCIES  (PART C STATES ) ORDER , 1951.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE —AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) 
(PART C STATES  ORDER ,1951.  
 
 
  3 
 THE HIMACHAL PRADESH AND BILASPUR (NEW STATE)  ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1954  
[28th May , 1954 .] 
An Act to provide for the formation of the new State of Himachal Pradesh by uniting the 
existing States of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur, and for matters connected therewith . 
 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
2*              *                 *            *              *                   *  
(c) “existing States ” mean the States specified as Bil aspur and Himachal Pradesh in Part C of 
the First Schedule to the Constitution immediately before the commencement of this Act, and 
“existing State ” means either of the existing States;  
(d) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, rule, scheme, notification, 
bye-law or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of either of the 
existing States;  
(e) “Order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “Parliamentary constituency ” has the same meaning as i n the Representation of the 
PeopleAct, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(g) “sitting member ” in relation to either House of Parliament or in relation to the Legislature 
of the existing State of Himachal Pradesh, means a person who immediately before the 
commencement of this Act is a member of that House or that Legislature, as the case may be.  
PART II  
FORMATION  OF THE NEW  STATE  OF HIMACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Formation of the new State of Himachal Pradesh. —As from the commencement of this Act 
there shall be formed by uniting the existing States a new Part C State to be known as the State of 
Himachal Pradesh (hereafter in this Act referred to as the “new State ”).— 
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Con stitution. —In the First Schedule to the 
Constitution, in Part C — 
(a) under the heading “Names of States ”— 
(i) entry “3. Bilaspur ” shall be omitted; and  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1954,  see Gazette of India,1954, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3.  
2. Clause ( b) omitted  by the A .O. (No. 3), 1956.  4 
 (ii) entries 4 to 10 shall be renumbered as entries 3 to 9 respectively;  
(b) under the heading “Territori es of States ”, after the first paragraph the following paragraph 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
“The territory of the State of Himachal Pradesh shall comprise the territories which 
immediately before the commencement of the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) 
Act, 1954 were comprised in the States of Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh. ” 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
Council of States  
5. Representation in the Council of States. —(1) There shall be allotted one seat to the new State 
in the Council of States.  
(2) The sitting member of the Council of States representing the group of States comprising the 
existing States shall on and from the commencement of this Act represent the new State in the 
Council but the term of such sitting member shall remai n unaltered, that is to say, shall expire on the 
2nd of April, 1958.  
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. —In the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, in the Table of Seats relating to the representatives of States specified in Part C of  the 
First Schedule — 
(i) for entries 4 and 5, the entry “4. Himachal Pradesh......I ” shall be substituted; and  
(ii) entries 6 to 10 shall be renumbered as entries 5 to 9 respectively.  
7. Amendment of section 27A, Act 43 of 1950. —In section 27A of the Representation of th e 
People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) — 
(i) in sub -section ( 5), for the word “Delhi ” the words “Delhi, Himachal Pradesh ” shall be 
substituted; and  
(ii) sub -section ( 6) shall be omitted.  
House of the people  
8. Representation in the House of the  People .—Until other provision is made by law, there shall 
be allotted 4 seats to the new State in the House of the People.  
9. Amendment of the First Schedule, Act 43 of 1950. —In the First Schedule to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) , in the part relating to Para C States ,— 
(i) entry 3 shall be omitted;  
(ii) entries 4 to 12 shall be renumbered as entries 3 to 11 respectively; and  
(iii) for the figure “3” in column 2 against Himachal Pradesh the figure “4” shall be 
substituted.  
10. Parliamentary constituencies of the new State and their delimitation .—(1) The new State 
shall, until other provision is made by law, consist of the following three Parliamentary constituencies 
namely: — 
(i) the constituency of Bilaspur comprising the existi ng State of Bilaspur; and  5 
 (ii) the two constituencies into which the existing State of Himachal Pradesh has been 
divided.  
(2) The Delimitation of Parliamentary Constituencies (Part C States) Order, 1951, shall, until 
other provision is made by law, have effect subject to the amendments made in the First Schedule.  
11. Sitting members .—(1) The sitting member of the House of the People representing the 
existing State of Bilaspur shall on and from the commencement of this Act represent the Bilaspur 
constituen cy of the new State and shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by 
that constituency.  
(2) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency of the existing 
State of Himachal Pradesh shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, represent the 
constituency of the same name in the new State and shall be deemed to have been elected to the 
House of the People by that constituency.  
Legislative Assembly of the New State  
12—16. Rep. by the Adaptation of Laws  (No.3) Order , 1956.  
Miscellaneous  
17. Amendment of section 13, Act 43 of 1950. —In section 13 of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the word “Bilaspur ” shall be omitted.  
18. [Amendment of section  2, Act 49 of 1951 .] Rep. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  3) Order, 
1956.  
19. Amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order, 1951 .—The 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order 1951,  shall be amended as shown in the Second 
Sche dule.  
20. Amendment of section 9, Act 81 of 1952 .—In section 9 of the Delimitation Commission 
Act, 1952 (81 of 1952), in sub -section ( 3), for the words “and the orders made under any of the said 
Acts” the words, brackets and figures “the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 and 
the orders made under any of the said Acts ” shall be substituted.  
21. Construction of Act 43 of 1950 .—Any reference to Himachal Pradesh in the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950),   1* * *, as amended b y this Act shall be construed as a reference 
to the new State.  
22. Electoral rolls of constituencies .—(1) The electoral rolls of the constituencies of the existing 
States shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, be deemed to be the electoral rolls of the 
constituencies of the same name in the new State and shall continue in force until such rolls are 
revised, or fresh rolls are prepared, in accordance with law.  
2*                       *                        *                         *                            *                          * 
23. Power of Delimitation Commission to revise its orders .—For the purpose of determination 
of the number of seats to be allotted to the new State in the House of the People in accordance with 
the pr ovisions of sub -section ( 1), and distribution of those seats as well as the seats allotted to the 
Legislative Assembly of the new State to territorial constituencies and delimitation thereof in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of section 8  of the Delimitation Commission Act, 
1952 (81 of 1952), it shall be lawful for the Delimitation Commission, notwithstanding anything 
                                                           
1 . The words, letters and figures “and the Government of Part C States Act, 1951” omitted by the A. O.  (No.3), 1956.  
2 . Omitted by the A. O. (No. 3), 1956.  6 
 contained in that Act, to Amend, vary or rescind any of its final orders published under section 9 of 
that Act in so far as  any such order relates to any or both of the existing States.  
24. [Rules of procedure of the Legislative Assembly of the new State .]Rep. by the Adaptation of 
laws (No . 3) Order , 1956.  
PART IV  
COURTS  
25. Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the new State .—As from the commencement of 
this Act,— 
(a) the Courts of the Judicial Commissioner for the existing States (hereafter in this 
Part referred to as “the existing Courts ”) shall be amalgamated and shall constitute the Court of 
the Judicial Commissioner for the new State (hereafter in this Part referred to as “the new Court ”); 
(b) the Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any, for the 
existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall be respectively the Judicial Commissioner and the 
Additi onal Judicial Commissioner for the new State;  
(c) every person who immediately before the commencement of this Act, is an officer or 
servant of either of the existing Courts shall be an officer or servant, as the case may be, of the 
new Court deemed to hav e been appointed on the same terms and conditions of service (or on 
terms and conditions as similar thereto as the changes effected by this Act permit) as were 
applicable to him immediately before such commencement : 
Provided that nothing in this clause sha ll be deemed to prevent the new Court from 
altering the designation or the duties of any office or post;  
(d) the new Court shall have all such original, appellate and other jurisdiction as under any 
law is exercisable immediately before the commencement of  this Act by either of the existing 
Courts in respect of any area forming par t of the new State;  
(e) the new Court shall have the same powers to admit, suspend and remove advocates, vakils 
and pleaders and to make rules with respect to advocates, vakils an d pleaders in the whole of the 
new State as are immediately before the commencement of this Act, exercisable by either of the 
existing Courts:  
Provided that subject to any rules made by the new Court in exercise of the powers conferred 
by this clause, any person who immediately before the commencement of this Act is an advocate, 
vakil or pleader entitled to practise in either of the existing Courts shall be recognised as an 
advocate, vakil or pleader entitled to practise in the new Court;  
(f) subject to the  provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act with respect to the practice and procedure in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for the existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall, until varied or altered by a 
competent authority, apply in relation to the new Court with such modifications as may be made 
by that Court;  
(g) the Judicial Commissioners ’ Courts (Declaration as High Courts) Act, 1950 (15 of 1950) 
shall apply to the new Court as if the new Court were in existence at the commencement of that 
Act; and any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act relating to 
appeals t o the Supreme Court from the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the existing State 
of Himachal Pradesh shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the new Court;  7 
 (h) all proceedings which immediately before the commencement of this Act ar e pending in 
either of the existing Courts shall by virtue of this Act stand transferred to the new Court and shall 
be continued as if they had been proceedings instituted in that Court;  
(i) any order made by either of the existing Courts in any such proce edings as aforesaid shall 
for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that Court, but also as an order made by the 
new Court;  
(j) references in any law to either of the existing Courts by whatever name, shall, unless the 
context otherwise require s, be construed as references to the new Court.  
26. Subordinate Courts .—All Courts which immediately before the commencement of this Act 
were exercising lawful powers, authority and jurisdiction under the superintendence and control of 
either of the existi ng Courts in any area forming part of the new State shall, until further provision is 
made by a competent legislature or authority, continue to exercise their respective powers, authority 
and jurisdiction in that area under the superintendence and control of the new Court.  
PART V  
ADMINISTRATIVE  AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
27. Existing authorities and officers to continue to function in the new State .—Save 
asotherwise provided in this Act, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, 
who immediately before the commencement of this Act were exercising lawful functions in any area 
forming part of the new State, shall, until further provision is made by a competent authority, continue 
to exercise their respective functions as  far as may be, in the same manner and to the same extent as 
they were doing before such commencement.  
28. Existing laws to continue .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in any area f orming part of the new State shall 
continue to be in force until repealed or amended by a competent legislature or authority.  
29. Power to construe laws. —For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the 
new State of any law made before th e commencement of this Act, any Court, tribunal or authority 
may, subject to any express provision of this Act, construe the law with such alterations not affecting 
the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the Court, tri bunal or 
authority, as the case may be.  
30. Existing taxes to continue. —All taxes, duties, cesses and fees which immediately before the 
commencement of this Act were being lawfully levied in either of the existing States or any part 
thereof, shall continue  to be levied in the same manner and to the same extent and to be applied for 
the same purposes until other provision is made by a competent legislature or authority.  
31. Saving of the powers of the Central Government in relation to the Bhakra -Nangal 
Proje ct.—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to derogate from the powers of the Central 
Government to make such arrangements or to take such action in relation to the Bhakra -Nangal 
Project as may, having due regard to the purposes of the Project, be necessary to ensure its proper 
administration and effective implementation.  
32. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may make such orders not inconsistent with the said provisions, as ap pears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such power shall be exercised by the President after the expiry of one year from 
the commencement of this Act.  8 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 10)  
MODIFICATIONS  IN THE  DELIMITATION  OF PARLIAMENTARY  CONSTITUENCIES  
(PART C STATES ) ORDER , 1951  
1. In paragraph 2, omit the words “Bilaspur and ”. 
2. In Table IV, after the entry relating to Chamba -Sirmur constituency, inse rt the following entry, 
namely:— 
“Bilaspur    Bilaspur    1   ” 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 19)  
Amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order,  1951  
1. In paragraph 2, for “Parts I to X ” substitute “Parts I to IX ”. 
2. For paragraph 4, substitute the following, namely: — 
“4, Any reference in the Schedule to this Order, — 
(a) to the State of Himachal Pradesh or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be 
construed as a reference to the State of Himachal Pradesh as formed by the Himachal P radesh and 
Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954, or to a district or other territorial division of that State as so 
formed; and  
(b) to any other State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a 
reference to that State or to th at district or other territorial division as constituted on the 26th day 
of January, 1950. ” 
3. In the Schedule ,— 
(a) omit Part III relating to Bilaspur;  
(b) renumber “Parts IV to X ” as “Parts III to IX ” respectively;  
(c) in Part V as so renumbered relating to Himachal Pradesh, insert the following, namely: — 
“31. Julahe  
32. Dumne (Bhanjre)  
33. Chuhre  
34. Hese (Turi)  
35. Chhimbe (Dhobi)  
36. Sarehde  
37. Daule. ” 
--------------------------The Lushai Hills District (Change of Name) Act, 1954--------------------------
 
1 THE LUSHAI HILL S DISTRICT (CHANGE OF NAME) ACT , 1954  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Lushai Hills District to be known as Mizo District.  
3. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution . 
4. Reference to Lushai Hills District to be construed as reference to Mizo District.  
   
2 THE LUSHAI HILL S DISTRICT (CHANGE OF NAME) ACT , 1954  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1954  
[29th April , 1954 .] 
An Act to change the name of the Lushai Hills District.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1)  This Act may be called the   Lushai   Hills District (Change 
of Name) Act, 1954.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Lushai Hills District to be known as Mizo District .—The tribal area in Assam now known as 
the Lushai Hills District shall, as from the commencement of this Act, be known as the Mizo District.  
3. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution .—In the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution , in paragraph  20,— 
(a) after sub -paragraph ( 2), the following sub -parag raph shall be inserted namely: — 
“(2A) The Mizo  District shall comprise the area which at the commencement of this 
Constitution was known as the Lushai Hills District. ”; 
(b)  in sub -paragraph ( 3), after the words “United Khasi Jaintia Hills District ” the words “and the   
Mizo   District” shall be inserte d; and  
(c) in Part A of the table, for the words “The Lushai Hills District ”, the words “The Mizo 
District” shall be substituted.  
4. Reference to Lushai Hills District to be construed as reference to Mizo District .—Any  
reference to the Lushai  Hills District in any law, instrument or other document shall, unless the context 
otherwise requires, be construed as a reference to the Mizo District.  
                                                           
1. 1st September , 195 4, vide notification No. S.R.O. 2832  (E), dated 1 stSeptember , 195 4, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
--------------------------The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954--------------------------
1 THE PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION ACT, 1954  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
2A. Rule of construction.  
CENTRAL COMMITTEE FOR FOOD STANDARDS  AND CENTRAL  FOOD LABORATORY  
3. The Central Committee for Food Standards.  
3A. Appointment of Secretary and other staff.  
4. Central Food Laboratory.  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO FOOD  
5. Prohibition of Import of certain articles of food.  
6. Application of law relating to sea customs and powers of Customs Officers.  
7. Prohibition of manufacture, sale, etc., of certain articles of food.  
ANALYSIS OF FOOD  
8. Public Analysts.  
9. Food Inspectors.  
10. Powers of Food Inspectors.  
11. Procedure to be followed by food Inspectors.  
12. Pur chaser may have food analysed.  
13. Report of Public analyst.  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Manufacturers, distributors and dealers to give warranty.  
14A. Vendor to disclose the name, etc. , of the person from whom the article of food was purchased.  
15. Notification of food poisoning.  
16. Penalties.  
16A. Power of court to try cases summarily.  
17. Offence s by companies.  
18. Forfeiture of property.  
19. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions under this Act.  
20. Cognizance and trial of offences.  
20A. Power of court to implead manufacturer, etc.  
20AA. Application of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 and section 360 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  2  
SECTIONS  
21. Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced penalties.  
22. protection of action taken in good faith.  
22A. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
23. Powder of Central Government to make rules.  
24. Power of the State Government to make rules.  
25. Repeal and Saving.  3 THE PREVENTION OF FOOD ADULTERATION ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1954  
[29th September , 1954 .] 
An Act to make provision for the prevention of adulteration of food.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
3[(i) “adulterant ” means any material which is or could be employed fo r the purposes of 
adulteration; ] 
4[(ia)] “adulterated ”—an article of food sh all be deemed to be adulterated — 
(a) if the article sold by a vendor is not of the nature, substance or quality demanded by the 
purchaser and is to his prejudice, or is not of the nature, substance or quality which it purports or 
is represented to be;  
(b) if the article contains any other substance which affects, or if the article is so processed as 
to affect, injuriously the nature, substance or quality thereof;  
(c) if any inferior or cheaper substance has been subs tituted wholly or in part for the article so 
as to affect injuriously the nature, substance or quality thereof;  
(d) if any constituent of the article has been wholly or in part abstracted so as to affect 
injuriously the nature, substance or quality thereof ; 
(e) if the article had been prepared, packed or kept under insanitary conditions whereby it has 
become contaminated or injurious to health;  
(f) if the article consists wholly or in part of any filthy, putrid, 5*** rotten, decomposed or 
diseased animal or  vegetable substance or is insect -infested or is otherwise unfit for human 
consumption;  
(g) if the article is obtained from a diseased animal;  
(h) if the article contains any poisonous or other ingredient which renders it injurious to 
health;  
(i) if the co ntainer of the article is composed, whether wholly or in part, of any poisonous or 
deleterious substance which renders its contents injurious to health;  
                                                           
1. The  words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 41 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1972).  
2. 1st June, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 1085 (E), dated 9th May, 1955, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i).  
This Act has been e xtended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I, to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, s. 3 and Sch. I, to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. and to Kohima and Mokokchun district in 
Nagaland by Act 24 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f . 1-4-1973).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Clause ( i) re-numbered as clause ( ia), thereof by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. The word “disgusting,” omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).   4 1[(j) if any colouring matter other than that prescribed in respect thereof i s present in the 
article, or if the amounts of the prescribed colouring matter which is present in the article are not 
within the prescribed limits of variability;]  
(k) if the article contains any prohibited preservative or permitted preservative in excess of 
the prescribed limits;  
2[(l) if the quality or purity of the article falls below the prescribed standards or its 
constituents are present in quantities not within the prescribed limits of variability, which renders 
it injurious to health;  
(m) If the qua lity or purity of the article falls below the prescribed standards or its 
constituents are present in quantities not within the prescribed limits of variability but which does 
not render it injurious to health.  
Provided that, where the quality or purity of  the article, being primary food, has fallen below 
the prescribed standards or its constituents are present in quantities not within the prescribed 
limits of variability, in either case, solely due to natural causes and beyond the control of human 
agency, then, such article shall not be deemed to be adulterated within the meaning of this                
sub-clause.  
Explanation .—Where two or more articles of primary food are mixed together and the 
resultant article of foo d— 
(a) is stored, sold or distributed under a name which denotes the ingredients thereof; and  
(b) is not injurious to health.  
then, such resultant article shall not be deemed to be adulterated within the meaning of this clause; ] 
(ii) “Central Food Laboratory ” means any laboratory or institute established or specified under 
section 4 ; 
(iii) “Committee ” means the Central Committee for Food Standards constituted under section 3;  
(iv) “Director of the Central Food Laboratory ” means the person appointed by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette as the Director of the Central Food Laboratory and 
includes any person appointed by the Central Government in like manner to perform all or any of the 
functions o f the Director under this Act;  
3[Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of any 
article of food shall be appointed to be a Director under this clause; ] 
4[(v) “food” means any article used as food or drink f or human consumption other th an drug  and 
water and includes — 
(a) any article which ordinarily enters into, or is used in the composition or preparation of, 
human food,  
(b) any flavouring matter or condiments, and  
(c) any other article which the Central Government may, having regard to its use, nature, 
substance or quality,  declare  by notification in the Official Gazette, as food for the purposes of 
this Act; ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 2, for sub-clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -clause ( l) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( v) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  5 1[(vi) “Food (Health) Authority ” means the Director of Medical and Healt h Services or the Chief 
Officer in charge of Health administration in a State, by whatever designation he is known, and 
includes any officer empowered by the Central Government or the State Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, to exercise the powers and perform th e duties of the Food (Health) Authority 
under this Act with respect to such local area as may be specified in the notification ;] 
(vii) “local area ” means any area, whether urban or rural, declared by 2[the Central Government 
or the State Government ] by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a local area for the purposes of 
this Act;  
(viii) “local a uthority ” means in the case of: — 
(1) a local area which is — 
(a) a municipality, the municipal board or municipal corporation;  
(b) a cantonment, the cantonment authority;  
(c) a notified area, the notified area committee;  
(2) any other local area, such authority as may be prescribed by 2[the Central Gov ernment or 
the State Government] under this Act;  
3[(viiia) “Local (Health) Authority ”, in relation to a local area, means the officer appointed by the 
Central Government or the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be in charge 
of Health administration in such area with such designation as may be specified therein;  
(viiib) “manufacture ” includes any process incidental or ancillary to the manufacture of an article 
of food ;] 
(ix) “misbranded ”—an article of food s hall be deemed to be misbranded — 
(a) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, or resembles in a manner likely to deceive, 
another article of food under the name of which it is sold, and is not plainly and conspicuously 
labelled so as to indicate its true character;  
(b) if it is falsely stated to be the product of any place or country;  
(c) if it is so ld by a name which belongs to another article of food;  
(d) if it is so coloured, flavoured or coated, powdered or polished that the fact that the article 
is damaged is concealed or if the articles is made to appear better or of greater value than it really  
is; 
(e) if false claims are made for it upon the label or otherwise;  
(f) if, when sold in packages which have been sealed or prepared by or at the instance of the 
manufacturer or producer and which bear his name and address, the contents of each package a re 
not conspicuously and correctly stated on the outside thereof within the limits of variability 
prescribed under this Act;  
(g) if the package containing it, or the label on the package bears any statement, design or 
device regarding the ingredients or th e substances contained therein, which is false or misleading 
in any material particular; or if the package is otherwise deceptive with respect to its contents;  
(h) if the package containing it or the label on the package bears the name of a f ictitious 
individual or company as the manufacturer or producer of the article;  
(i) if it purports to be, or is represented as being, for special dietary uses, unless its label bears 
such information as may be prescribed concerning its vitamin, mineral, or other dietary  properties 
in order sufficiently to inform its purchaser as to its value for such uses;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 2, for clause ( vi) (w.e .f. 1-4-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 2, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  6 (j) if it contains any artificial flavouring, artificial colouring or chemical preservative, without 
a declaratory label stating that fact, or in contravention of the requirements of this Act or rules 
made thereunder;  
(k) if it is not labelled in accordance with the requirements of this Act or rules made 
thereunder;  
(x) “package ” means a box,  bottle, gasket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, sack bag, wrapper or other 
thing in which an article of food is placed or packed;  
(xi) “premises ” include any shop, stall, or place where any article of food is sold or manufactured 
or stored for sale;  
(xii) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
1[(xiia) “prima ry food ” means any article of food, being a produce of agriculture or  horticulture in 
its natural form; ] 
(xiii) “sale” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the sale of any article 
of food, whether for cash or on credit or by way o f exchange and whether by wholesale or retail, for 
human consumption or use, or for analysis, and includes an agreement for sale an offer for sale, the 
exposing for sale or having in possession for sale of any such article, and includes also an attempt to 
sell any such article;  
(xiv) “sample ” means a sample of any article of food taken under the provisions of this Act or of 
any rules made thereunder;  
(xv) the words “unwholesome ” and “noxious ” when used in relation to an article of food mean 
respectively that the article is harmful to health or repugnant to human use.  
2[2A. Rule of construction .—Any reference in this act to a law which is not in force in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir shall, in  relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, 
if any, in force in that State. ] 
CENTRAL COMMITTEE FOR FOOD STANDARDS  AND CENTRAL  FOOD LABORATORY  
3. The Central Committee for Food Standards .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Central Committee for 
Food Standards to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on matters arising out of 
the administration of this Act and to carry ou t the other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Director -General, Health Services, ex officio , who shall be the Chairman.  
3[(b) the Director of the Central Food Laboratory or, in a case where more than one Central Food 
Laboratory is established, the Directors of such Laboratories, ex officio ;] 
(c) two experts nominated by the Central Government;  
4[(d) one representative each of t he Departments of Food and Agriculture in the Central 
Ministry  of Food and Agriculture and one representative each of the Central Ministries of Commerce, 
Defence, Industry and Supply and Railways, nominated by the Central Government;]  
(e) one representativ e each nominated by the Government of each  5*** State;   
(f) two representatives nominated by the Central Government to represent the 6[Union territories];  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.;f. 1 -4-1976)  
4. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 3, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
5. The words and letters “Part A State and Part B” omitted by A.O.  (No. 3), 1956.  
6. Subs. by A.O. (No. 3), 1956, for “Pa rt C States”.  7 1[(g) one representative each, nominated by the Central Government , to represent the agricultural, 
commercial and industrial interests;  
(gg) five representatives nominated by the Central Government to represent the consumers ’ 
interests, one of whom shall be from the hotel industry; ] 
(h) one representative of the medical profession nominated by the Indian Council of Medical 
Research;  
2[(i) one representative nominated by the Indian Standards Institution referred to in clause ( e) of 
section 2 of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952 (36 of 1952). ] 
 (3) The members of the Committee referred to in clauses ( c), (d), (e), (f), 3[4[(g), (gg),] (h) and ( i)] of 
sub-section ( 2) shall, unless their seats become vacant earlier by registration, death or otherwise, be 
entitled to hold office for three years and shall be eligible for re -nomination.  
(4) The functions of the Committee may be exercised notwithstanding any vacancy therein.  
(5) The Committee may appoint such and so many sub -committees as it deems fit and may appoint to 
them persons who are not memb ers of the Committee to exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may, subject to such conditions, if any, as the Committee may impose, be delegated to them by the 
Committee.  
(6) The Committee may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Gove rnment, make bye -laws 
for the purpose of regulating its own procedure and the transaction of its business.  
5[3A. Appointment of Secretary and other staff .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a 
Secretary to the Committee who shall, under the control and direction of the Committee, exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Committee.  
(2) The Centr al Government shall provide the Committee with such clerical and other staff as that 
Government considers necessary. ] 
4. Central Food Laboratory .—6[(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish one or more Central Foo d Laboratory or Laboratories to carry out the functions 
entrusted to the Central Food Laboratory by this Act or any rules made under this Act : 
Provided that the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, also specify any 
laboratory or institute as a Central Food Laboratory for the purposes of this Act. ] 
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Com mittee, make rules prescribing — 
7[(a) the functions of a Central Food Laboratory and the local area or areas within which such 
functions may be carried out; ] 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory of samples of articles of food for 
analysis or tests, the forms of the Laboratory ’s reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such 
reports;  
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable the said Laboratory to carry out 
its functions.  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO FOOD  
5. Prohibition of Import of certain articles of food .—No person shall import into India — 
(a) any adulterated food;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976 , s. 3, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “( g) and ( h)” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 3, for “( g),” (w.e.f. 1-4-1976).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).   8 (b) an misbranded food;  
(c) any article of food for the import of which a license is prescribed, except in accordance with 
the conditions of the license; and  
(d) any article of food in contravention of any other provision of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder.  
6. Application of law relating to sea customs and powers of Customs Officers .—(1) The law for 
the time being in force relating to sea customs and to goods, the import of which is prohibited by section 
18 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878) shall, sub ject to the provisions of section 16 of this Act, 
apply in respect of articles of food, the import of which is prohibited under section 5 of this Act, and 
officers of Customs and officers empowered under that Act to perform the duties imposed thereby on a 
1[Commissioner of Customs] and other officers of Customs shall have the same powers in respect of such 
articles of food as they have for the time being in respect of such goods as aforesaid.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the  1[Commissioner of Customs ], or any 
officer of the Government authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, may detain any imported 
package which he suspects to contain any article of food the import of which is prohibited under section 5 
of this Act and shall forthwith report such detention to the Director of the Central Food Laboratory and if, 
required by him, forward the package or send samples of any suspected article of food found therein to 
the said Laboratory.  
7. Prohibition of manufacture, sale , etc., of certain articles of food .—No person shall himself or 
by any person on his behalf manufacture for sal e, or store, sell or distribute — 
(i) any adulterated food;  
(ii) any misbranded food;  
(iii) any article of food for the sale of which a licence is  prescribed, except in accordance with the 
conditions of the licence;  
(iv) any article of food the sale of which is for the time being prohibited by the Food (Health) 
Authority 2[in the interest of public health ; 3***] 
(v) any article of food in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder;  4[or] 
4[(vi) any adulterant. ] 
4[Explanation —For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to store any adulterated 
food or misbranded food or any article of food referred to in clause ( iii) or clause ( iv) or clause ( v) if he 
stores such food for the manufacture there from of any article of food for sale. ] 
ANALYSIS OF FOOD  
5[8. Public Analysts .—The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications to be public 
analysts for such local area s as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State 
Government , as the case may be : 
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of any 
article of food shall be appointed to be a public analyst under this section : 
6[Provided further that different public analysts may be appointed for different article s of food. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 87, for “Customs Collector” (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995) .  
2. Subs by Act 49 of 1964, s. 4, for “with a view to preventing the outbreak or spread of infectious diseases” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
3. The word “or” omitted by Act 34 of 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
6. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  9 9. Food Inspectors .—(1) The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint such person as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications to be food 
inspectors for such local areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be : 
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of any 
article of food shall be appointed to be a food inspector under this section.  
(2) Every food inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the 
Government appointing him, may specify in this behalf. ] 
10. Powers of Food Inspectors .—(1) A fo od Inspector shall have power — 
(a) to take samp les of any article of food from — 
(i) any person selling such article ; 
(ii) any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing to deliver such 
article to a purchaser or consignee ; 
(iii) a consignee after delivery of any such article to him ; and  
(b) to send such sample for analysis to the public analyst for the local area within which such 
sample has been taken;  
1[(c) with the previous approval of the Local ( Health) Authority having jurisdiction in the local 
area concerned, or with the previous approval of the Food (Health) Authority, to prohibit the sale of 
any article of food in the interest of public health. ] 
2[Explanation —For the purposes of sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( a) “consignee ” does not include a 
person who purchases or receives any article of food for his own consumption. ] 
3[(2) Any food inspector may enter and inspect any place where any article of food is manufactured, 
or stored for sale, or stored  for the manufacture of any other article of food for sale, or exposed or 
exhibited for sale or where any adulterant is manufactured or kept, and take samples of such article of 
food or adulterant for analysis : 
Provided that no sample of any article of foo d, being primary food, shall be taken under this                    
sub-section if it is not intended for sale as such food. ] 
(3) Where any sample is taken under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), its cost 
calculated at the rate at which the  article is usually sold to the public shall be paid to the person from 
whom it is taken.  
(4) If any article intended for food appears to any food inspector to be adulterated or misbranded, he 
may seize and carry away or keep in the safe custody of the ven dor such article in order that it may be 
dealt with as hereinafter provided 4[and he shall, in either case, take a sample of such article and submit 
the same for analysis to a public analyst ]. 
5[Provided that where the food inspector keeps such article in the safe custody of the vendor he may 
require the vendor to execute a bond for a sum of money equal to the value of such article with one or 
more sureties as the food inspector deems fit and the vendor shall execute the bond accordingly. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 8, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 1964,  s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  10 1[(4A) Where any article of food seized under sub -section ( 4) is of a perishable nature and the Local 
(Health) Authority is satisfied that such article of food is so deteriorated that it is unfit for human 
consumption, the said Authority may, after giving notice in writing  to the vendor, cause the same to be 
destroyed. ] 
(5) The power conferred by this section includes power to break open any package in which any 
article of food may be contained or to break open the door of any premises where any article of food may 
be kept for safe : 
2[Provided that the power to break open the package or door shall be exercised only after the owner or 
any other person  in charge of the package or, as the case may be, in occupation of the premises, if he is 
present therein, refuses to open the package or door on being called upon to do so, and in either case after 
recording the reasons for doing so :] 
Provided further that the food inspector shall, in exercising the powers of entry upon, and inspection 
of any place under this section, follow, as far as may be the provisions of  the 3[Code of Criminal 
Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974) ] relating to the search or inspection of a place by a police officer executing a 
search warrant issued under that code.  
(6) 4[Any adulterant found in the possession of a manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in , any 
article of food or in any of the premises occupied by him as such ] and for the possession of which he is 
unable to account to the satisfaction of the food inspect or, 5[and any books of account or other documents 
documents found in his possession or control and which would be useful for, or relevant to, any 
investigation or proceeding under this Act, may be seized by the food inspector ] and 6[a sample of such 
adulterant ] subm itted for analysis to a public analyst.  
7[Provided that no such books of account or other documents shall be seized by the food inspector 
except with the previous approval of the authority to which he is officially subordinate. ] 
(7) Where the food inspector take any action under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) sub -section ( 2),              
sub-section ( 4), or sub -section ( 6), he shall 8[call one or more persons to be present at the time when such 
action is taken and take his or their signatures ]. 
9[(7A) Where any books of account or other documents are seized under sub -section ( 6) the food 
inspector shall, within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of seizure, return the same to the 
person from whom they were seized after copies thereof o r extracts therefrom as certified by that person 
in such manner as may be prescribed have been taken.  
Provided that where such person refuses to so certify, and a prosecution has been instituted against 
him under this Act, such books of account or other do cuments shall be returned to him only after copies 
thereof or extracts therefrom as certified by the court have been taken.  
(7B) When  any adulterant is seized under sub -section ( 6), the burden of proving that such adulterant 
is not meant for purposes of ad ulteration shall be on the person from whose possession such adulterant 
was seized. ] 
(8) Any food inspector may exercise the powers of a police officer 10[under section 42 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ] for the purpose of ascertaining the true name and residence of the 
person from whom a sample is taken or an article of food is seized.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for proviso (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 , (5 of 1898)”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “may be seized by the food inspector” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
6. Subs. by  s. 8, ibid., for “if necessary a sample of such material” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
8. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
9. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
10. Subs. by  s. 8, ibid., for “under section 57 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1898 , (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).    11 (9) Any food inspector exercising powers under this Act or unde r the rules made thereunder who — 
(a) vexatiously and without any reasonable grounds of suspicion seizes any articles of food 1[or 
adulterant ] or 
(b) commits any other act to the injury of any person without having reason to believe that such 
act is necessary for the execution of his duty.  
shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be punishable for such offence 2[with fine which 
shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend to one thousand rupees ]. 
11. Procedure to be followed by food Inspectors .—3[(1) When a food inspector takes a sample  of 
food for analysis, he shall — 
(a) give notice in writing then and thereof his intention to have it so analysed to the person from 
whom he has taken the sample and to the person, if any, whose name, address and other  particulars 
have been disclosed under section 14A.  
(b) except in special cases provided by rules under this Act, divide the sample the n and there into 
three parts and mark and seal or fasten up each part in such a manner as its nature permits and take 
the signature or thumb impression of the person from whom the sample has been taken in such place 
and in such manner as may be prescribed : 
Provided that where such person refuses to sign or put his thumb impression the food inspector 
shall call upon one or mo re witnesses and take his or their signatures or thumb impressions, as the 
case may be , in lieu of the signature or thumb impression of such person ; 
(c) (i) send one of the parts for analysis to the public analyst under intimation to the Local 
(Health) Aut hority; and  
(ii) send the remaining two parts to the Local (Health) Authority for the purposes of                            
sub-section ( 2) of this section and sub sections  (2A) and ( 2E) of section 13.  
(2) Where the part of the sample sent to the public analyst under sub -clause ( I) of clause ( c) of              
sub-section ( 1) is lost or damaged, the Local (Health) Authority shall, on a requisition made to it by the 
public analyst or the food inspector dispatch one of the parts of the sample sent to it under sub -clause ( ii) 
of the said clause ( c) to the public analyst for analysis. ] 
(3) When a sample of any article of food 4[or adulterant ] is taken under sub -section ( 1) or                           
sub-section ( 2) of section 10, 5[the food inspector shal l, by the immediately succeeding working day, send 
send a sample of the article of food or adulterant or both, as the case may be, ] in accordance with the rules 
prescribed for sampling to the public analyst for the local area concerned.  
6[(4) An article of food  seized under sub -section ( 4) of section 10, unless destroyed under                            
sub-section ( 4A) of th at section, and any adulterant seized under sub -section ( 6) of that section shall be 
produced before a magistrate as soon as possible and in any case not later than seven days after the receipt 
of the report of the public analyst. ] 
7*   *   *   *   * 
Provided  8*** that if an application is made to the magistrate in this behalf by the person from whom 
any article of food has been seized, the magistrate shall by order in writing direct the food inspector to 
produce such article before him within such time as may be specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4.  Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “the food inspector shall send a sample of it” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. The proviso omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
8. The word “further” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).   12 1[(5) If it appears to the magistrate on taking such evidence as he may deem necessary — 
(a) that the articl e of food produced before him under sub -section  (4) is adulterated or 
misbranded, he may order it — 
(i) to be forfeited to the Central Government, the State Government or the local authority, as 
the case may be; or  
(ii) to be destroyed at the cost of the owner or the person from whom it was seized so as to 
prevent its being used as human food; or  
(iii) to be so disposed of as to prevent its being again exposed for sale or used for food under 
its deceptive name; or  
(iv) to be returned to the owner, on his e xecuting a bond with or without sureties, for being 
sold under its appropriate name or, where the magistrate is satisfied that the article of food is 
capable of being made to conform to prescribed standards for human consumption after 
reprocessing, for bei ng sold after reprocessing under the supervision of such officer as may be 
specified in the order;  
(b) that the adulterant seized under sub -section ( 6) of section 10 and produced before him is 
apparently of a kind which may be employed for purposes of adul teration and for the possession of 
which the manufacturer, distributor or dealer, as the case may be, is unable to account satisfactorily, 
he may order it to be forfeited to the Central Government, the State Government or the local 
authority, as the case m ay be. ] 
(6) 2[If it appears to the magistrate that any such — 
(a) article of food is not adulterated; or  
(b) adulterant which is purported to be an a dulterant is not an adulterant,  
the person from whose possession the article of food or adulterant was taken ] shall be entitled to have it 
restored to him and it shall be in the discretion of the magistrate to award such person from such fund as 
the State Gover nment may direct in this behalf , such compensation not exceeding the actual loss which he 
has sustained  as the magistrate may think proper.  
12. Purchaser may have food analysed .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be held to prevent a 
purchaser of any article of food other than a food inspector 3[or a recognised consumer association, 
whether the purchaser is a member of that association or not, ] from having such article analysed by the 
public analyst on payment of such fees as may be prescribed and from receiving from the public analyst a 
report of his analysis : 
Provided that 4[such purchaser or recognised consumer association shall inform the vendor at the time 
time of purchase of his or its intention ] to have such article so analysed : 
Provided further that the provision of sub -section  (1), sub -section  (2) and sub -section  (3) of                 
section 11 shall, as far as may be, apply to a 5[purchaser of article of food or recognised consumer 
association who or which intends ] to have such articles so analysed, as they apply to a food inspector who 
takes a sample of food for analysis : 
Provided al so that if the report of the public analyst shows that the article of food is adulterated, the 
6[purchaser or recognised consumer association shall be entitled to get refund of the fees paid by him or 
it] under this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 9 , for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 70 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “such purchaser shall inform the vendor at the time of purchase of his intention” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “purchaser of article of food who intends” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
6. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for “purchaser shall be entitl ed to get refund of the fees paid by him” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  13 1[Explanation —For the purposes of this section and section 20, “ recognised consumer association ” 
means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) or any 
other law for the time being in force. ] 
13. Report of Public analyst .—2[(1) The public analyst shall deliver, in such form as may be 
prescribed, a report to the Local (Health) Authority of the result of the analysis of any article of food 
submitted to him for analysis.  
(2) On receipt of the report of the result of the analysis under sub -section ( 1) to the effect that the 
article of food is adulterated, the Local (Health) Authority shall, after the institution of prosecution 
against the person from whom the sample of the article of food was taken and the person , if any, whose 
name, address an d other particulars have been disclosed under section 14A, forward, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, a copy of the report of the result of the analysis to such person or persons , as the case 
may be, informing such person or persons  that if it is so des ired, either or both of them may make an 
application to the court within a period of ten days from the date of receipt of the copy of the report to get 
the sample of the article of food kept by the Local (Health) Authority analysed by the Central Food 
Labo ratory.  
(2A) When an application is made to the court under sub -section ( 2), the court shall require the Local 
(Health) Authority to forward the part or parts of the sample kept by the said Authority and upon such 
requisition being made, the said Authority  shall forward the part or parts of the sample to the court within 
a period of five days from the date of receipt of such requisition.  
(2B) On receipt of the part or parts of the sample from the Local (Health) Authority under                     
sub-section ( 2A), the court shall first ascertain that the mark and seal or fastening as provided in clause  (b) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 11 are intact and the signature or thumb impression, as the case may be, is 
not tampered with , and dispatch the pa rt or, as the case may be, one of the parts of the sample under its 
own seal to the Director of the Central Food Laboratory who shall thereupon send a certificate to the 
court in the prescribed form within one month from the date of receipt of the part of the sample specifying 
the result of the analysis.  
(2C) Where two parts of the sample have been sent to the court and only one part of the sample has 
been sent by the court to the Director of the Central Food Laboratory under sub -section  (2B), the court 
shall, as soon as practicable, return the remaining part to  the Local (Health) Authority and that Authority 
shall destroy that part after the certificate from the Director of the Central Food Laboratory has been 
received by the court : 
Provided that where the part of the sample sent by the court to the Director of the Central Food 
Laboratory is lost or damaged, the court shall require the Local (Health) Authority to forward the part of 
the sam ple, if any, retained by it to the court and on receipt thereof, the court shall proceed in the manner 
provided in sub -section ( 2B). 
(2D) Until the receipt of the certificate of the result of the analysis from the Director of the Central 
Food Laboratory, the court shall not continue with the proceedings pending before it in  relation to the 
prosecution.  
(2E) If, after considering the report, if any, of the food inspector or otherwise the Local (Health) 
Authority is of the opinion that the report delivered by the public analyst under sub -section  (1)                            
is erroneous, the said Authority shall forward one of the parts of the sample kept by it to any                         
other public analyst for analysis and if the report of the result of the analysis of that part of the sample by 
that other public analys t is to the effect that the  article of food is adulterated , the provisions of                    
sub-sections  (2) to ( 2D) shall, so far as may be, apply. ] 
(3) The certificate issued by the Director of the Central Food Laboratory 3[under sub -section ( 2B)] 
shall supersede the report given by the public analyst under sub -section  (1). 
                                                           
1. The Explanation  added by Act 70 of 1986, s. 2 . (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987)  
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 10, for sub -section s (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “under sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  14 (4) Where a certificate obtained from the Director of the Central Food Laboratory 1[under                              
sub-section ( 2B)] is produced in any proceeding under this  Act, or under sections 272 to 276 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), it shall not be necessary in such proceeding to produce any part of the sample of 
food taken for analysis.  
(5) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a public analyst, unless it  has been superseded 
under sub -section  (3), or any document purporting to be a certificate signed by the Director of the Central 
Food Laboratory, may be used as evidence of the facts stated therein any proceeding under th is Act or 
under section s 272 to 276 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
2[Provided that any document purporting to be a certificate signed by the Director of the Central Food 
Laboratory [not being a certificate with respect to the analysis of the part of the sample of any article of 
food referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 1A) of section 16 ] shall be final and conclusive evidence of 
the facts stated therein. ] 
3[Explanation —In this section, and in clause ( f) of sub -section  (1) of section 16, Director of the 
Central Fo od Laboratory shall include the officer for the time being in charge of any Food Laboratory (by 
whatever designation he is known) recognised by the Central Government for the purposes of this 
section. ] 
MISCELLANEOUS  
4[14. Manufacturers, distributors and dealers to give warranty .—No 5[manufacturer or distributor 
of, or dealer in ,] any article of food shall sell such article to any vendor unless he also give s a warranty in 
writing in the prescribed form about the nature and quality of such article to the vendor.  
6[Provided that a bill, cash memorandum or invoice in respect of the sale of any article of food given 
by a manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, such article to the vendor thereof shall be deemed to be a 
warranty given by such manufacturer, distributor or dealer under this section. ] 
Explanation —In this section, in sub -section  (2) of section 19 and in section 20A, the expression 
“distributor ” shall include a commission agent.  
14A.  Vendor to disclose the name, etc ., of the person from whom the article of food was 
purchased .—Every vendor of an article of food shall, is so required, disclose to the food inspector the 
name, address and other particulars of the person from whom he purch ased the article of food. ] 
15. Notification of food poisoning .—7[The Central Government or the State Government ] may , by 
notification in the Official Gazette, require medical practitioners carrying on their profession in any local 
area specified in the notification to report all occurrences of food poisoning coming within their 
cognizance to such officer as may be specified in the notification.  
16. Penalties .—8[(1) Subject to the provision s of sub-section ( 1A) if any person — 
(a) Whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf, imports into India or manufacturers 
for sale or stores, sells or distributes any article of food — 
(i) which is adulterated within the meaning of sub -clause ( m) of clause ( ia) of section 2 or 
misbranded within the meaning of clause ( ix) of that section or the sale of which is prohibited 
under any provision of this Act or any rule made t hereunder or by an order of the Food (Health) 
Authority ; 
(ii) Other than an article of food referred to in sub -clause  (I), in contravention of any of the 
provision of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 10, for “under sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 7,  for section 14 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 1 1, for “manufacturer, distributor or dealer of” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 1 1, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 8, for “The State Government” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
8. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  15 (b) whether by himself or by any other person  on his behalf, imports into India or manufacturers 
for sale or stores, sells or distributes any adulterant which is not injurious to health; or  
(c) prevents a food inspector from taking a sample as authorised by this Act; or  
(d) prevents a food inspector from exercising any other power conferred on him by or under this 
Act; or  
(e) being a manufacturer of an article of food, has in his possession, or in any of the premises 
occupied by him, any adulterant which is not injurious to health; or  
(f) uses any report or certificate of a test or analysis made by the Director of the Central Food 
Laboratory or by a public analyst or any extract thereof for the purpose of advertising any article of 
food; or  
(g) whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf , give to the vendor a false warranty in 
writing in respect of any article of food sold by him.  
he shall, in addition to the penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of section 6, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to 
three years, and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees : 
Provided that — 
(i) if the offence is under sub -clause ( I) of clause ( a) and is with respect to an article of food, 
being primary food,  which is adulterated due to human agency or is with respect to an article of food 
which is misbranded within the meaning of sub -clause ( k) of clause ( ix) of section 2; or  
(ii) if the offence is under sub -clause  (ii) of clause (a), but not being an offence  with respect to the 
contravention of any rule made under clause ( a) or clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1A) of section 23 or 
under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 24,  
the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence 
of imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years, 
and with fine which may extend to two years, and with fine which shall not be less than five hundred 
rupees : 
Provided further that if the offence is under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) and is with respect to the 
contravention of any rule made under clause ( a) or clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1A) of section 23 or under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 24, the court may, for any adequ ate and special reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months and with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. ] 
1[(1A) If any person whether by himself or by any other person on  his behalf, imports into India or 
manufactures for sale, or stores, sells or distributes — 
(i) any article of food which is adulterated within the meaning of any of the sub -clause ( e) to ( l) 
(both inclusive) of clause ( ia) of section 2; or  
(ii) any adulterant which is injurious to health , 
he shall, in addition to the penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of section 6, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which extend to six 
years and with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees : 
Provided that if such article of food or adulterant, when consumed by any person is likely to cause his 
death or is likely to cause such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within th e meaning of 
section 320 of the Indian Penal code (45 of 1860), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to term of life and with fine which shall not 
be less than five thousand rupee s.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  16 1[(1AA)] if any person in whose safe custody any article of food has been kept under sub -section  (4) 
of section  10, tampers or in any other manner interferes with such article, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less  than six months but which may extend to two years and 
with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees.  
2[(1B) if any person in whose safe custody any article of food has been kept under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 10, sells or distributes such a rticle which is found by magistrate before whom it is produced to be 
adulterated within the meaning of sub -clause ( h) of clause ( ia) of section 2 and which, when consumed by 
any person, is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm on his bo dy as would amount to 
grievous hurt within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), then 
notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1AA), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than thre e years but which may extend to term of life and with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees. ] 
(1C) if any person contravenes the provisions of section 14 or section 14A, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which shall not be less than 
five hundred rupees.  
(1D) if any person convicted of an offence under this Act commits a like offence afterwards, then 
without prejudice to the provision of sub -section ( 2), the court, before which the second or subsequent 
conviction takes place, may order the cancellation of the licence, if any, granted to him under this Act and 
thereupon such licence shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the rules made 
thereunder, stand cancel led. 
(2) if any persons convicted of an offence under this Act commits a like offence afterwards it shall be 
lawful for the court before which the second or subsequent conviction takes place to cause the offender's 
name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed to be published at the offender's 
expense in such newspapers or in such other manner as the court may direct. The expenses of such 
publication shall be deemed to be part of the cost attending the conviction and shall be recoverable in the 
same manner as a fine.  
3[16A.  Power of court to try cases summarily .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 shall be tried in a 
summary way by a judici al Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the State 
Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of 
the said Code shall, as far as may be , apply to such trial : 
Provided t hat in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for 
the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year : 
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a s ummary trial under this 
section, it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the 
case summarily , the Magistrate shall after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter 
recall any witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner 
provided by the said Code. ] 
4[17. Offence s by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company — 
(a) (i) the person, if any, who has been nominated under sub -section ( 2) to be in charge of, and 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company (hereinafter in this 
section referred to as the person responsible), or  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 1A) re-numbered as sub -section ( 1AA) thereof by Act 34 of 1976, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for sub -section ( 1B) (w.e.f 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).   
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  17 (ii) where no person has been so nominated, every person who at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company;  and  
(b) the company,  
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Any company may, by order in writing, authorise any of its directors or managers (such manager  
being employed mainly in a managerial or supervisory capacity) to exercise all such powers and take all 
such steps as may be necessary or expedient to prevent the commission by the company or any offence 
under this Act and may give notice to the Local (He alth) Authority, in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed, that it has nominated such director or manager as the person responsible, along with 
the written consent of such director or manager for being so nominated.  
Explanation .—Where a company  has different establishments or branches or different units in any 
establishment or branch, different persons may be nominated under this sub -section in relation to different 
establishments or branches or units and the person nominated in relation to any establishment, branch or 
unit shall be deemed to be the person responsible in respect of such establishment, branch or unit.  
(3) The person nominated und er sub -section ( 2) shall, until — 
(i) further notice cancelling such nomination is received from the com pany by the Local (Health) 
Authority; or  
(ii) he ceases to be a director or, as the case may be, manager of the company; or  
(iii) he makes a request in writing to the Local (Health) Authority, under intimation to the 
company, to cancel the nomination [whic h request shall be complied with b y the Local (Health) 
Authority.]  
whichever is the earliest, continue to be the person responsible : 
Provided that where such person ceases to be a director or, as the case may be, manager of the 
company, he shall intimate t he fact of such cesser to the Local (Health) Authority : 
Provided further that where such person makes a request under clause ( iii), the Local (Health) 
Authority shall not cancel such nomination with effect from a date earlier than the date on which the 
request is made.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the fore going  sub-sections, where an offence under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable t o, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, 
or other officer of the company, [ not being a person nominated under sub -section ( 2) such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and s hall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm; and  
(c) “manager ” in relation to a company engaged in hotel industry, includes the person in charge 
of the catering department of any hotel managed or run by it.]  
18. Forfeiture of property .—Where any person has been convicted under th is Act for the 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule thereunder, the article of food in respect 
of which the contravention has been committed may  be forfeited to the Government . 18 1[Provided that where the court is satisfied that the article of food is capable of being made to 
conform to prescribed standards for human consumption after reprocessing, the court may order the 
article of food to be returned to the owner, on his executing a bond with or without sureties, for being 
sold,  subject to the other provisions of this Act, after reprocessing under the supervision of such officer as 
may be specified therein. ] 
19. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions under this Act .—(1) It shall be no 
defence in a prosecution for an offence pertaining to the sale of any adulterated or misbranded article of 
food to allege merely that the vendor was ignorant of the nature, substance or quality of the food sold by 
him or that the purchaser having purchased any article for analysis  was not prejudiced by the sale.  
2[(2) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an offence pertaining to the sale of any 
adulterated or misbrand ed article of food if he proves — 
(a) that h e purchased the article of food — 
(i) in a case where a licence is prescribed for the sale thereof, from a duly licensed 
manufacturer, distributor or dealer,  
(ii) in any other case, from any manufacturer, distributor or dealer,  
with a written warranty in the prescribed form; and  
(b) that the article of food while in hi s possession was properly stored and that he sold it in the 
same state as he purchased it. ] 
(3) Any person by whom a warranty as is referred to 3[in section 14 ] is alleged to have been given 
shall be entitled to appear at the hearing and give evidence.  
20. Cognizance and trial of offences .—(1) 4[No prosecution for an offence under this Act not being 
an offence under section 14 or section 14 A] shall be instituted except by , or with the written consent of, 
5[the Central Government or the State Government  6*** or a person authorised in this behalf, by general 
or special order, by the Central Government or the State Government  6***]: 
Provided that a prosecution for an offence under this Act may be instituted by a purchaser 7[or 
recognised consumer association ] referred to in section 12, 8[if he or it produces ] in court a copy of the 
report of the public analyst along with the complaint.  
9[(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence under this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 1AA) of section 16 shall be cognizable and non -bailable). ] 
10[20A.  Power o f court to implead manufacturer , etc.—Where at any time during the trial of any 
offence under this Act alleged to have been committed by any person, not being the manufacturer, 
distributor or dealer of any article of food, the court is satisfied, on the evidence adduced before it, that 
such manufacturer, distributor or dealer is also concerned with that offence, then , the court may, 
notwithstanding anything con tained in 11[sub-section ( 3) of section 319 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ] or in section 20 proceed against him as though a prosecution had been 
instituted against him under section 20. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 10, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “in sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 16, for “No prosecution for an offence under this Act”  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
6. The words “or a local authority” omitted by Act 34 of 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 70 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “if he produces” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
9. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 16, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
10. Ins. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
11. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 17, for “sub -section ( 1) of section 351 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 , (5 of 1898) ”   
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).      19 1[20AA.  Application of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 and section 360 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 .—Nothing contained in the P robation of offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or 
section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to a person convicted of an 
offence under this Act unless that person is under eighteen years of age. ] 
2[21. Magistrate’ s power to impose enhanced penalties .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan 
Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorise d by this Act, except 
a sentence of imprisonment for life or for term exceeding six years in excess of his powers under the said 
section. ] 
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall , 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
3[22A. Power of Central Government to give directions. —The Central Government may give such 
such directions as it may deem necessary to a State Government regarding the carrying into execution of 
all or any of the provisions of this Act and the State Government shall comply with such directions.]  
23. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—4[(1) The Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Committee and after previous publication by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act : 
Provided that consultation with the Committee may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of 
the opinion that circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such 
consultation, but, in such a case, the Committee shall be consulted within six months of the making of the 
rules and the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Committee may 
make in relation to the amendment of the said rules. ] 
5[(1A)] 6[In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: —] 
(a) specifying the articles of food or classes of food for the import of which a licence is                    
required and prescribing the form and conditions of such licence, the authority empowered to issue 
the same, 7[the fees payable therefor, the deposit of any sum as s ecurity for the performance of the 
conditions of the licence and the circumstances under which such licence or securit y may be 
cancelled or forfeited] ; 
(b) defining the standards of quality for, fixing the limits of variability permissible in respect of, 
any article of food;  
(c) Laying down special provisions for imposing rigorous control over the production, 
distribution and sale of any article or class of articles of food which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify i n this behalf including registration of the premises where 
they are manufactured, maintenance of the premises in a sanitary condition and maintenance of the 
healthy state of human beings associated with the production, distribution and sale of such article  or 
class of articles;  
(d) restricting the packing and labe lling of any article of food and the design of any such package 
or label with a view to preventing the public or the purchaser being deceived or misled as to the 
character, quality or quantity of t he article 4[or to preventing adulteration ]. 
(e) defining the qualifications powers and duties of food inspectors and public analysis;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 21 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. Sub -section ( 1) re-numbered as sub -section ( 1A) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 21 , ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
7. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 13, for “and the fees payable therefor” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  20 1[(ee) defining the laboratories where samples of articles of food or adulterants may be analysed 
by public analysts under this Act ]; 
(f) prohibiting the sale or defining the conditions of sale of any substance which may be injurious 
to health when used as food or restricting in any manner its use as an ingredient in the manufacture of 
any article of food or regulating by the issue of licences the manufacture or sale of any article of food ; 
(g) defining the conditions of sale or conditions for licence of sale of any article of food in the 
interest of public health;  
(h) specifying the manner in which co ntainers for samples of food purchased for analysis shall be 
sealed up or fastened up;  
1[(hh) defining the methods of analysis; ] 
(i) specifying a list of permissible preservatives, other than common salt and sugar, which alone 
shall be used in preserved fr uits, vegetables or their products or any other article of food as well as the 
maximum amounts of each preservative ; 
(j) specifying the colouring matter and the maximum quantities thereof which may be used in any 
article of food;  
(k) providing for the exem ption from this Act or of any requirements contained therein and 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified, of any article or class of articles of food.  
(l) prohibiting or regulating the manufacture, transport or sale of any article known to be used as 
an adulterant of food;  
(m) Prohibiting or regulating — 
(i) the addition of any water , or other diluent or adulterant to any article of food;  
(ii) the abstraction of any ingredient from any article of food;  
(iii) the sale of any article of food to  which such addition or from which such abstraction has 
been made or which has been otherwise artificially treated;  
(iv) the mixing of two or more articles of food which are similar in nature or appearance.  
(n) providing for the destruction of such article s of food as are not in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder.  
2[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this act shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 3[which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree i n 
making and modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be ; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. ] 
 24. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the Committee and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act in matters not falling within the purview of section 
23. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) define the powers and duties of the Food (Health) Authority, 4[local authority and Local 
(Health) Authority under this Act ]; 5*** 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 1976. s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 13, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 21, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “and local authority” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
5. The words “and jurisdiction of food inspectors and public analysts”  omitted by Act 49 of 1964, s. 14  (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  21 (b) prescribe the forms of licences for the manufacture for sale, for the storage, for the sale and 
for the distribution of articles of food or any specified article of food or class of articles of food, the 
form of application for such licences, the conditions subject to which such licences may be issued, the 
authority empowered to issue the same, 1[the fees payable therefor, the deposit of any sum as security 
for the performance of the conditions of the licences and the circumstances under which such licences 
or security 2[may be suspended, cancelled or forfeited ]. 
(c) direct a fee to be paid for analysing any article of food or for any matter for which a fee may 
be prescribed under this Act.  
(d) direct that the whole or any part of the fines imposed under this Act shall be paid to a local 
authority on realisation;  
(e) provide for the delegation of the powers and functions conf erred by this Act on the State 
Government or the Food (Health) Authority to subordinate authorities or to local authorities.  
(3) All rules made by the State Governments under this Act, shall, as soon as possible after they are 
made, be laid before the resp ective State Legislatures.  
 25. Repeal and Saving .—(1)  If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force 
in any State to which this Act extends any law corresponding to this Act, that corresponding law shall 
upon such commencement sta nd repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of any corresponding law, all rules, regulations and bye -
laws relating to the prevention of adulteration of food made under such corresponding law and in force 
immediately before the commencement of t his Act shall, except where and so far as they are inconsistent 
with or repugnant to the provisions of this Act, continue in force until altered, amended or repealed by 
rules made under this Act.  
3[(3) (a) References to the commencement of this Act in this  section shall be construed as references 
to the commencement of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Amendment) Act, 1971 (41 of 1971).  
(b) For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the provisions of sub -section (2) shall be 
without prejudice  to the provisions contained in section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) 
which shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding law in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
as if such corresponding law had been an enactment.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1964, s. 14, for “and the fees payable therefor” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1976, s. 22, for “may be cancelled or forfeited” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 41 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1972).   
--------------------------The Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
ACT, 1954  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Salaries and daily allowances . 
4. Travelling allowances . 
5. Travelling allowances for intermedia te journeys . 
5A. Transit accommodation . 
6. Free transit by Railway . 
6A. Free transit by Steamer . 
6AA. Special facility to members from Ladakh . 
6B. Travel facilities to members . 
6C. Air travel facilities in certain circumstances . 
6D. Special facilities to blin d and physically incapacitated Members . 
7. Allowances during short intervals between the termination of one session and the 
commencement of another session, etc . 
8. Constituency allowance and amenities . 
8A. Pension . 
8AA. Travel facility to ex -Members . 
8AB. Round ing off period of pension . 
8AC. Family pension . 
8B. Advances for purchase of conveyance . 
9. Power to make rules . 
10. [Repealed. ] 2 
 THE SALARY, ALLOWANCES AND PENSION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1954  
[22nd May , 1954.]  
An Act to provide for the 1[salary,  allowances and pension] of Members of Parliament.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :― 
1. Short title and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called th e 2[Salary, Allowances and  
Pension]  of Members of  Parliament Act, 1954.  
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of June, 1954 . 
 2. Definitions .― In this Act, ― 
(a) “committee ” means a Committee of either House of Parliament, and includes a Joint 
Committee of both Houses;  
3[(aa) “dependent ” means any  of the following relatives of a deceased member, namely: ― 
(i) a minor legitimate son, and an unmarried legitimate daughter and a widowed mother; 
or 
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the member at the time of his death, a son or a 
daughter who ha s attained the age of eighteen years and who is infirm; or  
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the member at the time of his 
death, ― 
(a) the parent; or  
(b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or  
(c) a widowed daughter -in-law; or  
(d) a minor child of a pre -deceased son; or  
(e) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive; or  
(f) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the member is alive; or  
(g) such other person as may be specified by the rules made  under section 9 by the 
Joint Committee;]  
(b) “member ” means a member of either House of Parliament, 4[but, save as otherwise 
expressly  provided in thi s Act, does not include ]― 
(i) a Minister as defined in  the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952  (58 of 
1952); 5*** 
6[(ii) a Leader of the Opposition as defined in  the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of 
Opposition in  Parliament Act, 1977  (33 of 1977) ; and] 
7[(iii)] an o fficer of Parliament as defined in  the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of 
Parliament Act, 1953  (20 of 1953);  
                                                      
1.  Subs.  by Act 105 of 1976 , s. 2, for “salaries and allowances ” (w.e.f. 9-9-1976).   
2.  Subs.  by s. 3, ibid., for “Salaries  and Allowances ” (w.e.f. 9-9-1976).   
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 2, for “but does not include” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. The word “and” omitted by Act 33 of 197 7, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  
6.  Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  
7. Sub -clause ( ii) renumbered as sub -clause ( iii) by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).   3 
 (c) “new member ” means a member who takes his seat in either House of Parliament after the  
commencement of this Act and includes a member who i s re-elected or re -nominated;  
(d) “period of residence on duty ” means the period during which a member resides at a place  
where a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee is held or where any other  
business connected with his duties as such member is transacted, for the purpose of attending  such 
session or sitting or for the purpose of attending to such other business, and includes ― 
(i) in the case of session of a House of Parliament, a period of such resi dence, not 
exceeding three days , immediately preceding the commencement of the session and a period 
of such residence, not exceeding three da ys, immediately succeeding the 1[date on which the 
House of Parliament is adjourned sine die  or for a period exceeding seven days], and  
(ii) in the  case of a sitting of a committee or any other business a period of such residence, 
not exceeding two days, immediately preceding the commencement of the business of the 
committee or other business and a period of such residence, not exceeding two days, 
immediately succeeding the conclusion of the business of the committee or other business;  
Explanation .―A member who ordinarily resides at a place where a session of a House of 
Parliament or a sitting of a committee is held or where any other business connect ed with his 
duties as such  member is transacted shall, for the duration of the session or sitting or the time 
occupied for the transaction of other business (including the three or two days immediately 
preceding or succeeding), be deemed  to reside at such place for the purpose of attending such 
session or sitting or, as the case may be, for the  purpose of attending to such other business;  
(e) “term of office ” means, ― 
(a) in relation to a person who is a member at the commencement of this Act, the period 
beginning with such commencement and ending  with the date on which his seat  becomes 
vacant;  
2[(b) in relation to a new member, ― 
(i) where such new member is a member of the Council of States  elected in a biennial 
election,  or nominated, to that House, the period beginning with the date of publication of 
the notification in the Official Gazette notifying his name under  section 71 of the 
Representation of  the People Act,  1951  (43 of 1951) ; or 
(ii) where such new member is a member of the House of the People elected in a 
general election held for the purpose of constituting a new House of the People, the 
period beginning with the date of publication of the notification of the Election 
Commission under  section 73  of the said Act; or  
(iii) where such new member is a member of either House of Parliament elected in a 
bye-election to that House or a member nominated to the House of the People , the period 
begin ning with the date of his election referred to in  section 67 A of the said Act or , as the 
case may be , the date of his nomination,   
and ending with , in each such case, the date on which his seat becomes vacant.]  
3. Salaries and daily allowances .― 3[(1)] A member shall be entitled to receive  4[a salary at the 
the rate of 5[one lakh rupees] per mensem] during the whole of his term of office  6[and subject  to any 
any rules made under this Act]  7[an allowance at the rate of two thousand rupees for each day] d uring 
any period of residence on duty:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 2, for “end of the session” ( w.e.f. 1-6-1954 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 105 of 1976, s. 4, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 9 -9-1970).  
3. Section 3 numbered as s ub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 13 of 2018, s. 142 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 2010, s. 2, for “a salary at the rate of sixteen thousand rupees per mensem” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 142, for “fifty thousand rupees” (w.e. f. 1-4-2018).  
6. Subs. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 3, for “plus” ( (w.e.f. 1 -6-1954 ). 
7. Subs. by Act 37 of 2010, s. 2, for “an allowance at the rate of one thousand rupees for each day” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  4 
 1[Provided that no member shall be entitled to the aforesaid allowance unless he signs the register,  
maintained for this purpose by the Secretariat of the House of th e People or, as the case may be,  
Council of States,  on all the days (except intervening holidays for which no such signing is required) 
of the session of the House for which the allowance is claimed.]  
2[Provided further that the rates of salary specified in this section shall be applicable from the 18th 
day of May, 2009.]   
3[(2) The salary and daily allowance of members shall be increased after every five years 
commencing from 1st April, 2023 on the basis of Cost Inflation Index provided under clause ( v) of 
Explanation  to section 48 of the Income -tax Act, 1 961 (43 of 1961) .] 
4. Travelling allowances .―(1) There shall be paid to each member in respect of every journey 
performed by him  4[in India] for the purpose of attending a session of a House of Parliament or a 
meeting of a committee or for the purpose of attending to any other business connected wi th his duties 
as a member, from his usual place of residence to the place where the session or the meeting is to be 
held or the other business is to be transacted and for the return journey from such place to his usual 
place of residence ― 
5*   *   *  *   *
 (b) if the journey is performed by air, an amount equal to one 6[***]  air fare for each such 
journey;  
(c) if the journey or any part thereof cannot be performed by rail or air ― 
7[(i) where the journey or any part thereof is performed by steamer, an amount  equal to 
one 8*** fare (without diet) for the highest class in the steamer for each such journey or part 
thereof , or, if there is no regular steamer service, such amount for each such journey or part 
thereof as may be prescribed by rules made under sectio n 9;] 
 (ii) where the journey or any part thereof is performed by road,  9[a road mileage at the 
rate of sixteen rupees per kilometre] for each such journey or part thereof:  
10[Provided that when Parliament is in session and the spouse of a Member, if any, p erforms such 
journey or part thereof by road, unaccompanied by such Member, in respect of which such spouse has 
been allowed to travel by air or partly by air and partly by rail from the usual place of residence of the 
Member to Delhi or back under sub -section ( 2) of section 6B, the road mileage prescribed under this 
sub-clause shall be allowed to such Member for such journey or part thereof, subject to the condition 
that the total number of such journeys s hall not exceed eight in a year ]: 
11[Provided furthe r that where a member performs journey by road in Delhi from and to an 
aerodrome, he shall be paid a minimum amount of one hundred and twenty rupees for each such 
journey.]  
12*   *   *   *   * 
Explanation .― For the purposes of sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of this sub -section, the expression 
“journey ” shall include the journey from and to the railway station, port or aerodrome to and from the 
usual place of residence of the member or, as the  case may be, the residence of the member at the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1993, s. 2  (w.e.f. 9 -6-1993) . 
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2010, s. 2, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  
        3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 142 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4.  Ins. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1955).  
5. Clause  (a) omitted by Act 13 of 2018, by s 143 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
6. The words “and one fourth of the ” omitted by s . 143, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
7. Subs.  by Act 55 of 1958, s. 4, for sub -clause ( i) (w. e.f. 1 -6-1954).  
8. The words “and three -fifth of the” omitted by Act 13 of 2018 , s. 143 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
9.  Subs. by A ct 37 of 2010, s. 3,  for “a road mileage at the rate of  thirteen rupees per kilometer”  (w.e.f. 1-10-2010).  
10. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for the first proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  
11. Ins. by Act 48 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -6-1993).  
12. The third proviso omitte d by Act 37 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  5 
 place where the ses sion of the House of Parliament or a meeting of the committee is to be held or 
where any other business is to be transacted.   
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a m ember who performs a journey by  
road between places connected by rai l or steamer, either wholly or in part, may draw the mileage 
allowance referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) in place of the travelling 
allowance which would have been admissible to him if he had travelled by rail or steamer, as t he case 
may be . 
1[Provided that the total amount of travelling allowance drawn by such member for the entire 
journey shall not exceed the amount which would have been admissible to him had he performed such 
journey by rail or by steamer, as the case may be :  
Provided further that the first proviso shall be applicable to such journey only where the places of 
the journey are connected by e xpress, mail or superfast train: ] 
2[Provided also that the first proviso shall not be applicable to a member who, in the o pinion of 
the Chairman of the Council of States or, as the case may be, the Speaker of the House of the People, 
is so incapacitated physically an d cannot travel by air or train: ] 
3[Provided also that in case a member resides within a distance of three hund red kilometers from 
Delhi, he or his spouse, for the journey performed by him by road, may draw the mileage allowance 
referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) in place of the travelling allowance which 
would have been admissible to h im had he performed such journey by rail  or by road, as the case may 
be: 
Provided also that in case a member resides in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim or Tripura, he or his spouse may draw the mileage allowance 
referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) for journey performed by him by road 
from his residence in any of the said States to the nearest airport.]  
4[(3) There shall be paid to a member in respect of a journey performed by him in the course of a 
tour outside India undertaken in the discharge of his duties as such member, such travelling and daily 
allowances as may be prescribed by rules made under section 9 .] 
5[(4) There shall be paid to a person ― 
(a) who has been elected in a biennial election as a member of the Council of States but the 
notification in the Official Gazette notifying his name under section 71 of the Representation of 
the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) has not been published in the  Official Gazette; or  
(b) who has been elected as a member of the House of the People in a general election held 
for the purpose of constituting a new House of the People but the notification in the Official 
Gazette notifying his name under section 73 of t he Representation of the People Act, 1951(43 of 
1951) has not been published in the Official Gazette; or  
(c) who has been elected in a bye -election as a member of either House of Parliament or 
nominated as a member to either House of Parliament,  
an amount equivalent to the fare in respect of every journey performed by him for coming to Delhi 
before the publication of notification referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), or election or nomination 
under clause ( c): 
Provided that in case the journey is perform ed by rail or steamer or road, he shall be entitled to the 
reimbursement of the fare or road mileage to which a member is entitled:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
4. Ins. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  6 
 Provided further that in case he performs the journey by air, such journey shall be included for the 
purpose of counting thi rty-two journeys referred to in the first proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 5.]  
5. Travelling allowances for intermediate journeys .―1[(1)] Where a member absents himself 
for less than fifteen days during a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of a committee for 
visiting any place in India, he shall be entitled to receive travelling allowances in respect of such 
journey to such place and for the return journey ― 
(a) if the journey is performed by rail, equal to  2[one first class fare] for each su ch journey 
irrespective of the class in which the member actually travels;  
(b) 3[if the journey, being a journey during the sitting of the Committee] is performed by air, 
equal to one far e by air  for each such journey : 
Provided that such travelling allowan ces shall not exceed the total amount of daily allowances 
which would have been admissible to such member under section 3  for th e days of absence if he had 
not so remained absent:]  
4[Provided further that nothing in the first proviso shall apply, if the me mber performs the journey 
by air for visiting any place in India not more than once during a sitting of the Committee;]  
5[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a member shall be entitled to 
receive travelling allowances in respect of every journey performed by air for visiting any place in 
India during the interval not exceeding  6[five days] between two sittings of a Department related 
Standing Committee when a House of Parliament is adjourned for a fixed p eriod during the Budget 
Sessi on: 
Provided that such travelling allowances, excluding the air fare , shall not exceed the total amount 
of daily allowances which would have been admissible  to such member under section 3 for the days 
of absence if he had  not remained absent.]  
 7[(2) Every  member shall be entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air for each single journey 
by air  (other than a j ourney referred to in section 4 or the second proviso to sub -section ( 1) of this 
section or section 6C)  performed by him 8[either alone or along w ith spouse or any numb er of 
companions or relatives, ]  from any place in India to any other place in India during hi s term of office 
as such member :] 
9[Provided that the total number of such journeys under this sub -section shall be thirty -four 
journeys per  year: 
10[Provided further that where the number of journeys performed by any member by air is 11[less 
than thirty -four] , then, such number of journeys not performed by him shall be carr ied over to the 
following year: ] 
12[Provided also that the spouse or comp anion of a member, as the case may be, may alone 
perform maximum eight journeys by air from any place of India to the place in India for the purpose 
of visiting such member and such journey shall be included for the purpose of counting 13[thirty -four 
journe ys] referred to in the first proviso to sub -section ( 2):] 
                                                      
1. Section 5 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 105 of 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1955, s. 2, for “one second class fare ” (w.e.f. 1-4-1955).   
3. Subs. by Act 74 of 1985 , s. 3, for “if the journey” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).   
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for the second proviso and the Explanation  (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 18 of 1995, s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 4, for “seven days ”  (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
7. Subs. by Act 74 of 19 85, s. 3, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 26-12-1985). 
8. Subs. by Act 16 of 1999, s. 2, for “either alone or along with companion or spouse,” (w.e.f. 18 -3-1999).  
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 4, for the first proviso (w.e.f. 15-9-2006).  
10. The proviso ins.  by Act 28 of 1998, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20 -8-1998).  
11. Subs . by Act 40 of 2006, s. 4, for “less than thirty -two”  (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
12. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 4 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
13. Subs. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 4, for “thirt y-two journeys” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  7 
 1[Provided also that in case any member avails a total number of journeys by air more than  thirty -
thirty -four, such journeys permissible to him, in the year, he may be allowed to adjust not exceeding 
eight such journeys from the entitled number of journeys which may accrue in his credit in the next 
following year.]  
2[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), there shall be paid to a member who, 
who, in the opinion of the Chairman of the Council  of States or, as the case may be,  the Speaker of 
the House of the People, is so incapacitated physically and therefore cannot perform air or travel 
journey, road mileage for the entire journey.]  
Explanation 1 .―The provisions of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 4 
shall, so far as may be , apply to travelling allowances payable under this section as they apply to 
travelling allowances payable under that section.  
Explanation II .―For the purposes of this section, “year” means, ― 
(i) in the case of a person who is a member at the commencement of the Salary, Allowances 
and Pension of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985  (74 of 1985) , the year beginning 
with such commencement and each o f the subsequent years;  
(ii) in the case of a person who becomes a member after such commencement, the year 
beginning  with the date on which his term of office as such member commences and each of the 
subsequent years.] ] 
3[Explanation III .―For the purposes  of sub -section ( 2), any journey performed by  the 4[“spouse, 
companions or relatives shall be added in computing the limit of 5[thirty -four journeys ] specified in 
the proviso to that sub -section .] 
6[5A. Transit accommodation .―Where a person referred to in sub-section ( 4) of section 4 
comes to Delhi, he shall be entitled to such transit accommodation for such period as may be specified 
by the rules made under clause ( ccc) of sub -section ( 3) of section 9 by the Joint Committee.]  
 7[6. Free transit by railway .―(1) Every member shall be provided with one free                          
non-transferable 8[first class air -conditioned or executive class of any train ] pass which shall entitle 
him to travel at any time by any railway in India.  
Explanation .―9[For the pu rposes of this sub -section and sections 6A and 6B], a member shall 
include a Minister as defined in the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952  (58 of 1952), 10[a 
Leader of the Opposition as defined in the Salary and Allowances of Leader of Oppositio n in 
Parliament Act, 1977  (33 of 1977) ] and an officer of Parliament as defined in the Salaries and 
Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act , 1953  (20 of 1953 ), other than the Chairman of the Council 
of States.  
(2) A free railway pass issued to a member un der sub -section ( 1) shall be valid for the term of his 
office and on the expiration of such term, the pass shall be surrendered to the Secretary of the House 
of the People or the Counci l of States, as the case may be : 
Provided that where any such pass is i ssued to a new member before he takes his seat in either 
House of Parliament, he shall be entitled to use the pass for attending a session of that House for 
taking his seat therein.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2006 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -1-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1999, s. 2, for “the companion or the spouse shall be  added in computing the limit of twenty -eight 
journeys specified in the proviso to that sub -section .” (w.e.f. 18 -3-1999).  
5.  Subs. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 4, for “thirty -two journeys” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
6. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
7. Subs. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 5, for section 6 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
8. Subs. by Act 16 of 1999, s. 3, for “air -conditioned two tier” (w.e.f. 18 -3-1999).  
9. Subs. by Act 29 of 1972, s. 3, for “For the purposes of this sub -section and section 6A” (w.e.f. 9 -6-1972).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  8 
 (3) Until a member is provided with a free railway pass under sub -section (1) he shall be, and 
shall be deemed always to have been entitled to an amount equal to one  1[first class air -conditioned or 
or executive class of any train ] fare for any journey of the nature  referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4 performed by him by ra il. 
 (4) A member who on ceasing to be a member surrenders his pass shall, if he performs any return 
journey by rail of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4 , be entitled and be deemed 
always to have been entitled in respect of that journe y to an amount equal to one  1[first class air -
conditioned or executive class of any train s] fare. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be  construed as disentitling a member to any travelling 
allowances to which he is otherwise entitled under the provisions of  this Act.]  
2[6A. Free transit by Steamer .―(1) 3[Without prejudice  to the provisions of section 6 , every 
member representing the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands or the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep shall ― 
(a) be provided with one free non -transferable pass which shall entitle him to travel at any 
time by the highest class by steamer to and from any part of his constituency and any other part of 
his constituency or the nearest part in the main land of India ; and 
(b) be entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air from his usual pl ace of residence to the 
nearest airport in the main land of India 4[and back]: ] 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as absolving the member from 
payment of any diet charges payable by him during such travel.  
(2) A free steamer pass  issued to a member under sub -section ( 1) shall be valid for the term of his 
office and on the expiration of his term , the pass shall be surrendered to the Secre tary of the House of 
the People:  
Provided that where any such pass is issued to a new member be fore he takes his seat in the 
House of the People, he shall be entitled to use the pass for attending a session of that House for 
taking his seat therein.  
(3) Until a member is provided with a free steamer pass under sub -section ( 1), he shall be entitled 
to an amount equal to one fare (without diet) for the highest class for any journey of the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4 performed by him by steamer.  
(4) A member who on ceasing to be a member surrenders the steamer pass issued to him u nder 
sub-section ( 1), shall , if he performs any return journey by steamer of the nature referred to in             
sub-section ( 1) of section 4, be entitled in respect of that journey to an amount equal to one fare 
(without  diet) for the highest class.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed as disentitling a member to any travelling 
allowances to which he is otherwise entitled under the provisions of this Act.  
(6) In addition to  5[the facilities provided t o a member] under sub -section ( 1), he shall also be  
entitled ― 
(i) to one free pass for one person to accompany the member and travel by the  6[highest class] 
class] by  steamer to and fro m any part of the constituency of the member and any other part of his 
constituency or  the neares t port in the main  land of India; 7[or] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1999, s. 3, for “air -conditioned two -tier” (w.e.f. 18 -3-1999).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 1972, s. 4  (w.e.f. 9 -6-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 60 of 1988, s. 5, for the opening paragraph  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 30 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 60 of 1988, s. 5, for “a free steamer pass issued to a member” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “lowest class” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “and” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  9 
 (ii) to one free non -transferable pass for the spouse, if any, of the member to travel by the 
highest class by steamer to and fro m the usual place of residence of the member in his 
constituency and the nearest port in the main  land of India , 1[at any time b etween the Island and 
the main  land of India ; and ] 
2[(iii) to an amount equal to the fare by air either for the spouse, if any, of the member or for 
one person to accompany the member from the usual place of residence in the Island to the 
nearest airport o f the main land of India  3[and back] : 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as absolving the person accompanying 
the member or the spouse of the member from payment of any diet charges payable by such person  or 
spouse during such tra vel.] 
4[6AA . Special facility to members from Ladakh .―(1) Without prejudice  to the provisions of 
section 6 , every member who has his ordinary place of residence in the Ladakh area of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir shall be entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air for each single journey by 
air perform ed by him from any airport in Ladakh to the airport in Delhi and back at any time.  
(2) In addition to the air travel provided to a member under sub -section ( 1), he shall also be 
entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air for each single journey by air performed by the spouse, if 
any, of the member or one person to accompany such member, from any airport in Ladakh area to the 
airport in Delhi and back at any time.]  
5[6B. Travel facilities to members .―6[(1)] Without prejudice to the other provisions of this Act, 
Act, every me mber shall be entitled  to― 
(i) one free air -conditioned two -tier class railway pass for one person to accompany the 
member when he travels by  rail; and  
(ii) free travel by any railway i n India in first class air -conditioned or executive class in any 
train with the spouse, if any, of the member from any place in India to any other place in India 
and if such journey or part thereof is performed by air, from any place other than usual place  of 
residence of the member, to Delhi and back, to an amount equal to the fare by air for such journey 
or part thereof or the amount equal to the journey performed by air from the usual place of the 
residence of the member to Delhi and back , whichever is l ess:] 
7[Provided that where a member has no spouse, such member may be accompanied by any person 
person in place of the spouse, and notwithstanding anything containing in clause ( i), the person so 
accompanying shall be entitled to every facility available to the spouse .] 
8[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), the spouse of a Member 
Member shall be entitled to travel, ― 
(a) any number of times, by railway in first class air -conditioned or executive class in any 
train from the usual place of residence of the Member to Delhi and back; and  
(b) when Parliament is in session, by air or partly by air and partly by rail, from the usual 
place of residence of the Member to Delhi or back, subject to the condition that the total number 
of such air journeys shall not exceed eight in a year:  
Provided that where any such journey or part thereof is performed by air from any place other  
than the usual place of residence of the Member to Delhi and back, then, such spouse shall be entitled 
to an  amount  equal to the fare by air for such journey or part thereof, as the case may be, or to the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 60 of 1988, s. 5, for “once during every session” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Ins. by Act 30 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1989).  
4. Ins. by Act 60 of 1988, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988). 
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 1999, s. 4, for section 6B (w.e.f. 22 -3-1999).  
6. Section 6B renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 17 of 2000,  s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000).  
7. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000).  
8. Subs. by Act 37 of 2010, s. 4, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  10 
 amount equal to the journey performed by air from the usual place of residence of the Member to 
Delhi and back, whichever is less.]  
1[6C. Air travel facilities in certain circumstances .―Without prejudice to the other provisions 
of this Act, where during any part of a ye ar the usual place of residence  of a member in his 
constituency is inaccessible to or  from any place outside his constituency by road. rail or steamer due 
to climatic conditions, but there is air service between any place in his constituency, and the nearest 
place , having rail service, outsi de his constituency, such member  shall be entitled to travel to  and from 
by air from the nearest place in his constituency whe re there is air service to such  place having rail 
service : 
Provided that where the nearest place having air service is outside his  constitu ency, such member 
shall be entitled to travel to and fro m by air only from such place to the nea rest place having rail 
service. ] 
2[6D. Special facilities to blind and physically incapacitated Members .―A member who is 
blind or who is, in the opinio n of the Chairman of the Council of States or, as the case may be, the 
Speaker of the House of the People, so incapacitated physically as to require the facility of an 
attendant shall, with respect to each such journey ― 
(i) by air as is referred to in clau se (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or clause ( b) of                
sub-section  (1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or section 6 C which he performs along with an 
attendant be entitled (in addition to the allowances which he is entitled under section 4 o r section  
5 or, as the case may be , section 6 C) to an amount equal to one fare by air for such journey;  
(ii) by rail as is referred to in section 4, section 5, section 6 or section 6 B be allowed the 
facility of the one free railway pass for an attendant, t o attend such member, in the same class in 
which such member travels in lieu of one free air -conditioned two -tier class railway pass under 
clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6B.]    
3[(iii) by road as is referred to in section 4 or section 5, be entit led to an amount equal to one 
road mileage.]  
7. Allowances during short intervals between the termination of one session and the 
commencement of another session, etc .―4[Where the intervals between the adjournment of a House 
House of Parliament or, as the case may be, one sitting of a  committee and the re -assembly of that 
House or the next sitting of the committee at the same place] does not exceed  5[five days] and the 
member  concerned elects to remain at  such place during the interval , he shall be entitled to draw for 
each day of residence at such place a daily allowance at the rate specified in section 3:  
Provided that, if the member leaves such place during the interval, hi s absence from the place 
shall be treated as absence during a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of the committee, as 
the case may be, and the provisions of section 5 shall apply accordingly.  
6[8. Constituency allowance and amenities .―A member shall be entitled to such constituency 
allowance  7[office expense allowance] and to such medical facilities for himself and for members of  
his family and to such housing , telephone, water, electricity facilities or such amount in cash in lieu of  
all or any of such facilities, as may be prescribed by rules under section 9 :] 
8[Provided that where the House of the People is sooner dissolved before completing five years 
from the date appointed for its first meeting, the member of such House may be al lowed without 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 105 of 1976, s. 6, (w.e.f. 9 -9-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2000, s. 4, for section 6D  (w.e.f.7 -6-2000).  
3. Ins. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 7-5-2004). 
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 6, for “Where the interval betw een the termination of one session of a House of 
Parliament or, as the case may be, one sitting of a committee and the commencement of another session or sitting at 
the same place” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 6, for “seven days” (w. e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
6. Subs. by Act 74 of 1985, s. 5, for section 8 (w.e.f. 26-12-1985).  
7. Ins. by Act 60 of 1988, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
8. Ins. by Act 17 of 2000, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26 -4-1999).  11 
 payment, to such extent of the quota of free telephone calls or free units of electricity or free units in 
kilolitres of water, available to him for a year in which such dissolution of such House takes place, as 
remains unutilised on the date  of such dissolution, to avail during the period commencing on and from 
the date of such dissolution and ending on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
notification under section 73 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951)  has been 
issued for the constitution of subsequent House of the People subject to the condition that such 
Member shall be liable to pay for any telephone calls, in excess of the calls so allowed to be made 
during such period on the telephone provided to h im by the Government for such purpose, and units 
of electricity or kilolitres of water consumed in excess of the free electricity or kilolitres of water 
allowed:  
Provided further that where the member referred to in the first proviso becomes member of the 
subsequent House of the People as referred to be constituted in that proviso, then, he shall be entitled 
for the adjustment of the excess telephone calls, units of electricity, kilolitres of water for the payment 
of which he is liable under the first provi so against the quota of free telephone calls, units of 
electricity and kilolitres of water for which he is entitled during the first year of the duration of such 
subsequent House of the People.]  
 1[8A. Pension .―2[(1) With effect from the 18th day of May, 2 009, there shall be paid a pension 
of 3[twenty  five thousand rupees ] per mensem to every person who has served for any period as a 
Member of the Provisional Parliament or either House of Parliament:  
Provided that where a person has served as a Member of th e Provisional Parliament or either 
House of Parliament for a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional 
pension of 4[two thousand rupees ] per mensem for every year served in excess of five years.  
Explanation .―For the purpose of this sub -section, “Provisional Parliament ” shall include the 
body which functioned as the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the 
commencement of the Constitution.]  
5[(1A) The pension and additional pension to every person shall be increased after every five years 
years commencing from 1st April, 2023 on the basis of Cost Inflation Index provided under clause ( v) 
of Explanation  to section 48 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 196 1).] 
6*   *   *   *   * 
 (2) Where a ny person entitled  to pension under sub -section ( 1),― 
(i) is elected to the office of the President or Vice -President or is appointed to the office of the 
Governor of any State or the Administrator of any Union territory; or  
(ii) becomes a member of the Council of States or the House of the People or any Le gislative 
Assembly of a State or Union territory or any Legislative Council of a State or the Metropolitan 
Council of Delhi constituted under  section 3 of the Delhi Administration Act, 1966  (19 of 1966) ; 
or 
(iii) is employed on a salary under the Central G overnment or any State Gover nment or any 
corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State Gover nment, or any 
local authority or becomes otherwise entitled to any remuneration from such Government,  
corporation or local authority,  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 105 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -9-1976).  
2. Subs. by Ac t 37 of 2010, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s.144, for “twenty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs. by s . 144, ibid., for “fifteen hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
5. Ins. by s.144,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018). 
6. Sub-section ( 1A) and the Explanation  thereunder omitted by Act 40 of 2006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  12 
 such person shall not be entitled to an y pension under sub -section ( 1) for the period during which he 
continues to hold such office or as such member, or is so employed, or continues to be entitled to such 
remuneration:  
Provided that where the salary payable t o such person for holding such office or being such 
member or so employed, or where the remuneration referred to in clause ( iii) payable to such person, 
is, in either case, less than the pension pay able to him under sub -section ( 1), such person shall be 
entitled only to receive the balance as pension under that sub -section.  
1[(3) Where any person entitled to pension under sub -section ( 1) is also entitled to any other  
pension, such person shall be entitled to receive the pension under sub -section ( 1) in addi tion to such  
other pension .] 
(4) In computing the number of years, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the period during  which 
a person has served as a Minister as defined in the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952   
(58 of 1952) or 2[as an officer of Parliament] as defined in the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of 
Parliament Act,1953  (20 of 1953) , (other than the Chair man of the Council of States) 3[or as a Leader 
of the Opposition as defined in the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposi tion in Parliament 
Act, 1977  (33 of 1977) , or has served in all or any two of such capacities] by virtue of his membership 
in the House of the People or in the Council of States shall also be taken into account.]  
4[8AA . Travel facility to ex -Members .― 5[(1)] Every person who is not a sitting Member but 
has served for any period as a Member of either House of Parliament shall be, ― 
(a) with effect from the 18th day of January, 1999, entitled along with a companion to travel 
in any train by any railway in India in air -conditioned two -tier class; or  
(b) entitled to travel alone in any train by any railway in India in air -conditioned first class,  
 without payment of any charges on the basis of an authorisation issued for this purpose by the 
Secretariat of either House of Parliament , as the case may be.]  
6[(2) Every person who is not a sitting member but has served for any period as a member from 
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands or the Lakshadweep, shall be entitled to travel by the highest class 
of accommoda tion in any steamer sailing between the Andaman and Nicobar Islands or, as the case 
may be, the Lakshadweep and the main land territory of India in addition to the facilities available to 
such member under sub -section ( 1), without payment of any charges on  the basis of an authorisation 
issued for this purpose by the Secretariat of either House of Parliament.]  
7[8AB. Rounding off period of pension .―Where the period for which the pension is payable 
under this Act contains a part of a year, then, if such part is nine months or more, it shall be reckoned 
equivalent to complete one year for the purpose of payment of additional pension under sub -section  
(1) of section 8A and if such part is less than nine months, it shall be ignored.]  
8[8AC . Family pension .―(1) On the death of a member of either House of Parliament during his 
term of office, his spouse, if any, or dependent of such member shall be paid d uring the remaining 
period of life of such spouse or, as the case may be, such dependent so long as such dependent 
continues to be a dependent within the meaning of clause ( aa) of section 2, family pension equivalent 
to one -half of the pension which such m ember of Parliament would have received had he retired:  
Provided that no such family pension shall be payable to a dependent if such dependent is a sitting 
member of Parliament or is drawing pension under section 8A.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1993, s. 4, for sub -section (3) (w.e.f. 9 -6-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1977, s. 11, for “an officer of Parliament” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “or both” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 7 , for section 8AA  (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
5. Section 8AA numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 40 of 2006, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
6. Ins. by s.  8, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  
7. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004).  
8. Ins. by Act 40 of 2006, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006).  13 
 (2) The family pension payable under su b-section ( 1) shall also be payable to the spouse or 
dependent of a person who was a member of either House of Parliament or the Provisional Parliament 
at any time  1*** and died after serving as such member:  
Provided that such spouse or dependent is not dr awing any pension under this Act or is not 
entitled to draw family pension under the proviso to sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that no person shall be entitled to claim arrears of any family pension under this 
sub-section in respect of a period before t he commencement of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006  (40 of 2006) . 
Explanation .― For the purposes of this section, “Provisional Parliament ” shall include the body 
which functioned as the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India immediately before the 
commencement of the Constitution.]  
 2[8B. Advances for purchase of conveyance .―There may be paid to a member by way of re-
payable advance such sum of money not exceeding  3[four lakh rupees] as may be determin ed by rules 
made  in this behalf under section 9 for the purchase of a conveyance .] 
 9. Power to make rules .―(1) For the purpose of making rules under this section, there shall be 
constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament consisting of five  members from the 
Council of States nominated by the Chairman and ten members from the House of the People 
nominated by the Speaker.  
(2) The Joint Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall elect its Chairman and shall have 
power to regulate its pro cedure.  
4[(2A) A member of the Joint Committee shall hold office as such member for one year from the 
date of his nomination and any casual vacancy in the Joint Committee may be filled by nomination by 
the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker o f the House of the People, as the case may be.  
Explanation .― In the case of a member of a Joint Committee holding office as such immediately 
before the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament (Amendment) 
Act, 1958  (55 of 1958),  the period of one year shall be computed from the date of such 
commencement.]  
(3) The Joint Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) may  4[after consultation with the  
Central Government] make rules  to provide for all or any o f the following matters, na mely :― 
(a) the routes for the performance of any journey;  
5[(aa) the person who may be specified as dependent under sub -clause ( g) of clause ( aa) of 
section 2;]  
(b) the manner in which fractions of a day shall be dealt with for  the purpose of determining 
the da ily allowance admissible for that day;  
(c) the travelling allowance admissible where a member is provided with free transit for the 
whole or any part of a journey  4[and the reduction of the daily allowance where a member is 
provided with free board or lodg ing at the expense of the G overnment or a local authority ]; 
6[(cc) the date at which road mileage shall be paid under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of              
sub-section  (1) of section 4 ;] 
5[(ccc) the transit accommodation and the period for which su ch accommodation m ay be 
provided under section 5A;]  
                                                      
       1. The words, brackets and figures  “before the commencement  of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament (Amendment) Act, 2006  (40 of 2006) ” omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 145 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2006) . 
2. Ins. by Act 74 of 1985, s. 7 (w.e.f. 26 -12-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 2010, s. 6, for “one lakh r upees” (w.e.f. 1 -10-2010).  
4.  Ins. by Act 55 of 1958, s. 8 (w.e.f.30 -12-1958).  
5. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004)  
6. Ins. by Act 61 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -11-1982).  14 
 (d) the travelling allowance admissible where the place from which a member commences his 
journey or to which he returns is not his usual place of residence;  
1[(dd) the travelling allowance admissible in respect of journeys performed by any vessel 
where  there is no regular steamer service;  
(ddd) the travel ling and daily allowan ces admissible for journeys performed by a member in 
the course of a tour outside India undertaken in connection with his duties as  such member;]  
(e) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished by a member for the purpose of 
claimi ng any allowance under this Act;  
2[(ee) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished by any person for the purpose 
of claim ing any pension under this Act; ] 
3[(f) the constituency allowance and medical and other facilities mentioned in  section 8 and 
the amount to be paid in cash in lieu of such facilities;  
(ff) the amount which may be paid by way of repayable advance for the purcha se of 
conveyance; the rate of interest thereon and the mode of recovery of such amount and interest 
thereon; and ] 
4[(fff) to provide for carry forward of unutilised free telephone calls pertaining to any year 
beginning on or after the 1st day of April, 200 2 to any subsequent year;]  
(g) general ly for regulating the payment of 5[daily and travelling allowan ces and pension] 
under this Act ]. 
(4) Any rules made under sub -section ( 3) shall not take effect until they are approved and 
confirmed by the Chairman of t he Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People and 
are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication of the rules shall be conclusive proof that 
they have been duly made.   
10. [Validation of payment of certain travelling allowanc es.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending 
Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First Schedule . 
                                                      
 1. Ins.  by Act 55 of 1958, s. 8 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1958).  
2. Ins. by Act 105 o f 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9 -9-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 74 of 1985, s. 8, for “clause ( f)” (w.e.f.26 -12-1985)  
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 2004, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2004) .   
5. Subs. by Act 105 of 1976, s. 8, for “daily and travelling allowances” ( w.e.f. 9 -9-1976).  
--------------------------The Shillong (Rifle Range and Umlong) Cantonments Assimilation of Laws Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE SHILLONG (RIFILE RANGE AND UMLONG ) 
CANTONMENTS ASSIMILATION OF LAWS ACT, 1954  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Assimilation of laws.  
4. Removal of difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE SHILLONG (RIFILE RANGE AND UMLONG ) 
CANTONMENTS ASSIMILATION OF LAWS ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1954  
[28th May,  1954 .] 
An Act to assimilate certain laws in force in the scheduled ar eas to the laws in force in the 
Khasi and Jaintia Hills District.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Shillong (Rifle Range and 
Umlong)  Cantonments Assimilation of Laws Act, 1954.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act: — 
(a) appointed day means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act.  
(b) law means so much of any Act, Ordinance , Regulation, rule, order or bye -law as relates to 
any of the mat ters enumerated in Lists I and III in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
(c) “scheduled areas means , the areas specified in the Schedule.  
3. Assimilation of laws .—(1) All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or 
are in force in the scheduled areas shall on that day cease to be in force  in the schedule d areas except 
as respects things done or omitted to b e done before that day, and for the removal of doubts, it is 
herby declared that section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 ( 10 of 1897) shall apply in relation to 
such successor as it applies in relation to the repeal of an enactment by a Central Act.  
(2) All laws which imm ediately before the appointed day extend to, or in force in , the Khasi and 
Jaintia Hills District shall  as from that day extend to and be in force in the schedule d areas.  
4. Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition under section 3 
from one law or group of laws to another law or group of laws, the Central Government may, by order 
notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary for th e removal of the 
difficulty.  
THE  SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( c)] 
(1) The Shillong (Rifle Range) Cantonment, that is to say, the area as defined  below:— 
Note1 .— This area lies about half a mile to the west of Laban village, and  about the same distance 
south of the Umjasai river as it runs from west to east  from Cantonment Boundary Pillar No.37.  
It is nowhere conti guous with the boundaries of the Shillong Cantonment.  
Note  2.—No. 1 Boundary Pillar is situated at a bearing of 313o and at a distance of  420 feet from 
the centre of the 400o firing point on the main range through which  the Ummawlong stream flows , 
and at a bearing of 243o and at a distance of 565 feet  from centre of the 600o firing point on the same 
range , 
Magnetic  variation , when this boundary was surveyed in 1926 , was 15o west. 
 
                                                           
1. 16th August, 1954, see Gazette of India 1954, Part  II, s. 3.  3 
 Boundaries of the detached area  
 
Pillars   Bearing 
from  Magnetic  North  
   Degrees    Minutes  Direct 
Horizontal 
distance 
in feet. 
Pillar No.  1 to Pillar No.  2 The boundary runs from pillar No  1 in a                        
north -westerly direction crossing the head of a Nala, to 
Pillar No.  2, which is situated on spur across this Nala.  308 18 335 
Pillar No.  2 to Pillar No.  3 Then ce it veers slightly more north wards and 
descends a thickly wooded slope until it reaches a 
stream at pillar No.  3 317 12 391 
Pillar No.  3 to Pillar No.  4 The boundary is formed by the stream between these 
two pillars and runs in a south -westerly direction . 
Pillar No.  4 is in midstream.  219 42 830 
Pillar No. 4 to  Pillar  No. 5  Thence it turns  sharp south -east to pillar No. 5 situated 
at the foot of a steep of hill.  144 48 61 
Pillar No. 5 to Pillar  No. 6  Thence the boundary again turns sharp south -west 
with a slight diagonal ascent.  238 12 113 
Pillar No. 6 to Pillar No. 7  From Pillar No. 6 the slight diagonal ascent is continue  
but almost due south.  187 24 164 
Pillar No. 7 to Pillar No. 8  The boundary thence continues in the same line for a 
distance of 40 Per feet whence it curves south -west to 
Pillar No. 8 situated in the center of a Nala  50 feet to 
the south -east of the south corner of a disused range 
butt. 212 6 208 
Pillar No. 8 to Pillar No. 9  Thence to the south corner of this butt and along the 
Pillar No. 9 in the centre of the south -west side of           
the butt . 324 48 138 
Pillar No. 9 to Pillar No. 10  The boun dary thence turns a right angle to run south -
west straight up a steep slope for a distance of 150 
feet, thence turning south to follow a spur for 180 feet 
upto Pillar No. 10 . 205 48 300 
Pillar No. 10 to Pillar No. 11  Thence under the brow of this spur in a  curve, for 95 
feet to the south -east and 60 feet almost south . 141 54 150 
Pillar  No. 11 to Pillar No. 12  Thence south -west to Pillar No. 12 situated on the 
crest of the spur . 238 54 120 
Pillar No 12 to Pillar No. 13  The boundary between these two Pillars follow s up the 
same spur in a south -easterly direction.  225 30 391 
Pillar No. 13 to Pillar  No. 14  Thence the boundary turns south -east and runs down 
to a Nala.  159 30 231 
Pillar No.  14 to Pillar No. 15  Thence in the same lin e to a spur across the Nala . 154 18 268 4 
 Pillars   Bearing 
from  Magnetic  North  
  Degrees    Minutes  Direct 
Horizontal 
distance 
in feet.   
Pillar No . 15 to Pillar No. 16  Thence in the same line across this spur to the south 
slope of it.  152 30 320 
Pillar No. 16 to Pillar No. 17 The boundary turns Cast from Pillar No. 16 along the 
south slope of the spur.  77 12 235 
Pillar No. 17 to Pillar No. 18  In the same line down the south -east slope of this spur.  82 36 210 
Pillar No. 18 to Pillar No. 19  The boundary here veers north -east, descends a steep 
slope to cross a Nala down which the Wah Jalynnoh 
branch of the Ummawlong stream flows and ascends a 
steep slope to the north -east of this stream to Pillar    
No. 19 which is situated in a cleaning in a t hick wood.  75 54 850 
Pillar No. 19 to Pillar No. 20  Thence almost in the same line but slightly more 
northerly along this cleaning to Pillar No. 20 on the 
edge of a track running south -west from the southern 
extremity of Kench ’s Trace.  70 42 464 
Pillar No. 20 to Pillar No. 21  Thence north -east to Pillar No. 21 which is situated to 
the east of the southern extremity of Kench ’s Trace.  42 48 363 
Pillar No. 21 to Pillar No. 22  The Boundary runs in a north westerly direction along 
Kench’s Trace to Pillar No. 21A; thence in a direct 
line to Pillar No. 21 B situated on Kench ’s Trace; 
thence along Kench ’s Trace through Pillar No. 21C to 
Pillar No. 21D; thence in adirect line to Pillar No. 22 
which is situated on the west bank of the Ummawlong  
stream just north of the 20 yards firing point of the 
rifle range.  326 30 680 
Pillar No.  22 to Pillar No. 23  The west bank of the Ummawlong stream forms the 
boundary between these two pillars.  5 30 1,440  
Pillars No. 23 to Pillar No. 24  The boundary hence turns  abruptly and runs south -
west on to the lower crest of a spur. 203 42 200 
Pillar No. 24 to Pillar  No. 25  Thence in the same line up and across a Nala running 
to the south -east of this spur.  203 42 200 
Pillar No. 25 to Pillar No. 26  Thence in the same line up the side of a spur to the 
south -east of this Nala, to Pillar No. 1.  203 12 240 
(2) The Shi llong (Umlong) Cantonment, that is to say, the area as defined  below:— 
Area  ...... 1,962 acres.  
Breamar  East Boundary Pillar No.1 or Contonment Boundary Pillar No . 29 is situated  on the left 
bank of the Wah Sohkh lur at a point 300 feet, north -west of   Cantonment boundary Pillar No.  30 on a 
True Bearing of 308o II from Cantonment Boundary Pillar No.  30. 5 
 (MagneticVariation .       .        .      .      .        .     .     .  55’ west in 1931.)  
 
Description  Forward bearings 
from true North  
 Degrees  Minutes  Horizontal 
distance  in 
feet. 
From Braemar  Boundary Pillar No. 1 which is also Cantonment Boundary Pillar No. 29 
the boundary runs across a stream in a north -westerly direction in a straight line along the 
boundary of private land to Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 2 . 294 30 165 
From Braemar  Boundary Pillar No. 2 the boundary runs in a westerly direction along the 
boundary of private land to the bed of the dry nallah at a point 10 feet north of Braemar 
Pillar No. 3 . 258 05 800 
From Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 3 the boundary runs in a westerl y direction along the 
bed of dry nallah to Braemar  Boundary Pillar No. 4 which is situated near the head of 
this dry nallah . 252 28 800 
From Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 4 the boundary runs in a southerly direction for a 
distance of about 70 feet to a private cart road, thence along the east side of this road to 
Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 5 which is situated on a left bank of a stream, where the 
road crosses the stream.  184 53 580 
From Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 5 the boundary runs in a south -westerly direction 
across the stream and the cart road up the hill in a straight line to Braemar Boundary 
Pillar No. 6 alongside the Cantonment Boundary Pillar No. 34.  216 50 240 
From Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 6 the boundary runs in an easterly direction along the 
Cantonment Boundary to Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 7 which is situated where the 
road cross es the Wah Sohk hlur on its right bank approximately 46 feet west of 
Cantonmen t Boundary Pillar No. 33 situated on the hillside.  97 05 705 
From Brae mary  Boundary Pillar No. 7 the Boundary runs in a north -easterly direction 
along the Cantonment Boundary which is the right ba nk of the Wah So hkhlur (Wah 
Lindoh) stream to Braemar  Boundary Pillar No. 8 which is situated on the right bank 
where the river bends left handed below Cantonment Boundary Pillar No. 30.  36 30 1,150 
From Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 8 in a northwesterly  direction along the Cantonment 
Boundary which is the right bank of the Wah Sokhlur (Wah Lindoh) stream and crossing 
it opposite Braemar Boundary Pillar No. 1. 292 30 195 
 
 
   
 
 
 
--------------------------The Special Marriage Act, 1954--------------------------
1 
 THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent  and commencement .  
2. Definitions.  
3. Marriage Officers.  
CHAPTER  II 
SOLEMNIZATION OF SPECIAL MARRIAGES  
 4. Conditions relating to sol emnization of special marriages . 
 5. Notice of intended marriage.  
 6. Marriage Notice Book and publication.  
 7. Objection to marriage.  
 8. Procedure on receipt of objection.  
 9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect of inquiries.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad.  
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses.  
12. Place and form of solemnization.  
13. Certificate of marriage.  
14. New notice when marriage not solemnized within three months.  
CHAPTER  III 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES CELE BRATED IN OTHER FORMS  
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms.  
16. Procedure for registration.  
17. Appeals from orders under section 16.  
18. Effect of registration of marriage under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER  IV 
CONSEQUENCES OF MARRIAGE UNDER TH IS ACT 
19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family.  
20. Rights and disabilities not affected by Act.  
21. Succession to property of parties married under Act.  
21A. Special provision in certain cases.  
 
 2 
 CHAPTER  V 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
SECTIONS  
22. Restitution of conjugal rights . 
23. Judicial separation . 
CHAPTER  VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
24. Void marriages.  
25. Voidable marriages.  
26. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.  
27. Divorce.  
27A. Alt ernative relief in divorce proceedings.  
28. Divorce by mutual consent.  
29. Restriction on petitions for divorce during first one year after marriage.  
30. Remarriage of divorced persons.  
CHAPTER  VII 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE  
31. Court to which petition sho uld be made.  
32. Contents and verification of petitions.  
33. Proceedings to be in camera  and may not be printed or published.  
34. Duty of court in passing decrees.  
35. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings.  
36. Alimony pendente lite.  
37. P ermanent alimony and maintenance.  
38. Custody of children.  
39. Appeals from decrees and orders.  
39A. Enforcement of decrees and orders.  
40. Application of Act 5 of 1908.  
40A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases.  
40B. Special provisions relating to  trial and disposal of petitions under the Act.  
 40C. Documentary evidence.  
41. Power of High Court to make rules regulating procedure.  
CHAPTER  VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Saving.  
43. Penalty on married person marrying again under this Act.  
44. Punishment of bi gamy.  3 
 SECTIONS  
45. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate.  
46. Penalty for wrongful action of Marriage Officer.  
47. Marriage Certificate Book to be open to inspection.  
48. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records.  
49. Correction of errors.  
50. Power to make rules.  
51. Repeals and savings.  
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
 THE SPECIAL MARRIAGE ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 43 OF 19541 
[9th October , 1954 .] 
An Act to provide a special form of marriage in certain cases, for the registration of such and 
certain other marriages and for divorce.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Special Marriage           
Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which  this Act extends who are 2[in the State of Jammu  
and Kashmir].  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,― 
4*   *   *   *        * 
(b) “degrees of prohibited relationship ”-a man and any of the persons mentioned in Part I of the 
First Schedule and a woman and any of the persons mentioned in Part II of the said Schedule are 
within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
Explanation I .―Relationship includes, ― 
(a) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;  
(b) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;  
(c) relationship by adoption as well as by blood;  
and all terms of relationship  in this Act shall be construed accordingly.  
Explanation II .―“Full blood ” and “half blood ”―two persons are said to be related to each other by 
full blood when they are descended from a common ancestor by the same wife and by half blood when 
they are descen ded from a common ancestor but by different wives.  
Explanation III .―“Uterine blood ”―two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood 
when they are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands.  
Explanation IV .―In Explanation s II and III, “ancestor ” includes the father and “ancestress ” the 
mother;  
5*    *   *   *     * 
(d) “district ” in relation to a Marriage Officer, means the area for which he is appointed as such 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
6[(e) “district court ” means, in any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area, the principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and Sche dule I and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, Section 3 and Schedule I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for “outside the said territories ” (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  
3.  1 st January, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 3606, dated 17th Decemb er, 1954, published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, P art II, Section 3.  
4. Omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29.  
5. Omitted by s. 29, ibid.  
6. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 20,  for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  5 
 may be specified by the State Government by notificat ion in the Official Gazette as having 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act;]  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
1[(g) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator the reof.] 
3. Marriage Officers .―(1) For the purposes of this Act, the State Government may, by, notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint one or more Marriage Officers for the whole or any part of the State.  
2[(2) For the purposes of this Act, in its application to citizens of India  domiciled in the territories to 
which this Act extends who are in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify such officers of the Central Government as it may think fit to 
be the Marriage O fficers for the State or any part thereof.]  
CHAPTER  II 
SOLEMNIZATION OF SPECIAL MARRIAGES  
4. Conditions relating to solemnization of special marriages .―Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force relating to the solemnization of marriages, a 
marriage between any two persons may be solemnized under this Act, if at the time of the marriage the 
following conditions are fu lfilled, namely: ― 
(a) neither party has a spouse living;  
3[(b) neither party ― 
(i) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or  
(ii) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or  
(iii) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity  4* * *;] 
(c) the male has completed the age of twenty -one years and the female the age of eighteen y ears;  
5[(d) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  
Provided that where a custom governing at least one of the parties permits of a marriage between 
them, such marriage may be solemnized, notwithstanding that they are within the degrees of 
prohibited relationship; and]  
6[(e) where the marriage is solemnized in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, both parties are 
citizens of India domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends].  
7[Explanation .―In this section, “custom ”, in rela tion to a person belonging to any tribe, community, 
group or family, means any rule which the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf as applicable to members of that tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided  that no such notification shall be issued in relation to the members of any tribe, community, 
group or family, unless the State Government is satisfied — 
(i) that such rule has been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time among those 
members;  
(ii) that such rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A .O. (No. 3) Order, 1956 for cl ause ( g). 
2. Subs . by Act 33  of 1969, s.  29, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).    
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 21, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. The words “or epilepsy ” omitted by Act 39 of 1999 , s. 4  (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
5. Subs. by A ct 32 of 1963, s. 2, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 22 -9-1963).    
6. Subs. by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  
7.  Ins. by Act 32 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -9-1963).  
 6 
 (iii) that such rule, if applicable only to a family, has not been discontinued by the family.]  
5.  Notice of intended marriage .―When a marriage is intended to be solemniz ed under this Act, the 
parties to the marriage shall give notice thereof in writing in the form specified in the Second Schedule to 
the Marriage Officer of the district in which at least one of the parties to the marriage has resided for a 
period of not le ss than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which such notice is given.  
 6. Marriage Notice Book and publication .―(1) The Marriage Officer shall keep all notices given 
under section 5 with the records of his office and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of every such 
notice in a book prescribed for that purpose, to be called the Marriage Notice Book, and such boo k shall 
be open for inspection at all reasonable times, without fee, by any person desirous of inspecting the same.  
(2) The Marriage Officer shall cause every such notice to be published by affixing a copy thereof to 
some conspicuous place in his office.  
(3) Where either of the parties to an intended marriage is not permanently residing within the local 
limits of the district of the Marriage Officer to whom the notice has been given under section 5, the 
Marriage Officer shall also cause a copy of such notic e to be transmitted to the Marriage Officer of the 
district within whose limits such party is permanently residing, and that Marriage Officer shall thereupon 
cause a copy thereof to be affixed to some conspicuous place in his office.  
7. Objection to marria ge.―(1) Any person may, before the expiration of thirty days from the date 
on which any such notice has been published under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, object to the marriage on 
the ground that it would contravene one or more of the conditions specified in  section 4.  
(2) After the expiration of thirty days from the date on which notice of an intended marriage has been 
published under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, the marriage may be solemnized, unless it has been 
previously objected to under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The nature of the objection shall be recorded in writing by the Marriage Officer in the Marriage 
Notice Book, be read over and explained if necessary, to the person making the objection and shall be 
signed by him or on his behalf.  
 8. Procedure on re ceipt of objection .―(1) If an objection is made under section 7 to an intended 
marriage, the Marriage Officer shall not solemnize the marriage until he has inquired into the matter of 
the objection and is satisfied that it ought not to prevent the solemniz ation of the marriage or the objection 
is withdrawn by the person making it; but the Marriage Officer shall not take more than thirty days from 
the date of the objection for the purpose of inquiring into the matter of the objection and arriving at a 
decisi on. 
(2) If the Marriage Officer upholds the objection and refuses to solemnize the marriage, either party 
to the intended marriage may, within a period of thirty days from the date of such refusal, prefer an appeal 
to the district court within the local li mits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has his office, and 
the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the Marriage Officer shall act in 
conformity with the decision of the court.  
9. Powers of Marriage Officers in respect  of inquiries .―(1) For the purpose of any inquiry under 
section 8, the Marriage Officer shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath;  
(b) discovery and inspection;  
(c) compelling the production of documents;  
(d) reception of evidence of affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
and any p roceeding before the Marriage Officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  7 
 Explanation .―For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of any person to give evidence, the local 
limits of the jurisdiction of the Marriage Officer shall be the local limits of his district.  
(2) If it appears to the Marriage Officer that the objection made to an int ended marriage is not 
reasonable and has not been made in good faith he may impose on the person objecting costs by way of 
compensation not exceeding one thousand rupees and award the whole or any part thereof, to the parties 
to the intended marriage, and any order for costs so made may be executed in the same manner as a 
decree passed by the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Marriage Officer has 
his office.  
10. Procedure on receipt of objection by Marriage Officer abroad .―Where an objection is made 
under section 7 to a Marriage Officer  1[in the State of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of an intended 
marriage in the State], and the Marriage Officer, after making such inquiry into the matter as he thinks fit, 
entertains a doub t in respect thereof, he shall not solemnize the marriage but shall transmit the record with 
such statement respecting the matter as he thinks fit to the Central Government, and the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry into the matter and after ob taining such advice as it thinks fit, 
shall give its decision thereon in writing to the Marriage Officer who shall act in conformity with the 
decision of the Central Government.  
11. Declaration by parties and witnesses .―Before the marriage is solemnized the parties and three 
witnesses shall, in the presence of the Marriage Officer, sign a declaration in the form specified in the 
Third Schedule to this Act, and the declaration shall be countersigned by the Marriage Office r. 
12. Place and form of solemnization .―(1) The marriage may be solemnized at the office of the 
Marriage Officer, or at such other place within a reasonable distance therefrom as the parties may desire, 
and upon such conditions and the payment of such addi tional fees as may be prescribed.  
(2) The marriage may be solemnized in any form which the parties may choose to adopt:  
Provided that it shall not be complete and binding on the parties unless each party says to the other in 
the presence of the Marriage Of ficer and the three witnesses and in any language understood by the 
parties, ―“I, (A), take the (B), to be my lawful wife (or husband) ”. 
13. Certificate of marriage .―(1) When the marriage has been solemnized, the Marriage Officer 
shall enter a certificate thereof in the form specified in the Fourth Schedule in a book to be kept by him 
for that purpose and to be called the Marriage Certificate Book and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and the three witnesses.  
(2) On a certificate being entered in the Marriage Certificate Book by the Marriage Officer, th e 
Certificate shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the fact that a marriage under this Act has been 
solemnized and that all formalities respecting the signatures of witnesses have been complied with.  
14. New notice when marriage not solemnized with in three months .―Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within three calendar months from the date on which notice thereof has been given to the 
Marriage Officer as required by section 5, or where an appeal has been filed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8,  within three months from the date of the decision of the district court on such appeal or, where 
the record of a case has been transmitted to the Central Government under section 10, within three months 
from the date of decision of the Central Government,  the notice and all other proceedings arising 
therefrom shall be deemed to have lapsed, and no Marriage Officer shall solemnize the marriage until a 
new notice has been given in the manner laid down in this Act.  
CHAPTER  III 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES CELEBR ATED IN OTHER FORMS  
15. Registration of marriages celebrated in other forms .―Any marriage celebrated, whether 
before or after the commencement of this Act, other than a marriage solemnized under the  Special 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 33 of 1969, s . 29, for “outside the territories to which this Act extends in respect of an intended marriage outside 
the said territories ” (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).  8 
 Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872) , or under this Act , may be registered under this Chapter by a Marriage 
Officer in the territories to which this Act extends if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: ― 
(a) a ceremony of marriage has been performed between the parties and they have .been living 
toget her as husband and wife ever since;  
(b) neither party has at the time of registration more than one spouse living;  
(c) neither party is an idiot or a lunatic at the time of registration;  
(d) the parties have completed the age of twenty -one years at the tim e of registration;  
(e) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship:  
Provided that in the case of a marriage celebrated before the commencement of this Act, this 
condition shall be subject to any law, custom or usage having the force o f law governing each of them 
which permits of a marriage between the two; and  
(f) the parties have been residing within the district of the Marriage Officer for a period of not less 
than thirty days immediately preceding the date on which the application i s made to him for 
registration of the marriage.  
16. Procedure for registration .―Upon receipt of an application signed by both the parties to the 
marriage for the registration of their marriage under this Chapter the Marriage Officer shall give public 
notice thereof in such manner as may be prescribed and after allowing a period of th irty days for 
objections and after hearing any objection received within that period, shall, if satisfied that all the 
conditions mentioned in section 15 are fulfilled, enter a certificate of the marriage in the Marriage 
Certificate Book in the form specif ied in the Fifth Schedule, and such certificate shall be signed by the 
parties to the marriage and by three witnesses.  
17. Appeals from orders under section 16 .―Any person aggrieved by any order of a Marriage 
Officer refusing to register a marriage under this Chapter may, within thirty days from the date of the 
order, appeal against that order to the district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction th e 
Marriage Officer has his office, and the decision of the district court on such appeal shall be final, and the 
Marriage Officer to whom the application was made shall act in conformity with such decision.  
18. Effect of registration of marriage under this  Chapter .―Subject to the provisions contained in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 24, where a certificate of marriage has been finally entered in the Marriage 
Certificate Book under this Chapter, the marriage shall, as from the date of such entry, be deemed to be a 
marri age solemnized under this Act, and all children born after the date of the ceremony of marriage 
(whose names shall also be entered in the Marriage Certificate Book) shall in all respects be deemed to be 
and always to have been the legitimate children of th eir parents:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as conferring upon any such 
children any rights in or to the property of any person other than their parents in any case where, but for 
the passing of this Act, such children w ould have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such 
rights by reason of their not being the legitimate children of their parents.  
CHAPTER  IV 
CONSEQUENCES OF MARRIAGE UNDER THIS ACT  
19. Effect of marriage on member of undivided family .―The marriage  solemnized under this Act 
of any member of an undivided family who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religions shall be 
deemed to effect his severance from such family.  
20. Rights and disabilities not affected by Act .―Subject to the provisions of section 19, any person 
whose marriage is solemnized under this Act shall have the same rights and shall be subject to the same 
disabilities in regard to the right of succession to any property as a person to whom the Caste Disabilities 
Removal Act, 1850  (21 of 1850), applies.  
21. Succession to property of parties married under Act .―Notwithstanding any restrictions 
contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), with respect to its application to members of 9 
 certain communities, succession to the property or any person whose marriage is solemnized under this 
Act and to the property of the issue of such marriage shall be regulated by the provisions of the said Act 
and for the purposes of this Act shall have effect as if Chapter III of Part V (Special Rules for Parsi 
Intestate s) had been omitted therefrom.  
1[21A. Special provi sion in certain cases .―Where the marriage is solemnized under this Act of any 
person who professes the Hindu, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion with a person who professes the Hindu, 
Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina religion, section 19 and section 21 shall not apply and so much of sect ion 20 as 
creates a disability shall also not apply.]  
CHAPTER  V 
RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
 22. Restitution of conjugal rights .―When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of th e other, the aggrieved party may apply by petition to the district 
court for restitution of conjugal rights, and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the application shoul d not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
2[Explanation .―Where a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of prov iding reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn 
from the society.]  
 23. Judicial separation .―(1) A petition for judicial s eparation may be presented to the district court 
either by the husband or the wife, ― 
(a) on any of the grounds specified 3[in sub -section ( 1) 4[and sub -section ( 1A)] of section 27 ] on 
which a petition for divorce might have been presented; or  
(b) on the gr ound of failure to comply with a decree for  restitution of conjugal rights;  
and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition , and that there is no 
legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judi cial separation accordingly.  
(2) Where the court grants a decree for judicial separation, it shall be no longer obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being sat isfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so.  
CHAPTER  VI 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
24. Void marriages .―(1) Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be null and vo id 5[and may, 
on a petition presented by either party thereto against the other party, be so declared] by a decree of 
nullity if ― 
(i) any of the conditions specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 4 has not been 
fulfilled; or  
(ii) the responde nt was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the institution of 
the suit.  
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any marriage deemed to be solemnized under this 
Act within the meaning of section 18, but the registration of a ny such marriage under Chapter III may be 
declared to be of no effect if the registration was in contravention of any of the conditions specified in 
clauses ( a) to ( e) of section 15:  
                                                      
1. Ins . by Act 68 of 1976, s . 22 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
2. Added by s. 23, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1970, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).  
4. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “and may be so declared ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   10 
 Provided that no such declaration shall be ma de in any case where an appe al has been preferred under 
section 17 and the decision of the district court has become final.  
25. Voidable marriages .―Any marriage solemnized under this Act shall be voidable and may be 
annulled by a decree of nullity if, ― 
(i) the marriage has not been c onsummated owing to the wilful refusal of the respondent to 
consummate the marriage; or  
(ii) the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner; or  
(iii) the consent of either party to the marriage was obtained  by coercion or fraud, as defined in 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872):  
Provided that, in the case specified in clause ( ii), the court shall not grant a decree unless it is 
satisfied, ― 
(a) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;  
(b) that proceedings were instituted within a year from the date of the marriage; and  
(c) that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has not taken pla ce since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of the grounds for a decree:  
Provided further that in the case specified in clause ( iii), the court shall not grant a decree if, ― 
(a) proceedings have not been instituted within one year after the c oercion had ceased or, as the 
case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or  
(b) the petitioner has with his or her free consent lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband and wife after the coercion had ceased or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered.  
1[26. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages .―(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
is null and void under section 24, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if the 
marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the commencement 
of the Marria ge Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree of nullity is 
granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to be void 
otherwise than on a petition under this Act.  
(2) Where a decree of n ullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 25, any child 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it has been dissolved inst ead of being annulled, shall be deemed 
to be their legitimate child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or w hich is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 25, 
any rights in or to the property of any person, other than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such r ights by 
reason of not his being the legitimate child of his parents.]  
 27. Divorce .―2[(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, a petition 
for divorce may be presented to the district court either by the husband or the w ife on the ground that the 
respondent ― 
3[(a) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or  
(b) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 26, for section 26 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Section 27 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 2 9 of 1970,  s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).   
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27, for clauses ( a) and ( b).   11 
 (c) is undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for seven years or more for an offence as defined in 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
1*   *     *                      *   * 
(d) has since the sole mnization of the marriage treated the petitioner with cruelty; or  
2[(e) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably  be 
expected to live with the respondent.  
Explanation .―In this clause, ― 
(a) the expression “mental disorder ” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes sc hizophrenia;  
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder ” means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub -normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the respondent, and whether or not it requires or 
is susceptible to medical treatment; or  
(f) has been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or ] 
3*   *   *   *  * 
 (h) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who 
would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive;  4* * * 
5[Explanation .―In this sub -section, the expression “desertion ” means desertion of the petitioner by 
the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or against the wish of 
such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the marriage, and its 
grammatic al variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7*   *   *   *   * 
8[(1A) A wife may also present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground, ― 
(i) that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or 
bestiality;  
(ii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 (78 of 
1956), or in a proceeding under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (or 
under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898) (5 of 1898), a decree 
or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband awarding maintenance to the wife 
notwithst anding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such decree or order, 
cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards.]  
                                                      
1. The Proviso omitted by Act 68 of 1976 , s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for clauses ( e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
3. Clause ( g) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).  
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. The words “and by the wife on the ground that her husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, 
sodomy or bestiality ” omitted by s. 27 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Omitted by Act 29 of 1970), s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1970).    
8. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   12 
 1[(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made thereunder, either party to a marriage, 
whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the Special Marriage (Amendment) Act, 1970 
(29 of 1970), may present a petition for divorce to the district court on the ground ― 
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of one year or upwards after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding to 
which they were parties; or  
(ii) that there has been no restitution of conjugal rights as between the parties t o the marriage for a 
period of one year or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.]  
2[27A. Alternative relief in divorce proceedings .―In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition 
for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, except insofar as the petition is founded on the ground 
mentioned in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 27, the court may, if it considers it just so  to do 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation.]  
28. Divorce by mutual consent .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules made 
thereunder, a petition for divorce may be presented to th e district court by both the parties together on the 
ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more, that they have not been able 
to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) 3[On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months] after the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime , the district court shall, on being satisfied, after 
hearing the parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
under this Act, and that the averments in the petition are true, pass a decree declaring the marri age to be 
dissolved with effect from the date of the decree.  
29. Restriction on petitions for divorce during first one year after marriage .―(1) No petition for 
divorce shall be presented to the district court  4[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
year has passed] since the date of entering the certificate of marriage in the Marriage Certificate Book:  
Provided that the d istrict court may, upon application being made to it, allow a petition to be 
presented  5[before one year has passed] on the ground that the case is one of exceptional hardship 
suffered by the petitioner or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respon dent, but if it appears to the 
district court at the hearing of the petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any 
misrepresentation or concealment of the nature of the case, the district court may, if it pronounces a 
decree, do  so subject to the condition that the decree shall not have effect until after the   6[expiry of one 
year] from the date of the marriage or may dismiss the petition, without prejudice to any petition, which 
may be brought after the  7[expiration of the said one year] upon the same, or substantially the same, facts 
as those proved in support of the petition so dismissed.  
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 8[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the district court shall have regard to the 
interests of any children of the marriage, and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties before the expiration of the  9[said one y ear]. 
30. Remarriage of divorced persons .―Where a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of divorce , 
and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or if there is such a right of appeal, the time for 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1970, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12-8-1970). 
2. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
  3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than one year  after the date of the  
presentation of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than  two years ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “unless at the date of the presentation of the petition three years have passed ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for  “before three years have passed ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “expiry of three years ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
7. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “expiration of the said three years ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
8. Subs . by s. 30, ibid.,for “expiration of the three years ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
9. Subs . by s. 30, ibid., for “said three years ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   13 
 appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been  presented but has 
been dismissed  1* * * either party to the marriage may marry again.  
CHAPTER  VII 
JURISDICTION AND PRO CEDURE  
31. Court to which petition should be made .―2[(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI 
shall be presented to the district court within the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction -- 
(i) the marriage was solemnized; or  
(ii) the respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition resides; or  
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together; or  
3[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, where she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or]  
(iv) the petitioner is residing at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time residing outside the t erritories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if 
he were alive.]  
(2) Without prejudice to any jurisdiction exercisable by the court under sub -section  (1), the district 
court may, by virtue of this sub -section, entertain a petition by a wife domiciled in the territories to which 
this Act extends for nullity of marriage or for divorce if she is resident in the said territories and has been 
ordinarily res ident therein for a period of three years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition and the husband is not resident in the said territories.  
32. Contents and verification of petitions .―(1) Every petition under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall 
state, as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded, and 
shall also state that there is no collusion between, the petitioner and the other party to the marriage.  
(2) The statements contained in every such p etition shall be verified by the petitioner or some other 
competent person in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at the hearing, be 
referred to as evidence.  
 4[33. Proceedings to be in camera  and may not be printed or publ ished.―(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera  and it shall not be lawful for any person to print or publish 
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or publi shed with the previous permission of the Court.   
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of the provisions contained in                
sub-section ( 1), he shall be punishable with fine which may e xtend to one thousand rupees.]  
34. Duty of court in passing decrees .―(1) In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, 
whether defended or not, if the court is satisfied that, ― 
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists; and  
(b) 5[where the petition is founded on the ground specified in clause ( a) of sub -section (1) of 
section 27, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connived at or condoned the act 
of sexual intercourse referred to therein], or, where the ground of the petition is cruelty,  
the petitioner has not in any manner condoned the cru elty; and  
(c) when divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been obtained 
by force, fraud or undue influence; and  
                                                      
1. The words “and one year has elapsed thereafter but not sooner ” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 31, (w.e. f. 27-5-1976).   
2.  Subs . by s. 32, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3.  Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
4. Subs . by Act 68 of 1976,  s. 33, for section 33  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
5. Subs . by s. 34, ibid. for “where the ground of the petition is adultery, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or 
connived at or condoned the adultery ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).    14 
 (d) the petition is not presented or prosecuted in collusion with the respondent; and  
(e) there has not been an y unnecessary or improper delay in instituting the proceedings; and  
(f) there is no other legal ground why the relief should not be granted;  
then, and in such a case, but not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly.  
(2) Before proceeding  to grant any relief under this Act it shall be the duty of the court in the first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about a reconciliation bet ween the parties:  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause ( c), clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g) and clause ( h) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 27 .] 
2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and r efer the matter to any person named by the parties in this behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the cour t shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to the report.  
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.]  
 3[35. Relief for res pondent in divorce and other proceedings .―In any proceeding for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also ma ke a counter -claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground, and if the petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is  proved,  the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had p resented a petition seeking such relief on that ground.]  
36. Alimony pendente lit e.―Where in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI it appears to 
the district court that the wife has no independent income sufficient for her support and the necessary 
expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife, order the husba nd to pay to her the 
expenses of the proceeding, and weekly or monthly during the proceeding such sum as having regard to 
the husband ’s income, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.  
 4[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of t he proceeding and such weekly or 
monthly sum during the proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the husband.]  
37. Permanent alimony and maintenance .―(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under Chapter V 
or Chapter VI may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent to the decree, on 
application made to it for the purpose, order that the husband shall secure to the wife for her maintena nce 
and support, if necessary, by a charge on the husband ’s property such gross sum or such monthly or 
periodical payment of money for a term not exceeding her life, as, having regard to her own property, if 
any, her husband ’s property and ability  5[the co nduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case], it 
it may seem to the court to be just.  
(2) If the district court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any 
time after it has made an order under sub -section ( 1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify 
or rescind any such order in such manner as it may seem to the court to be just.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 68 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by  s. 35, ibid., for section 35 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 6 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).    
5.  Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for “and the conduct of the parties ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  15 
 (3) If the district court is satisfied that the wife in whose favour an order has been  made under this 
section has re married or is not leading a chaste life,  1[it may, at the instance of the husband vary, modify 
or rescind any such order and in such manner as the court may deem just.]  
38. Custody of children .―In any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI the district court may, 
from time to time, pass such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may seem to it to 
be just and proper with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of  minor children, consistently 
with their wishes wherever possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by  petition for the 
purpose, make, revoke, suspend or vary, from time to time, all such orders and provisions with respect to 
the custody, mainte nance and education of such children as might have been made by such decree or 
interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree were still pending.  
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor ch ildren, 
during the proceeding, under Chapter V or Chapter VI, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within 
sixty days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.]  
3[39. Appeals from decrees and orders .―(1) All decrees made by the court in any  proceeding under 
Chapter V or Chapter VI shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable as decrees of the 
court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and such appeal shall lie to the court to which 
appeals ordinarily  lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act, under section 37 or section 38 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the 
exercise of its original jurisdiction.  
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a  4[period of ninety days] from the date 
of the decree or order.  
 39A. Enforcement of decrees and orders .―All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders 
of the court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction for the time being are enforced.]  
 40. Application of Act 5 of 1908 .―Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, and to such 
rules as the High Court may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908).  
5[40A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases .―(1) Where ― 
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to the district court having jurisdiction, by a party 
to the marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 23 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 27, and  
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for decree for judicial separation under section 23, or for decree of divorce under section 27 
on any ground whether in the same district court, or in a different district court, in the same State or in 
a different State, the petition shall be dealt with as specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) In a case where sub -section ( 1) applies, ― 
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 36, for “it shall rescind th e order ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).   
2. The proviso i ns. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 7 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).   
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 37, for section 39  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976) .  
4. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 3, for “period of thirty days ” (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  16 
 (b) if the petitions are presented to different district courts, the petitions presented later shall be 
transferre d to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the district court in which the earlier petition was presented.  
(3) In a case where clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) applies,  the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceeding 
from the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code.   
40B. Special provisions relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act .―(1) The trial of 
a petition u nder this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day, until its conclusions, unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necess ary for reasons to be recorded.  
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent.  
(3) Ever y appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing within three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent.  
40C. Documentary evidence .―Notwithstanding anything  contained in any enactment to the 
contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petition under 
this Act on the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered. ] 
41. Power of High Court to make rules regulatin g procedure .―(1) The High Court shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules consistent with the provisions contained in this Act 
and the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), as it may consider expedient for the purpose of 
carrying into effect  the provisions of Chapters V, VI and VII.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules shall 
provide for, ― 
(a) the impleading by the petitioner of the adulterer as a co -respondent on a petition for divo rce 
on the ground of adultery, and the circumstances in which the petitioner may be execused from doing 
so; 
(b) the awarding of damages against any such co -respondent ; 
(c) the intervention in any proceeding under Chapter V or Chapter VI by any person not a lready a 
party thereto;  
(d) the form and contents of petitions for nullity of marriage or for divorce and the payment of 
costs incurred by parties to such petitions; and  
(e) any other matter for which no provision or no sufficient provision is made in this  Act, and for 
which provision is made in the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869).  
CHAPTER  VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
42. Saving.―Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the validity of any marriage not solemnized 
under its provisions; nor shall this Act be dee med directly or indirectly to affect the validity of any mode 
of contracting marriage.  
43. Penalty on married person marrying again under this Act .―Save as otherwise provided in 
Chapter III, every person who, being at the time married, procures, a marriage  of himself or herself to be 
solemnized under this Act shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 494 or section 
495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), as the case may be, and the marriage so solemnized shall be 
void.  17 
 44. Punishment of bigamy .―Every person whose marriage is solemnized under this Act and who, 
during the lifetime of his or her wife or husband, contracts any other marriage shall be subject to the 
penalties provided in section 494 and section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 186 0), for the offence 
of marrying again during the lifetime of a husband or wife, and the marriage so contracted shall be void.  
45. Penalty for signing false declaration or certificate .―Every person making, signing or attesting 
any declaration or certificate  required by or under this Act containing a statement which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true shall be guilty of the offence 
described in sectio n 199 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  
46. Penalty  for wrongful action of Marriage Officer .―Any Marriage Officer who knowingly and 
wilfully solemnizes a marriage under this Act, ― 
(1) without publishing a notice regarding such marriage as required by section 5, or  
(2) within thirty days of the publication of the notice of such marriage, or  
(3) in contravention of any other provision in this Act,  
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with  both.  
47. Marriage Certificate Book to be open to inspect ion.―(1) The Marriage Certificate Book kept 
under this Act shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection and shall be admissible as evidence of 
the statements therein contained.  
(2) Certified extracts from the Marriage Certificate Book shall, on applica tion, be given by the 
Marriage Officer to the applicant on payment by him of the prescribed fee.  
 48. Transmission of copies of entries in marriage records .―Every Marriage Officer in a State 
shall send to Registrar -General of Births, Deaths and Marriages o f that State at such intervals and in such 
form as may be prescribed, a true copy of all entries made by him in the Marriage Certificate Book since 
the last of such intervals, and, in the case of Marriage Officers outside the territories to which this Act 
extends, the true copy shall be sent to such authority as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf.  
49. Correction of errors .―(1) Any Marriage Officer who discovers any error in the form or 
substance of any entry in the Marriage Certificate Book may, within one month next after the discovery of 
such error, in the presence of the persons married or, in case of their death or abse nce, in the presence of 
two other credible witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin without any alteration of the original 
entry and shall sign the marginal entry and add thereto the date of such correction and the Marriage 
Officer shall make th e like marginal entry in the certificate thereof.  
(2) Every correction made under this section shall be attested by the witnesses in whose presence it 
was made.  
(3) Where a copy of any entry has already been sent under section 48 to the Registrar -General o r 
other authority the Marriage Officer shall make and send in like manner a separate certificate of the 
original erroneous entry and of the marginal corrections therein made.  
 50. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government, in the case of  1* * * offic ers of the Central 
Government, and the State Government, in all other cases, may, by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, 
make  rules  for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the duties and powers of Marriage Officers and the areas in which they may exercise 
jurisdiction;  
                                                      
1. The words “diplomatic and consular officers and other ” omitted by Act 33 of 1969, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -8-1969).   18 
 (b) the manner in which a Marriage Officer may hold inquiries under this Act and the procedure 
therefor;  
(c) the form and manner in which any books requ ired by or under this Act shall be maintained;  
(d) the fees that may be levied for the performance of any duty imposed upon a Marriage Officer 
under this Act;  
(e) the manner in which public notice shall be given under section 16;  
(f) the form in which, and  the intervals within which, copies of entries in the Marriage Certificate 
Book shall be sent in pursuance of section 48;  
(g) any other matter which may be or requires to be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall b e laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session imm ediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of n o effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made before 
the State Legislature.]  
 51. Repeals and savings .―(1) The Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), and any law 
corresponding to the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), in force in any Part B State immediately 
before the commencement of this Act are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, ― 
(a) all marriages duly solemnized under the Special Marriage Act, 1872 (3 of 1872), or any such 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been solemnized under this Act;  
(b) all suits and proceedings in causes and matters matrimonial which, when this Act com es into 
operation, are pending in any court, shall be dealt with and decided by such court, so far as may be, as 
if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the provisio ns contained in section 
6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding 
law as if such corresponding law had been an enactment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1.  Ins . by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15.3.1984).  
 19 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( b) “Degrees of prohibited  relationship ”] 
PART I 
1. Mother.  
2. Father ’s widow (step -mother).  
3. Mother ’s mother.  
4. Mother ’s father ’s widow (step grand -mother).  
5. Mother ’s mother ’s mother.  
6. Mother ’s mother ’s father ’s widow (step great grand -mother).  
7. Mother ’s father ’s mother.  
8. Mother ’s father ’s father ’s widow (step great grand -mother).  
9. Father ’s mother.  
10. Father ’s father ’s widow (step -grand mother).  
11. Father ’s mother ’s mother.  
12. Father ’s mother ’s father ’s widow (step great grand -mother).  
13. Father ’s father ’s mother.  
14. Father ’s father ’s father ’s widow (step great grand -mother).  
15. Daughter.  
16. Son ’s widow.  
17. Daughter ’s daughter.  
18. Daughter ’s son ’s widow.  
19. Son ’s daughter.  
20. Son ’s son ’s widow.  
21. Daughter ’s daughter ’s daughter.  
22. Daughter ’s daughter ’s son ’s widow.  
23. Daughter ’s son ’s daughter.  
24. Daughter ’s son ’s son ’s widow.  
25. Son ’s daughter ’s daughter.  
26. Son ’s daughter ’s son ’s widow.  
27. Son ’s son ’s daughter.  
28. Son ’s son ’s son ’s widow.  
29. Sister.  
30. Sister ’s daughter.  
31. Brother ’s daughter.  
32. Mother ’s sister.  
33. Father ’s sister.  
34. Father ’s brother ’s daughter.  20 
 35. Father ’s sister ’s daughter.  
36. Mother ’s sister ’s daughter.  
37. Mother ’s brother ’s daughter.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this Part, the expression “widow ” includes a divorced wife.  
PART II 
1. Father.  
2. Mother ’s husband (step -father).  
3. Father ’s father.  
4. Father ’s mother ’s husband (step grand -father).  
5. Father ’s father ’s father.  
6. Father ’s father ’s mother ’s husband (step great grand -father).  
7. Father ’s mother ’s father.  
8. Father ’s mother ’s mother ’s husband (step great grand -father).  
9. Mother ’s father.  
10. Mother ’s mother ’s husband (step grand -father).  
11. Mother ’s father ’s father.  
12. Mother ’s fathe r’s mother ’s husband (step great grand -father).  
13. Mother ’s mother ’s father.  
14. Mother ’s mother ’s mother ’s husband (step great grand -father).  
15. Son.  
16. Daughter ’s husband.  
17. Son ’s son.  
18. Son ’s daughter ’s husband.  
19. Daughter ’s son.  
20. Daughter ’s daughter ’s husband.  
21. Son ’s son ’s son.  
22. Son ’s son ’s daughter ’s husband.  
23. Son ’s daughter ’s son.  
24. Sen ’s daughter ’s daughter ’s husband.  
25. Daughter ’s son ’s son.  
26. Daughter ’s son ’s daughter ’s husband.  
27. Daughter ’s daughter ’s son.  
28. Daughter ’s daughter ’s daughter ’s husband.  
29. Brother.  
30. Brother ’s son.  
31. Sister ’s son.  
32. Mother ’s brother.  21 
 33. Father ’s brother.  
34. Father ’s brother ’s son.  
35. Father ’s sister ’s son.  
36. Mother ’s sister ’s son.  
37. Mother ’s brother ’s son.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this part, the expression “husband ” includes a divorced husband.  
 
 
 
 
 22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 5)  
NOTICE  OF INTENDED  MARRIAGE  
To 
Marriage Officer for the .......................... .............................................. .District.  
We hereby give you notice that a marriage under the Special Marriage Act, 1954, is intended to be 
solemnized between us within three calendar months from the date hereof.  
Name     Condition  Occupation  Age Dwelling 
place    Permanent place 
dwelling   if present 
dwelling place not 
permanent  Length of 
residence  
A.B.  Unmarried       
  Widower       
 Divorcee       
C.D. Unmarried       
 Widow       
 Divorcee  
      
Witness our hands this .................... ................ day of................ ........................... 20...... 
(Sd.) A.B., 
(Sd.) C.D., 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 11)  
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDEGROOM  
I, A.B., hereby declare as follows: ― 
1.  I am at the present time unmarried (or a widower or a divorcee, as the case m ay be).  
2.  I have completed .....years of age.  
3.  I am not related to C.D. (the bride) within the degrees of prohibited relationship.  
4.  I am aware that, if any statement in this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or bel ieve it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine.  
(Sd.) A.B. (the Bridegroom) . 
DECLARATION TO BE MADE BY THE BRIDE  
I, C.D., hereby declare as follows: ― 
1. I am at the present time unmarried (or a widow or a divorcee, as the case may be).  
2. I have completed ....years of age.  
3. I am not related to A.B. (the Bridegroom) within the degree s of prohibited relationship.  
4. I am aware that, if any statement i n this declaration is false, and if in making such statement I 
either know or believe it to be false or do not believe it to be true, I am liable to imprisonment and 
also to fine.  
(Sd.) C.D. (the Bride)  
Signed in our presence by the above -named A.B. and C. D. So far as we are aware there is no lawful 
impediment to the marriage.  
(Sd.) G.H.                                      
(Sd.) I.J.            Three witnesses . 
(Sd.) K.L.         
                  Countersigned E.F.,  
         Marriage Officer  
Dated the                                            day of                                      20 
 24 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 13)  
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE  
 
I, E.F., hereby certify that on the ………………………………………………………………….day of   
……………………………………………… 20………….. ,A.B.  and C.D* appeared before me and 
that each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder, 
made the declarations required by section 11 and that a marriage under this Act was solemnized between 
them in my presence.  
(Sd.)  E.F.,  
                                                   Marriage Officer for  
(Sd.) A.B.,  
                           Bridegroom  
(Sd.) C.D.,                  Bride . 
 
(Sd.) G.H.  
(Sd.) I.J.            Three witnesses  
(Sd.) K.L.  
Dated the                                                day of                                            20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
* Herein give particulars of the parties.  25 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 16)  
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE CELEBRATED IN OTHER FORMS  
I, E.F., hereby certify that A.B. and CD.* appeared before me this  ………… day of ……….  20 and 
that each of them, in my presence and in the presence of three witnesses who have signed hereunder have 
declared that a ceremony of marriage has been performed between  them and that they have been living 
together as husband and wife since the time of their marriage, and that in accordance with their desire to 
have their marriage registered under this Act, the said marriage has, this  day of            
20……................ ..... been registered under this Act, having effect as from.  
 
 
(Sd.) E.F.,                                        
                                                        Marriage Officer for  
(Sd.) A.B.,                                        
                      Husband . 
(Sd.) C.D.                                         
                        Wife. 
(Sd.) G.H.                                         
(Sd.) IJ.                Three witnesse s. 
(Sd.) K.L.                                          
 
 
Dated the                                            day of                                       20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________  
* Herein give particulars of the parties.  
--------------------------The Transfer of Evacuee Deposits Act, 1954--------------------------
1 THE TRANSFER OF EVACUEE DEPOSITS ACT, 1954  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment of Custodian and Assistant Custodians of Deposits . 
4. Transfer of deposits in mass migration area.  
5. Procedure for transfer of certain other deposits to Pakistan . 
6. Transfer of records relating to transferable deposit . 
7. Power of Court or Custodian to convert deposits into money before transmission to Pakistan.  
8. Cesser of jurisdiction in respect of deposits tr ansferred.  
9. Reception in India of deposits transferred from Pakistan.  
10. Powers of Custodian . 
11. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
13. Power to make rules . 
14. [Repealed .]  
  2 THE TRANSFER OF EVACUEE DEPOSITS ACT, 1954  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1954  
[26th March , 1954 .] 
An Act to provide, in pursuance of an agreement with Pakistan, for the transfer to that country of 
certain deposits belonging to evacuees, the reception in India of similar deposits belonging to 
displaced persons, and matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS an agreement has been arrived at with Pakistan for the transfer to that country of certain 
deposits belonging to evacuees, the reception in India of similar deposits belonging to displaced persons, 
and matters connected  therewith:  
BE it enacted by Parliamen t as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This act may be called the Transfer of Evacuee 
Deposits Act, 1954.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except 1[the territories which , immediately before 1st November 
1956 , were comprised in ] the states of Assam, West Bengal, Tripura, Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of February, 1954.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the con text otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Custodian ” means a Custodian of Deposits appointed under section 3 and includes an 
Assistant Custodian of Deposits;  
(b) “deposit” means— 
(i) any  movable property in the custody or under the control of any civil or revenue court in 
respect of any proceedings before it; or  
(ii) any movable property under the superintendence or in the custody of a court of wards 
under any law for the time being in fo rce, whether such movable property is in the actual custody 
of the court of wards, or in that of some other authority on its behalf ; or 
(iii) any movable property in the custody or under the control of a manager , 
and includes any securities, insurance poli cies and negotiable instruments in the custody or under the 
control of any such civil or revenue court or under the superintendence or in the custody of such court of 
wards or in the custody or under the control of such manager.  
Explanation I. — “Securities ” include shares , scrips stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stocks or 
other marketable securities of a like nature in or of any body corporate and also Government securities ; 
Explanation II. —Where any deposit in the custody or under the control of any ci vil or revenue court 
or under the superintendence or in the custody of a court of wards or in the custody or under the control of 
the manager has vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property as evacuee property, such deposit shall, for 
the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be in the custody or under the control of such civil or revenue 
court or under the superintendence or in the custody of the court of wards or in the custody or under the 
control of the manager, as the case may be;  
(c) “displaced person ” means any person who on account of the setting up of the Dominions of 
India and Pakistan or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in any area now 
forming part of Pakistan, has on or after the 1st day of March, 1947, left, or been  displaced from, his 
place of residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in India;  
(d) “evacuee” means any person who, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of India and 
Pakistan or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of  such disturbances, has, on or after the 1st 
                                                           
1. Ins. by A.O (No. 3) , 1956.  3 day of March, 1947, left any place in the territories to which this Act extends and who is now residing 
in any` place forming part of Pakistan;  
(e) “manager” means the manager of an encumbered estate appointed under any law for the time 
being in force relating to encumbered estates;  
(f) “transferable deposit ” means a deposit in which an evacuee has any right or interest, to the 
extent of that right or interest ; 
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Appointment of Custodian and Assistant Custodians of Deposits .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Custodian of Deposits and as many 
Assistant Custodians of Deposits as may be necessary for the purpose of discharging the duties imposed 
upon the Custodian and Assistant Custodians by or under this Act.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Custodian and Assistant Custodians of De posits shall 
discharge the duties imposed on them by or under this Act under the general superintendence and control 
of the Central Government, and the Central Government may, by general or special order provide for the 
distribution of work among them.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Assistant Custodians of Deposits shall discharge the 
duties imposed on them by or under this Act under the general superintendence and control of the 
Custodian.  
4. Transfer of deposits in mass migration area .—(1) Where a civil or revenue court or a court of 
wards situated in a mass migration  area or the manager exercising jurisdictio n in any such area is  
satisfied,— 
(a) in the case of a civil or revenue court  other than a civil court exercising jurisdiction under the 
Guardians and Wards  Act, 1890 (VIII of 1890) or the manager, that all the parties interested in a  
deposit are Muslims;  
(b) in the case of a civil court exercising  jurisdiction under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 
(VIII of 1890), that both  the guardi an and the minor interested in a deposit  are Muslims;  
(c) in the case of a court of wards having  under its superintendence or custody a deposit, that the 
ward is a Muslim;  
the civil or revenue court or the court of  wards or the manager, as the case may be,  shall, as soon as may 
be after the  commencement of this Act, transfer the deposit along with the records relating  thereto, to 
such authorised officer or authority in Pakistan as the Central  Government may, be general or special 
order, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that where, in the opinion of any such  civil or revenue court or the court of wards or the 
manager, any of the persons interested  in a deposit is not an evacuee, the deposit shall not be transferred  
to Pakistan under this section.  
(2) Ever y civil or revenue court and every  court of wards and the manager shall, as soon as may be, 
send to the Custodian  in such form as may be prescribed, particulars of all deposits transferred to  Pakistan 
under sub -section ( 1). 
Explanation .—In this section, th e expression mass  migration area means the territories  1[which 
immediately  before the 1st November 1956 were] comprised in the fo llowing States or areas,  namely:— 
(i) the State of Punjab;  
(ii) the State of Patiala and East Punjab  States Union;  
(iii) the State of Ajmer;  
(iv) the State of Delhi;  
(v) the State of Himachal Pradesh;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by A.O (No. 3) , 1956.  4 (vi) the districts of Alwar , Bhara tpur and  Bikaner in the State of Rajasthan, and the districts of 
Saharanpur, Dehra  Dun,  Meerut and Muzaffarnagar in the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
5. Procedure for transfer of certain other deposits to Pakistan .—(1) Where either on a request 
received in this behalf from any such officer or authority in Pakistan as may be specified in this behalf by 
the Central Government by notification in the Officia l Gazette, or on any other information available to 
him, the Custodian is of opinion that there is a transferable deposit to which the provisions of section 4 do 
not apply, he may send for the record relating thereto from any court or other authority and i nspect the 
same.  
(2) If after making any such inspection as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) and after making such 
further inquiry into the matter as may be prescribed, the Custodian is satisfied that the deposit is a 
transferable deposit within the meani ng of this Act, he may by order, direct that the deposit shall be 
transferred to such authorised officer or authority in Pakistan as the Central Government may, by general 
or special order, specify in this behalf, and any court or other authority holding i n its custody or under its 
control any such deposit shall comply with the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where in respect of any deposit the extent of 
the right or interest of an evacuee in such deposit is not easily ascertainable or, having regard to the nature 
of the deposit, it is in the opinion of the Custodian not practicable to separate the right or interest of the 
evacuee from the right or interest of other persons in such deposit, the Custodian shall not transf er any 
part of the deposit to Pakistan.  
6. Transfer of records relating to transferable deposit .—(1) Where a transferable deposit is 
directed to be transferred to Pakistan under the provisions of section 5, the Custodian may send the record 
relating to the  deposit , or, if it is expedient so to do, only a certified copy of such part of the record as, in 
the opinion of the Custodian, is material to the case to the Government of Pakistan or to such officer or 
authority to whom or to which the deposit has been directed to be transferred.  
(2) If a certified copy only is sent pursuance of sub -section  (1), the original record, together with a 
copy of the order of the Custodian under section 5, shall be returned to the court or other authority from 
which it was obtained.  
 7. Power of Court or Custodian to convert deposits into money before transmission to 
Pakistan .—Where the transfer to Pakistan of any article which is a transferable deposit is prohibited 
under any law for the time being in force, it shall be law ful for a civil or a revenue court, or the court of 
wards or the manager or the Custodian, as the case may be, to convert such article into money in such 
manner as may be prescribed, and upon such conversion the provisions of this Act shall apply to the 
proceeds thereof as they apply a transferable deposit.  
8. Cesser of jurisdiction in respect of deposits transferred .—Upon the transfer of any transferable 
deposit under section 4 or in pursuance or an order of the Custodian under section 5, all courts and 
authorities in India shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, cease to have or exercise any jurisdiction 
in relation to the deposit so transferred in so far as it relates to the right or interest of any evacuee in the 
deposit.  
9. Reception in India o f deposits transferred from Pakistan .—(1) It shall be lawful for the 
Custodian to receive and hold in his custody any deposit transferred by any such officer or authority in 
Pakistan as may be specified by the Central Government by general or special order  as being a deposit 
belonging to any displaced person in India.  
(2) On receipt of any such deposit as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Custodian shall cause notice 
thereof to be given in such manner as may be prescribed to all persons who may in his opinion, be 
interested in the deposit, and after giving a reasonable opportunity to such persons to be heard in the 
matter and after inspecting any such record relating to the deposit as may be transferred from Pakistan, 
dispose of the deposit in the m anne r following, that is to say — 
(a) if there is only one claimant entitled to the deposit or if all the claimants, where there are more 
than one, appear before the Custodian and there is no dispute as to the distribution of the deposit, pay 
the deposit to tha t claimant or, as the case may be, distribute the deposit among the claimants in the 
manner agreed to by them;  5 (b) if all the claimants do not appear  before the Custodian or if all such claimants appear but do 
not agree as to the person or persons entitled  to the deposit or to the manner or of its distribution 
among them, the Custodian shall forward the deposit and the records relating thereto to the principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction within whose jurisdiction all, or the largest number of claim ants, 
reside, or where the claimants residing within the jurisdiction of two or more courts are equal in 
number, to the court which, in the opinion of the Custodian, would best serve the convenience of the 
claimants.  
(3) The court to which a deposit and an y record relating thereto are forwarded under sub -section ( 2) 
shall proceed to deal with the matter as if the deposit had been made in compliance with an order made by 
it in a proceeding before it and, after making such further inquiry into the matter as i t thinks fit, award the 
deposit to or distribute it among the person or persons who in its opinion is or are entitled thereto.  
(4) An appeal shall lie from every order passed by any court under sub -section ( 3) to the court 
authorised to hear appeals from t he decisions of such court if the amount or value of the subject matter of 
the claim made in the appeal exceeds two thousands rupees.  
(5) The disposal of any deposit in accordance with the provisions of this section shall discharge the 
Custodian from any l iability to any person in respect of the deposit.  
10. Powers of Custodian .—The Custodian shall have all the powers vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance or witnesses and requiring the deposit of their expenses;  
(c) compelling the production of documents;  
(d) examining witnesses on oath;  
(e) reception of evidence of on affidavits;  
(f) issuing  commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
and may summon and examine suo motu  any person whose evidence appears to him to be material; and 
shall be deemed to be a civil court within the meaning of section 480 and section 482 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure , 1898 (Act V of 1898).  
Explanation .—For the purpose of enforcing the atten dance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Custodian shall be the local limits for which he is appointed.  
11. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to question the 
legality of any action taken or of any decision given by the Custodian in connection with the transfer of 
any transferable deposit or with the disposal of any deposit received from Pakistan as belongin g to a 
displaced person.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any Custodian or any other person in respect of anything which is 
in good faith done or intend ed to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and witho ut prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) define the terms and conditions of service of the Custodian and Assistant Custodians and the 
local limits of their respective jurisdictions and the distribution of work among them or the transfer of 
work from one to another of the Custodian and Assistant Custodians;  
(b) the manner in which deposits and records relating thereto may be transferred to Pakistan;  
(c) prescribe the manner in which any inquiry under this Act may be held;  6 (d) the manner in which a transferable deposit may be converted into money under section 7;  
(e) specify the persons to whom and the manner in which notices of any proceedings under this 
Act shall be given;  
(f) prescribe the manner in which certified copies of any record may be prepared under this Act 
and the fees, if any, which may be levied in respect of such certified copies;  
(g) prescribe the form in which any application may be made to the Custodian under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef ore the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or th e successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only  in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
14. [Repeal of Ordinance  6 of 1954 .]—Rep by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1950 (58 of 1960), 
s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
________  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
