--------------------------The Citizenship Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955  
ACT  No. 57 OF 19551 
[30th December , 1955 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and determination of Indian citizenship.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act  may be called the Citizenship Act, 1955.  
2. Interpretation .―(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “a Government in India ” means the Central Government or a State Government.  
2[(b) “illegal migrant ” means a foreigner who has entered into India ― 
(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or 
authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf; or       
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or author ity 
as may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf but remains therein beyond the 
permitted period of time;]  
(d) “Indian consulate ” means the office of any consular officer of the Government of India 
where a register of births is kept, or where th ere is no such office, such office as may be 
prescribed;  
(e) “minor ” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;  
3[(ee) “Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder ” means a person registered as an Overseas 
Citizen of India Cardholder by the Ce ntral Government under section 7A;]  
(f) “person ” does not include any company or association or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(h) “undivided India ” means India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, as 
originally enacted.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person born aboard a registered ship or aircraft, or aboard an 
unregistered ship or aircraft of the government of any country, shall be deemed  to have been born in 
the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country.  
(3) Any reference in this Act to the status or description of the father of a person at the time of 
that person's birth shall, in relation  to a person born after the death of his father, be construed as a 
reference to the status or description of the father at the time of the father's death; and where that 
death occurred before, and the birth occurs after, the commencement of this Act, the s tatus or 
description which would have been applicable to the father had he died after the commencement of 
this Act shall be deemed to be the status or description applicable to him at the time of his death.  
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to be of full age if he is not a minor and 
of full capacity if he is not of unsound mind.  
                                                      
       1. This Act has been extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar haveli, vide Notification No. S.O. 846, dated 
17-3-1962, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii), page 517. The Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu 
vide Notification No. S.O. 847, dated 17 -3-1962, see ibid., and to Pondicherry with modification vide Notification No. 
G.S.R. 1557, dated 24 -11-1962, Gazette of India, Part II, section 3( i).  
       2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 2, for clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
       3. Subs. by Act 1 of 201 5, s. 2, for clause ( ee) (w.e.f. 6-1-2015). 
       4. Omitted by Act 32 of 200 5, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -6-2005).  2 
 ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP  
1[3. Citizenship by birth .―(1) Except as provided in sub -section ( 2), every person born in 
India ― 
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 1st day of July, 1987;  
(b) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendmen t) Act, 2003  (6 of 2004)  and either of whose parents is a citizen of India at the time of 
his birth;  
(c) on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003  (6 of 2004) , 
where ― 
(i) both of his parents are citizens of India; or  
(ii) one of  whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an illegal migrant at the 
time of his birth,  
shall be a citizen of India by birth.  
(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth ― 
(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from suits and legal process as is 
accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to the President of India and he or 
she, as the case may be, is not a citizen of India; or  
(b) his father or mother is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a place then under 
occupation by the enemy.]  
4. Citizenship by descent .―2[(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen of India by 
descent, ― 
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 10th day of December, 1992, if 
his father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or  
(b) on or after the 10th  day of December, 1992, if either of his parents is a citizen of India at 
the time of his birth:  
Provided that if the father of a person referred to in clause ( a) was a citizen of India by descent 
only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue  of this section unless ― 
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or the 
commencement of this Act, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government, 
after the expiry of the said period; or  
(b) his father is, at the  time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:  
Provided further that if either of the parents of a person referred to in clause ( b) was a citizen of 
India by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless ― 
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or on or after 
the 10th day of December, 1992, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central 
Government, after the expiry of the said period; or  
(b) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:   
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 
2004) , a person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, u nless his birth is registered at 
an Indian consulate in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed, ― 
(i) within one year of its occurrence or the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) 
Act, 2003 (6 of 2004) , whichever is later; or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 200 4, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  3 
 (ii) with the permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period:  
Provided also that no such birt h shall be registered unless the parents of such person declare, in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, that the minor does not hold the passport of 
another country.  
(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section and is als o a citizen of any other 
country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or nationality of 
another country within six months of attaining full age.]   
(2) If the Central Government so directs, a birth shall be deemed for  the purposes of this section 
to have been registered with its permission, notwithstanding that its permission was not obtained 
before the registration.  
(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 1[any person] born outside undivided India 
who was, or was deemed to be, a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution shall be 
deemed to be a citizen of India by descent only.  
5. Citizenship by registration .―2[(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other 
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application 
made in this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who  is not 
already such citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs to 
any of the following categories, namely: ― 
(a)   a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before 
making an  application for registration;  
(b)   a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place outside 
undivided India;  
(c)   a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven 
years before making  an application for registration;  
(d)   minor children of persons who are citizens of India;  
(e)   a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of India under 
clause ( a) of this sub -section or sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(f)   a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of 
independent India, and  3[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] immediately before 
making an application for registration;  
(g)   a person of full age and  capacity who has been registered as an  4[Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder] for five years, and who  5[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] 
before making an application for registration.  
Explanation 1 .―For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( c), an applicant shall be deemed to be 
ordinarily resident in India if ― 
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months immediately before making 
an application for registration; and  
(ii) he has resi ded in India during the eight years immediately preceding the said period of 
twelve months for a period of not less than six years.  
Explanation 2. ―For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian 
origin if he, or either of his  parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory which 
became part of India after  the 15th day of August, 1947.]  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 2, for “any male person”.  
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f . 3-12-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 3, for “has been residing in India for one year” (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Overseas Citizen of India” (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  
5. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for “has been residing in India for one year ” (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  4 
     1[(1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special circumstances exist, may after 
recording the circumstances  in writing, relax the period of twelve months, specified in clauses ( f) and 
(g) and clause ( i) of Explanation 1  of sub -section ( 1), up to a maximum of thirty days which may be 
in different breaks.]  
(2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub -section ( 1) until 
he has taken the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule.  
(3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his Indian citizenship or whose Indian 
citizenship has terminated, unde r this Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub -section ( 1) 
except by order of the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are special circumstances justifying such 
registration, cause any minor to be regi stered as a citizen of India.  
(5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of India by registration as from the 
date on which he is so registered; and a person registered under the provisions of clause ( b)(ii) of 
article 6 or article 8 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be a citizen of India by registration as from 
the commencement of the Constitution or the date on which he was so registered, whichever may be 
later.  
2[(6) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to 
grant exemption from the residential requirement under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) to any person or 
a class of persons, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant such exemption.].  
6. Citizenship by naturali sation .―(1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by 
any person of full age and capacity  3[not being an illegal migrant] for the grant of a certificate of 
naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied that the applicant is qualifi ed for 
naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation:  
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the applicant is a person who has 
rendered distinguished service to the cause of sci ence, philosophy, art, literature, world peace or 
human progress generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions specified in the Third Schedule.  
(2) The person to whom a certificate of naturalisation is granted under sub -section ( 1) shall, on 
taking the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule, be a citizen of India by 
naturalisation as from the date on which that certificate is granted.  
4[6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord .―(1) For 
the purposes of this section ― 
(a) “Assam ” means the territories included in the State of Assam immediately before the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985  (65 of 1985) ; 
(b) “detected to be a foreigner ” means detected to be a forei gner in accordance with the 
provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 
by a Tribunal constituted under the said Order;  
(c) “specified territory ” means the territories included in Bangladesh immediately be fore the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985  (65 of 1985) ; 
(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian origin, if he, or either of his parents or any of his 
grandparents was born in undivided India;  
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been  detected to be a foreigner on the date on which a 
Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinion to the effect 
that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority concerned.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 1 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule” (w.e.f. 3 -12-
2004).  
4. Ins. by Act 6 5 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1985).  5 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sectio ns (6) and ( 7), all persons of Indian origin who came 
before the lst day of January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of those 
whose names were included in the electoral rolls used for the purposes of the General Election to the 
House of the People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates of 
their entry into Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the lst day of January, 1966.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7), every person of Indian origin who ― 
(a) came to Assam on or after the lst day of January, 1966 but before the 25th day of March, 
1971 from the specified territory; and  
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam; and  
(c) has been detected to be a fore igner;  
shall register himself in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf 
under s ection 18 with such authority ( hereafter in this sub -section referred to as the registering 
authority) as may be specified in such rules and if his name is included in any electoral roll for any 
Assembly or Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such detection, his name shall be 
deleted therefrom.  
Explanation .―In the case of every person seeking registration under this sub -section, the opinion 
of the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such person to be a 
foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient proof of the requirement under clause ( c) of this sub -
section and if any question arises as to whether such person complies with any other requirement 
under this sub -section, the registering authority shall, ― 
(i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other requir ement, decide the 
question in conformity with such finding;  
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to such other requirement, refer the 
question to a Tribunal constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in accordance with such 
rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf under section 18 and decide the question 
in conformity with the opinion received on such reference.  
(4) A person registered under sub -section ( 3) shall have, as from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same rights 
and obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under the Passport s Act, 
1967 (15 of 1967) and the obligations connected the rewith), but shall not entitled to have his name 
included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency at any time before the 
expiry of the said period of ten years.  
(5) A person registered under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to b e a citizen of India for all 
purposes as from the date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner.  
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8 ― 
(a) if any person referred to in sub -section ( 2) submits in the prescribed manner and form and 
to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985  (65 of 1985) , a declaration that he does not wish to be a citizen of India, 
such person shall  not be deemed to have become a citizen of India under that sub -section;  
(b) if any person referred to in sub -section ( 3) submits in the prescribed manner and form and 
to the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citiz enship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985) , or from the date on which he has been detected to be a 
foreigner, whichever is later, a declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the provisions 
of that sub -section and sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5), it shall not be necessary for such person to 
register himself under sub -section ( 3). 6 
 Explanation .―Where a person required to file a declaration under this sub -section does not have 
the capacity to enter into a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any person 
competent under the law for the time being in force to act o n his behalf.  
(7) Nothing in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 6) shall apply in relation to any person ― 
(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985  
(65 of 1985) , is a citizen of India;  
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) 
Act, 1985, under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946).  
(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the provisions of this section shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the ti me being in force.]  
7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory .―If any territory becomes a part of India, the 
Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, specify the persons who shall be 
citizens of India by reason of their connection with that territory; and those persons shall be citizens of 
India as from the date to be specified in the order.  
1[OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP  
 2[7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder .―(1) The Central Government 
may, subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an applicat ion made 
in this behalf, register as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder ― 
(a) any person of full age and capacity, ― 
(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India at the time of, or at any 
time after the commencement of the Constit ution; or  
(ii) who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a citizen of India at the 
time of the commencement of the Constitution; or  
(iii) who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory that became part of 
India after  the 15th day of August, 1947; or  
(iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a great grandchild of such a citizen; or  
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citi zens of India or one of the 
parents is a citizen of India; or  
(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an Overseas 
Citizen of India Cardholder registered under section 7A and whose marriage has been registered 
and s ubsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the 
presentation of the application under this section:  
Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, such 
spouse shall be su bjected to prior security clearance by a competent authority in India:  
Provided further that no person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great 
grandparents is or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Centr al 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as 
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder under this sub -section.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the date from 
which the existing persons of Indian Origin Cardholders shall be deemed to be Overseas Citizens of 
India Cardholders.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 7 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 4, for sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  7 
 Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, “Persons of Indian Origin Cardholders ” 
means the persons registered as such u nder notification number 26011/ 4/98 F.I., dated the 19th 
August, 2002, issued by the Central Government in this regard.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that special circumstances exi st, after recording the circumstances in writing, register a 
person as an Overseas Citizen of India Ca rdholder.   
7B. Conferment of rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder. ―(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an Overseas Citizen of India 
Cardholder shall be entitled to such rights, other than the rights specified under sub -section ( 2), as the 
Central Government may, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
(2) An Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on a 
citizen of India ― 
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of opportunity in matte rs of 
public employment;  
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;  
(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election as Vice -President;  
(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court;  
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the High Court;  
(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) in regard to 
registration as a voter;  
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) with 
regard to the eligibility for being a member of the House of the People or of the Council of States, 
as the case may be;  
(h) under sections 5, 5A and section 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 
1951) with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or the 
Legislative Council, as the case may be, of a State;  
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection with affairs of the Union or of 
any State except f or appointment in such services and posts as the Central Government may, by 
special order in that behalf, specify.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid bef ore each House of Parliament.  
7C. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of In dia Card .―(1) If any Overseas Citizen of India 
Cardholder of full age and capacity makes in prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the Card 
registering him as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the 
Central Government , and upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder.  
(2) Where a person ceases to be an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder under sub -section ( 1), 
the spouse of foreign origin of that person, who has obtaine d Overseas Citizen of India Card under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, and every minor child of that person registered as an 
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an Overse as Citizen of India 
Cardholder.  
7D. Cancella tion of registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder. ―The Central 
Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, if it is 
satisfied that ― 
(a) the registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholde r was obtained by means of 
fraud, false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or  8 
 (b) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has shown disaffection towards the Constitution, 
as by law established; or  
(c) the Overseas Citizen of India Car dholder has, during any war in which India may be 
engaged, unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or  been engaged in, or associated 
with, any business or commercial activity that was to his knowledge carried on in such manner as 
to assist an enemy  in that war; or  
(d) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has, within five years after registration under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7A, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than two 
years; or  
(e) it is necessary so to do in the intere sts of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the interests of the 
general public; or  
(f) the marriage of an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, who has obtained such Car d 
under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, ― 
(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or  
 (ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such marriage, he has 
solemnised marriage with any other person.] ] 
TERMINA TION OF CITIZENSHIP  
8. Renunciation of citizenship .―(1) If any citizen of India of full age and capacity, 1***, makes 
in the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship, the declaration shall be 
register ed by the prescribed authority;  and, upon such registration, that person shall cease to be a 
citizen of India:  
Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war in which India may be engaged, 
registration thereof shall be withheld until the Central Government otherwise direct s. 
(2) Where 2[a person] ceases to be a citizen of India under sub -section ( 1), every minor child of 
that person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India:  
Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age, make a declaration 3[in 
the prescribed form and manner] that he wishes to resume Indian citizenship and shall thereupon 
again become a citizen of India.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
9. Termination of citizenship .―(1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration 
otherwise v oluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the 26th January, 1950 and the 
commencement of this Act, voluntarily acquired , the citizenship of another country shall, upon such 
acquisition or, as the case may be, such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a citizen of India who, during any war in 
which India may be  engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country, until the Central 
Government otherwise directs.  
(2) If any que stion arises as to whether, when or how any   5[citizen of India]   has acquired the 
citizenship of another country, it shall be determined by such authority, in such manner, and having 
regard to such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.  
                                                      
1. The words “who is also a citizen or national of another count ry” omitted by Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 3, for “a male person ” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1987).  
3. Ins. by  Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2014).  
4. Omitted by s. 8 , ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
5. Subs . by s. 9, ibid., for “person ” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  9 
 10. Deprivation of citizenship .―(1) A citizen of India who is such by naturalisation or by virtue 
only of clause ( c) of article 5 of the Constitution or by registration otherwise than under clause ( b)(ii) 
of article 6 of the Constitution or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of  this Act, shall cease to 
be a citizen of India, if he is deprived of that citizenship by an order of the Central Government under 
this section.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Central Government may, by order, deprive any 
such citizen o f Indian citizenship, if it is satisfied that ― 
(a) the registration or certificate of naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud, false 
representation or the concealment of any material fact; or  
(b) that citizen has shown himself by act or speech to be disloyal or disaffected towards the 
Constitut ion of India as by law established; or  
(c) that citizen has, during any war in which India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or 
communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or associated with, any business that was to his 
knowledge carried on in such man ner as to assist an enemy in that war; or  
(d) that citizen has, within five years after registration or naturalisation, been sentenced in any 
country to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; or  
(e) that citizen has been ordinarily resident ou t of India for a continuous period of seven 
years, and during that period, has neither been at any time a student of any educational institution 
in a country outside India or in the service of a Government in India or of an international 
organisation of wh ich India is a member, not registered annually in the prescribed manner at an 
Indian consulate his intention to retain his citizenship of India.  
(3) The Central Government shall not deprive a person of citizenship under this section unless it is 
satisfied that it is not conducive to the public good that person should continue to be a citizen of India.  
(4) Before making an order under this section, the Central Government shall give the person 
against whom the order is proposed to be made notice in writing in forming him of the ground on 
which it is proposed to be made and, if the order is proposed to be made on any of the grounds 
specified in sub -section ( 2) other than clause ( e) thereof, of his right, upon making application 
therefore in the prescribed manner , to have his case referred to a committee of inquiry under this 
section.  
(5) If the order is proposed to be made against a person on any of the grounds specified in sub -
section ( 2) other than clause ( e) thereof and that person so applies in the prescribed  manner, the 
Central Government shall, and in any other case it may, refer the case to a Committee of Inquiry 
consisting of a chairman (being a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial office) and two 
other members appointed by the Central Gov ernment in this behalf.  
(6) The Committee of Inquiry shall, on such reference, hold the inquiry in such manner as may be 
prescribed and submit its report to the Central Government ; and the Central Government shall 
ordinarily be guided by such report in mak ing an order under this section.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
11. [Commonwealth citizenship .]Omitted by Act  The C itizenship (Amendment) Act, ( 6 of 2004 ),  
s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004 ). 
12. [Power to confer rights of Indian citizen or citizens of certain country .] Omitted by s . 10, ibid. 
(w.e.f. 3-12-2004 ). 
13. Certificate of Citizenship in case of doubt .―The Central Government may, in such cases as 
it thinks fit, certify that a person with respect to whose citizenship of India a doubt exists, is a citizen 
of India; and a certi ficate issued under this section shall, unless it is proved that it was obtained by 
means of fraud, false representation or concealment of any material fact, be conclusive evidence that 
person was such a citizen on the date thereof, but without prejudice t o any evidence that he was such a 
citizen at an earlier date.  10 
 14. Disposal of application under  sections 5, 6 and 7A .―(1) The prescribed authority or the 
Central Government may, in its discretion, grant or refuse an application under  1[sections 5, 6 and 
7A] and shall not be required to assign any reasons for such grant or refusal.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section  l5 the decision of the prescribed authority or the Central 
Government on any such application as aforesaid shall be f inal and shall not be called in question in 
any court.  
 2[14A. Issue of national identity cards .―(1) The Central Government may compulsori ly 
register every citizen of India and issue national identity card to him.   
(2) The Central Government may maintain a National Register of Indian Citizens and for that 
purpose establish a National Registration Authority.   
(3) On and from the date of comme ncement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003  (6 of 
2004) , the Registrar General, India, appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Registration of 
Births and Deaths Act, 1969  (18 of 1969) shall act as the National Registration Authority and he  shall 
function as the Registrar General of Citizen Registration.   
(4) The Central Government may appoint such other officers and staff as may be required to assist 
the Registrar General of Citizen Registration in discharging his functions and responsibili ties. 
(5) The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India shall be such 
as may be prescribed.]  
15. Revision .―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this Act by the prescribed 
authority or any officer or other authority (other than the Central Government) may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the order, make an application to the Central G overnment for a revision of 
that order:  
Provided that the Central Government may entertain the application after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making 
the applicati on in time.  
(2) On receipt of any such application under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, after 
considering the application of the aggrieved person and any report thereon which the officer or 
authority making the order may submit, make such o rder in relation to the application as it deems fit, 
and the decision of the Central Government shall be final.  
 3[15A. Review.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Central Government, may, 
within thirty days from the date of such order, make a n application for review of such order:  
Provided that the Central Government may entertain an application after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making 
the applicatio n in time:   
Provided further that an application for a review of an order passed in terms of the provisions of 
section 14A shall be disposed of in the manner provided for in the procedure as may be laid down 
under clause ( ia) of sub -section ( 2) of section 18. 
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall, make such 
order as it deems fit, and the decision of the Central Government on such review shall be final.]  
16. Delegation of powers .―The Central Government may, by o rder, direct that any power which 
is conferred on it by any of the provisions of this Act other than those of section 10 and section 18 
shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be 
exercisable also by  such officer or authority as may be so specified.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 6 of 2004, s. 11, for “sections 5 and 6” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
2. Ins. by s. 12 , ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  11 
 17. Offences .―Any person who, for the purpose of procuring anything to be done or not to be 
done under this Act, knowingly makes any representation which is false in a material particular shall 
be punishab le with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[five years], or 2[with fine which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees], or with both.  
18. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette make rules to carry  out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for ― 
(a) the registration of anything required or authori sed under this Act to be registered, and the 
conditions and res trictions in regard to such registration;  
3[(aa) the form and manner in which a declaration under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 shall be 
made;];  
(b) the forms to be used and the registers to be maintained under this Act;  
(c) the administration and taking of  oaths of allegiance under this  Act and the time within 
which and the manner in which, such oaths shall be taken and recorded;  
(d) the giving of any notice required or authori sed to be given by any person under this Act;  
(e) the cancellation of the registr ation of, and the cancellation and amendment of certificates 
of naturalisation relating to, persons deprived of citizenship under this Act, and the delivering up 
of such certificates for those purposes;  
4[(ee) the manner and form in which and the authority  to whom declarations referred to in 
clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 6) of section 6A shall be submitted and other matters connected 
with such declarations;]  
5[(eea) the conditions and the manner subject to which a person may be registered as an 
Overse as Citizen of India Cardholder under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A;  
(eeb) the manner of making declaration for renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7C;]  
(f) the registration at Indian consulates of the births and deaths of persons of any class or 
description born or dying outside India;  
(g) the levy and collection of fees in respect of applications, registrations, declarations and 
certificates under this Act, in respect of the taking of an oath of allegiance, and i n respect of the 
supply of certified or other copies of documents;  
(h) the authority to determine the question of acquisition of citizenship of another country, the 
procedure to be followed by such authority and rules of evidence relating to such cases;  
(i) the procedure to be followed by the committees of inquiry appointed under section 10 and 
the conferment on such committees of any of the powers, rights and privileges of civil courts;  
3[(ia) the procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 14A;]  
(j) the manner in which applications for revision may be made and the procedure to be 
followed by the Central Government in dealing with such applications; and  
(k) any other matter which is to be, or  may be, prescribed under the Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 6 of 2004, s. 14, for “six months”  (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004)  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “ with fine ” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004). . 
3. Ins. by s. 15 , ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
4. Ins. by Act 65 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -12-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  12 
 (3) In making any rule under this section, the Cent ral Government may provide that a breach 
thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
1[Provided that any rule made in respect of a matt er specified in clause ( ia) of sub -section ( 2) may 
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with bo th.] 
2[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of session , 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such mo dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.]  
 19. [Repeals .] [Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960  (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule. ] 
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE .] [Omitted  by Act the Citizenship (Amendment) Act , 2003 (6 of 2004), 
s. 16 ( w.e.f.  3-12-2004) .] 
3[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 5( 2) and 6( 2)] 
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE  
I, A. B. _________ do sole mnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws of India and 
fulfill my duties as a citizen of India. ] 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 6( 1)] 
QUALIFICATIONS FOR NATURALI SATION  
The qualifications for naturali sation of a person 4*** are― 
(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where citizens of India are prevented by 
law or practice of that country from becoming subjects or citizens of that country by 
naturali sation;  
(b) that, if he is a citizen of any country, 5***; 
(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India or partly 
the one and partly the other, throughout the period of twelve months imm ediately preceding the 
date of the application;  
6[Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special circumstances exist, it may, 
after recording the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months up to a maximum 
of thirty days which may be in different breaks.]  
                                                      
1. The p roviso ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004). 
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 17, for the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
4. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the F irst Schedule” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).   
  5. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “he has renounced the citizenship of that country in accordance with the law therein in force     
in that behalf and has notified such renunciation to the Central Government” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
6. The p roviso ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 6 (w.e.f. 6 -1-2015).  13 
 (d) that during the  1[fourteen  years] immediately preceding the said period of twelve months, 
he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India, or partly the one 
and partly the other, for per iods amounting in the aggregate to not less than  2[eleven  years];  
(e) that he is of good character;  
(f) that he has an adequate knowledge of a language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the 
Constitution; and  
(g) that in the event of a certificate of natu ralisation being granted to him, he intends to reside 
in India, or to enter into , or continue in, service under a Government in India or under an 
international organi sation of which India is a member or under a society, company or body of 
persons establish ed in India:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if in the special circumstances of any particular case 
it thinks fit, ― 
(i) allow a continuous period of twelve months ending not more than six months before the 
date of the application to be reckoned, for the purposes of clause ( c) above, as if it had 
immediately preceded that date;  
(ii) allow periods of residence or service earlier than  3[fifteen  years] before the date of the 
application to be reckoned in computing the aggregate mentioned in clause ( d) above.  
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE .]Omitted by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act , 2005 (32 of 2005), s. 
5 (w.e.f.  28-6-2005 ). 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 18, for “twelve years” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 18,  ibid., for “nine years” (w.e.f. 3 -12-2004).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “thirteen years” (w.e .f. 3-12-2004).  
--------------------------The Commanders-in-Chief (Change in Designation) Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE COMMANDERS -IN-CHIEF (CHANGE IN DESIGNATION) ACT, 1955  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and Commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. Construction of references to Commanders -in-Chief in enactments or instruments . 
THE SCHEDULE  [Repealed .] 
 
  2 
 THE COMMANDERS -IN-CHIEF (CHANGE IN DESIGNATION) ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1955  
[3rd May,  1955 .] 
An Act to amend certain enactments for the purpose of changing the designation of the 
Commanders -in-Chief of the Armed Forces.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and Commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commanders -in-Chief (Change 
in Designation) Act, 1955.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. [Amendment of certain enactments .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 58 of 1960, s. 2         
and the First Schedule.  
3. Construction of references to Commanders -in-Chief in enactments or instruments .—Any 
reference, by whatever form of words, to the Commander -in-Chief of the regular Army, the Commander -
in-Chief of the Indian Navy, and the Commander -in-Chief of the Air Force , in any law for the time being 
in force, or in any instrument or other document, shall be construed as a reference to the Chief of the 
Army Staff, the Chief of the Naval Staff, and the Chief of the Air Staff respectively.  
[THE SCHEDULE .]—Rep. by the Repea ling and Amending Act , 58 of 1960, s. 2 and the                    
First Schedule.  
 
                                                           
1. 7th May, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 2(E), dated the 7th May, 1955, see Gazette of India, 1955, Extraordinary           
Part II, sec. 4.  
--------------------------The Durgah khawaja Saheb Act, 1955--------------------------
1 THE D URGAH KHAWAJA SAHEB ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 36 OF 1955  
[14th October , 1955.]  
An Act to make provision for the proper administration of the Durgah and the Endowment of the 
Durgah of Khawaja Moin -ud-din Chishti, generally known as Durgah Khawaja Saheb, 
Ajmer.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Durgah Khawaja Saheb                  
Act, 1955.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of Ajmer, acting in his individual 
capacity;  
(b) “Committee ” means the Committee consituted under section 4;  
(c) “Durgah” means the institution known as the Durgah Khawaja Saheb , Ajmer, and includes the 
premises called the Durgah Sharif with all buildings contained therein, together with all additions 
thereto or all alerations thereof which may hereafter be made from time to time;  
(d) “Durgah Endowment ” includes— 
(i) the Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer;  
(ii) all buildings and movable property within the boundaries of the Durgah Sharif;  
(iii) Durgah Jagir, including all land, houses and shops and all immovable property wherever 
situated belonging to the Durgah Sharif;  
(iv) all other p roperty and all income derived from any source whatsoever dedicated to the 
Durgah o r placed for any religious, pious or charitable purposes under the Durgah 
Administration, including the Jagirdari villages of Hokran and K ishanpur in Ajmer; and  
(v) all such  nazars of offerings as are received on behalf of the Durgah by the Nazim or any 
person authorised by him;  
(e) “Nazim” means the Nazim appointed under section 9.  
3. Act to override Act XX of 1863 .—This Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in the Religious Endowments Act, 1863  (XX of 1863) . 
4. The Committee .—(1) The administration, control and management of the Durgah Endowment 
shall be vested in a Committee constituted in the manner hereinafter provided.  
(2) The Committee shall by the name of “The Durgah Committee, Ajmer ”, be a body corporate and 
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued through its 
president.  
5. Composition of Committee .—The Committee shall consist of not less than five and not more than 
nine members all of whom shall be Hanafi Muslims and shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
6. Term of office and resignation and removal of members and casual vacancies .—(1) A member 
of the Committee shall hold office for a period of five years from the date of his appointment but may 
                                                           
1. 1st March , 195 6, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 482(E), dated 24th February , 195 6, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i). 2 resign his office earlier by giving notice in writing thereof to the Central Government and shall cease to 
be a member on the resignation being accepted by that Governmen t. 
(2) The Central Government may remove from off ice any member of the Committee — 
(a) who is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court, or  
(b) who has applied for being adjudged an insolvent, or is an und ischarged insolvent, or  
(c) who has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude, or  
(d) who has absented himself for a period of twelve consecutive months from the meetings of the 
Committee; or  
(e) whose presence on the Committee would, in the opinion of the Central Governmen t, be 
prejudicial to the interests of the Durgah.  
(3) Casual vacancies among members of the Committee shall be filled by appointment made by the 
Central Government inconsultation with the remaining members of the Committee.  
(4) The term of office of a memb er appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall be for so long only as the 
member whose place has been filled would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not 
occurred.  
7. President and v ice-president .—(1) The Committee shall elect a president and a vice-president 
from among its members.   
(2) When the office of the president is vacant or in the absence of the president from any meeting, the 
vice-president shall perform the functions of the president.   
(3) In the absence of the president  and vice president, a meeting of the Committee may be presided 
over by a member elected by the majority of the members present at the meeting . 
8. Supe rsession of the Committee .—If in the opinion of the Central Government the Committee is 
guilty of gross m ismanagement of the affairs of the Durgah or of neglect in the performance of its 
functions, the Central Government may supersede the Committee and entrust an y person with full powers 
of the Committee until a new Committee is constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
9. Power of Central Government to appoint Nazim .—(1) The Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Committee, appoint a per son to be the Nazim of the Durgah and the Nazim shall in 
virtue of his office be the secretary of the Committee:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in the case of the appointment of the first 
Nazim.  
(2) The Nazim shall be paid such salar y and allowances as the Central Government may fix out of the 
revenues of the Durgah Endowment.  
(3) The Committee shall exercise its powers of administration, control and management of the 
Durgah Endowment through the Nazim.  
10. Advisory Committee to advis e Nazim .—For the  purpose of advising the Nazim in the discharge 
of his functions under this Act and also for such other purposes as may be specified in any bye -laws of 
the Committee, the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chief Commissioner, constitute an 
Advisory Committee consisting of such number of persons, being Hanafi Muslims, not exceeding seven, 
as the Central Government may think fit, such persons being chosen from among the residents of the 
State of Ajmer or any of the neighbouring S tates.  
11. Powers and duties of the Committee .—The powers and d uties of the Committee shall be — 
(a) to administer, control and manage the Durgah Endowment;  
(b) to keep the buildings within the boundaries of the Durgah Sharif and all buildings, houses and 
shops comprised in the Drugah Endowment in proper order and in a state of good repair;  
(c) to receive all moneys and other income of the Durgah Endowment;  3 (d) to see that the Endowment funds are spent in the manner desired by the donors;  
(e) to pay salarie s, allowances and perquisites and make all other payments du e out of, or charged 
on, the revenues or income of the Durgah Endowment.  
(f) to determine the privileges of the Khadims and to regulate their presence in the Durgah by the 
grant to them of licence s in that behalf, if the Committee thinks it necessary so to do;  
(g) to define the powers and duties of the Advisory Committee;  
(h) to determine the functions and powers, if any, which the Sajjadanashin may exercise in 
relation to the Durgah;  
(i) to appoint, suspend or dismiss servants of the Durgah Endowment;  
(j) to make such provision for the education and maintenance of the indigent descendants of 
Khawaja Moin -ud-din Chishti and their families and the indigent Khadims and their families residing 
in India as the Committee considers expedient consistently with the financial position of the Durgah;  
(k) to delegate to the Nazim such powers and functions as the Committee may think fit;   
(l) to do all other such things as may be incidental or conducive to  the efficient administration of 
the Durgah.  
12. Remuneration of the Sajjadanashin .—There shall be paid to the person for the time being 
holding the office of the Sajjadanashin remuneration at the rate of rupees two hundred per mensem out of 
the revenues o f the Durgah Endowment.  
13. Succession to the office of Sajjadanashin .—(1) As soon as the office of the Sajjadanashin falls 
vacant, the Committee shall, with the previous approval of the Chief Commissioner, make such interim 
arrangements for the performance of the functions of the Sajjadanashin as it may think fit, and 
immediat ely thereafter publish a notice in such form and manner as may be determined by the 
Committee, inviting applications within one month of such publication from persons claiming to succeed 
to that office.   
(2) Where only one person claims to succeed to the o ffice of the Sajjadanashin and the Committee is 
satisfied as to his right to succeed, it shall, with the previous approval of the Chief Commissioner, pass an 
order in writing according recognition as Sajjadanashin to such person.   
(3) Where more persons th an one claim to succeed to the office of the Sajjadanashin, the Committee 
shall, after consultation with the Chief Commissioner, refer the dispute to the Judicial Commissioner of 
Ajmer for a decision regarding the claim to succeed to that office, and the J udicial Commissioner, after 
taking such evidence as he considers necessary and  after giving an opportunity to  the claimants to be 
heard in respect of their claims, shall communicate his decision to the Committee.   
(4) The Commitee, on the receipt of the de cision, shall, with the previous approval of the Chief 
Commissioner, pass an order in writing in accordance with such decision declaring the person found 
entitled to succeed to the office of the Sajjadanashin and according recognition as Sajjadanashin to s uch 
person.   
(5) An order passed by the Committee under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) shall be final and shall 
not be questioned in any court. 
14. Power to solicit or receive offerings on behalf of the Durgah .—1[(1)] It shall be lawful for the 
Nazim or any person authorised by him in this behalf to solicit and receive on behalf of the Durgah any 
nazars or offerings from any person, and notwithstanding anything contained in any rule of law or 
decision to the contrary, no person other than the Nazim of any person authorised by him in this behalf 
shall receive o r be entitled to receive nazars  or offerings or behalf of the Durgah.   
2[(2) Whoever solicits or receives any nazars o r offerings in contravention of the provisions of                   
sub-section (1), shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
                                                           
1. Section 14 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 20 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1964).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-1964).   4 (3) The Nazim, the Sajjadanashin, the employees and servants of the Durgah Endowment and all 
other persons authorised to do any act under this Act shall, while acting or purporting  to act in pursuance 
of any of the provisions made by or under this Act, be deemed to be public servant s within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. ] 
15. Committee to observe Muslim Law and tenets of the Chishti Saint .—Save as otherwise 
provided under any enactment for the time being in force, the committee shall, in exercise of its powers 
and the discharge of its duties, follow the rules of Muslim Law applicable to Hanafi Muslims in India, 
and shall conduct and regulate  the established rites and ceremonies in accordance with the tenets of the 
Chishti Saint.  
16. Board of Arbitration .—(1) If any dispute arises between the Committee on the one part and the 
Sajjadanashin, any Khadim, and any person claiming to be the servant  of the Durgah under some 
hereditary right or any one or more of them on the other part and such dispute does not, in the opinion of 
the Committee, relate to any religious usage or custom or to the performance of any religious office, it 
shall at the reque st of either party to the dispute, be referred to a Boa rd of Arbitration consisting of — 
(i) a nominee of the Committee;  
(ii) a nominee of the other party to the dispute; and  
(iii) a person who holds or has held the office of, or is acting or has acted as, a district judge, to be 
appointed by the Central Government, and the award of the Board shall be final and shall not be 
questioned in any Court.  
(2) No suit shall lie in any Court in respect of any matter which is required by sub -section ( 1) to be 
referred  to a Board of Arbitration.  
17. Defect in the cons titution of, or vacancy in, the Committee not to invalidate acts and 
proceedings .—No act or  proceeding of the Committee shall be invalidated merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy among its members or a defect in the cons titution thereof.  
18. Enforcement of final orders of Committee .—Where in the ex ercise of its powers and 
performance of its duties the Committee passes any final order agai nst any person directing him to do, or 
to abstain from doing s omething , the person against whom the order is directed shall be bound to comply 
with the order and in case of non -compliance with such order any civil court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction the person against whom the order has been passed, r esides or carries on busines s may 
execute the order in the same manner and by the same procedure as if it were a decree or order passed by 
itself in a suit.  
19. Audit of accounts and annual report .—(1) The accounts of the Durgah shall be audited every 
year by such persons and in such manner as the Central Government may direct . 
(2) The Committee shall every year prepare a report on the administration of the Durgah , which, 
together with the accounts of the Durgah and the report of the auditor thereon, shall be published in the 
Official Gazette.  
20. Bye-laws .—(1) The Committee may make bye -laws to carry out the purposes of this Act . 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r such bye -laws may 
provide for — 
(a) the division of duties among the president and the members of the Committee;  
(b) the time and place of, the quorum for, and procedure and conduct of business at, the meetings 
of the Committee;  
(c) the security, if any, to be taken from the employees of the Committee ; 
(d) the books and accounts to be kept at the office of the Committee;  
(e) the custody and investment of the property and the funds of the Durgah;  
(f) the details to be included in or excluded from the budget of the Durgah;  5 (g) the persons by whom receipts m ay be granted for money paid to the Committee;  
(h) the maintenance of peace and order within the Durgah compound and regulating the conduct 
of persons within the precincts of the Durgah;  
(i) the duties and powers of the employees of the Durgah ; 
(j) the reg ulation of the cooking of degs and distribution of the food so cooked, notwithstanding 
any judicial decision relating to the right of any person or class of persons to participate in such 
cooking or distribution;  
(k) the powers and functions of the Advisor y Committee and the matters in which the advice of 
the Advisory Committee may be sought by the Nazim;  
(l) the manner of entering into contracts by or on behalf of the Committee.  
(3) Any power to make bye -laws conferred by this section is conferred subject to the condition of the 
bye-laws being first published in draft for objections by being hung up on the premises of the Durgah and 
of their not taking effect un til they have been approved and  confirmed by the Central Government and 
published in the Official  Gazette.   
(4) The Central Government in approving and confirming a bye -law may make any change there in 
which appe ars to be necessary . 
(5) The Central Government may, after previous publication of its intention cancel any bye -law 
which it has approved and confirmed, and thereu pon the bye -law shall cease to have effect.  
1[(6) Every bye -law made under this section and every order made by the Central Government under 
sub-section  (5) shall be laid,  as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia ment, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification in the bye -law or order,  or 
both Houses agree that the bye -law or order  should not be made, the bye -law or order  shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously d one under 
that bye -law or order.]  
21. Transitional provisions .—The person holding, the office of Sajjadanashin immediately before 
the commencement of this Act shall , on and from such commencement, continue to hold that office 
subject to the other provisions of this Act and to the final decision in the suit relating to that office which 
is pending on such commen cement and to which the sai d person is a party.  
22. Repeal .—The Durgah Khawaja , Saheb Act, 1936  (XXIII of 1936) and the Durgah Khawaja 
Saheb (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1950 (XVII of 1950) are hereby repealed.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Essential Commodities Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE  ESSENTIAL  COMMODITI ES ACT, 1955  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Essential commodities declaration , etc. 
3. Powers to control production, supply, distribution, etc., of essential commodities . 
4. Imposition of duties on State Governments, etc.  
5. Delegation of powers . 
6. Effect of orders inconsistent with other enactments . 
6A. Confiscation of essential commodity . 
6B. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation of food grains, etc . 
6C. Appeal . 
6D. Award of confiscation not to interfere with other punishments . 
6E. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases . 
7. Penalties . 
7A. Power of Central Government to recover certain amounts as arrears of land revenue . 
8. Attempts and abetment . 
9. False statement . 
10. Offences by compani es. 
10A. Offences to be cognizable.  
10B. Power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., of companies convicted under 
the Act.  
10C. Presumption of culpable mental state.  
11. Cognizance of offences . 
12. Special provision regarding fine . 
12A. Power to try s ummarily . 
12B. Grant of injunction, etc., by civil courts.  
13. Presumption as to orders . 
14. Burden of proof in certain cases.  
15. Protection of action taken under Act.  
15A. Prosecution of public servants . 
16. Repeals and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 2 
 THE  ESSENTIAL  COMMODITI ES ACT, 19551 
ACT NO. 10 OF 1955  
[1st April , 1955 .] 
An Act to provide, in the interest of the general public, for the control of the production, 
supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce, in certain commodities.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Six th Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
 1. Short title and extent .―(1) This Act may be called the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2***. 
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
3[(ia) “Collector ” includes an Additional Collector and such other officer, not below the rank 
of Sub -Divisional Officer, as may be authorised by the Collector to perform the functions and 
exercise the powers of the Collector under this Act;]  
4*   *   *   *  * 
 (b) “food-crops ” include crops of sugarcane;  
 (c) “notified order ” means an order notified in the Official Gazette;  
5[(cc) “order ” includes a direction issued thereunder;]  
6[(d) “State Government, ” in relation to a Union territory,  means the administrator  thereof;]  
5[(e) “sugar ” means ― 
(i) any form of sugar containing more than ninety per cent, of sucrose, including sugar 
candy;  
(ii) khandsari sugar or bura sugar or crushed sugar or any sugar i n crystalline or powdered 
form; or 
(iii) sugar in process in va cuum pan sugar factory or raw sugar produced therein.]  
7[2A. Essential commodities declaration , etc.―(1) For the purposes of this Act, “essential 
commodity ” means a commodity specified in the Schedule.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that 
it is necessary so to do in the public interest and for reasons to be specified in the notification 
published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to ― 
(a) add a commodity to the said Schedule;  
(b) remove any commodity from the said Schedule,  
in consultation with the State Governments.  
                                                      
1. Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modification by Regulation 12 of 1962, section 3 and Schedule, to Dadra and 
Nagar Hav eli by Regulation 6 of 1963, section 3 and Schedule I and to Lakshadweep and Amindivi Islands by 
Regulation 8 of  1965, section 3 and Schedule, to the State of Sikkim vide S.O. 28(E), dated 7th January, 1976  
(w.e.f. 7 -1-1976).  
This Act has been amended in Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 71 of 1976, in Orissa by Orissa Act, 8 of 1976, in  
Uttar Pradesh by Uttar Prades h Acts 9 of 1974, 18 of 1975, 39 of 1975 and 16 of 1978.   
2. The words “except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir”  omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule  
 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).   
3.  Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   
4.  Clause ( c) omitted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
5.  Ins.  by Act 36 of 1967, s. 2  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
6. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for clause ( d). 
7. Ins. by Act 54 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).   3 
 (3) Any notification issued under sub -section ( 2) may also direct that an entry shall be made 
against such commodity in the said Schedule declaring that such commodi ty shall be deemed to be an 
essential commodity for such period not exceeding six months to be specified in the notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest and for reasons to be specified, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, extend such period beyond the said six months.  
(4) The Central Government may exercise its powers under sub -section ( 2) in respect of the 
commodity to which Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of Entry 33 List III in the Seventh 
Schedule t o the Constitution.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
issued, before both Houses of Parliament.]  
3. Powers to control production, supply, distribution, etc., of essential commodities .―(1) If 
the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining or 
increasing supplies of any essential commodity or for securing their equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices,   1[or for securing any essential commodity for the defence of India or the 
efficient conduct of military operations], it may, by order, provide for regulating or prohibiting the 
production, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), an order made 
thereunder may provide ― 
(a) for regulating by licences, permits or otherwise the production or manufacture of 
any essential commodity;  
(b) for bringing under cultivation any waste or arable land, whether appurtenant to a building 
or not, for the growing thereon of food -crops ge nerally or of specified food -crops, and for 
otherwise maintaining or increasing the cultivation of food -crops generally, or of specified        
food-crops.  
(c) for controlling the price at which  any essential commodity may be bought or sold;  
(d) for regula ting by licences, permits or otherwise the storage, transport, distribution, 
disposal, acquisition , use or consumption of, any essential commodity;  
(e) for prohibiting the withholding from sale of any essential commodity ordinarily kept for 
sale; 
2[(f) for requiring any person holding in stock, or engaged in the production, or in the business 
of buying or selling, of any essential commodity, ― 
(a) to sell the whole or a specified part of the quantity held in stock or produced or 
received by  him or,  
(b) in th e case of any such commodity which is likely to be produced or received by  him, 
to sell the whole or a specified part of such commodity when produced or received by  him, 
to the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer or agent of such Gove rnment or to a 
Corporation owned or controlled by such Government or to such other person or class of persons and 
in such circumstances as may be specified in the order.  
Explanation  1.―An order made under this clause in relation to food grains, edible oilseeds or 
edible oils, may, having regard to the estimated production, in t he concerned area, of such food grains, 
edible oilseeds and edible oils, fix the quantity to be sold by the prod ucers in such area and may also 
fix, or provide for the fixation of, such quantity on a graded basis, having regard to the aggregate of 
the area held by, or under the cultivation of, the producers.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s . 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 2 of 1976, s. 3, for clause ( f). 4 
 Explanation  2.―For the purpose  of this clause, “production ” with its grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions includes manufacture of edible oils and sugar;]  
(g) for regulating or prohibiting any class of commercial or financial transactions relating to 
foodstuffs  1*** which, in the opinion of the authority  making the order, are, or, if unregulated, are 
likely to be, detrimental to the public interest;  
(h) for collecting any information or statistics with a view to regulating or prohibiting any of 
the aforesaid matters;  
(i) for requiring  persons  engaged in t he production, supply or distribution of or trade and 
commerce in, any essential commodity to maintain and produce for inspection such books, 
accounts and records relating to their business and to furnish such information relating thereto, as 
may be specif ied in the order;  
2[(ii) for the grant  or issue of licences, permits or other documents, the charging of fees 
therefore, the deposit of such sum, if any, as may be specified in the order as security for the due 
performance of the conditions of any such lic ence, permit or other document, the forfeiture of the 
sum so deposited or any part thereof for contravention of any such conditions, and the 
adjudication of such forfeiture by such authority as may be specified in the order;]  
3[(j) for any incidental and s upplementary matters, including, in particular, the entry, search or 
examination of premises, aircraft, vessels, vehicles or other conveyances and animals, and the 
seizure by a person authorised to make suc h entry, search or examination, — 
(i) of any articl es in respect of which such person has reason to believe that a 
contravention of the order has been, is being, or is  about to be committed and any packages, 
coverings or receptacles in which such articles are found;  
(ii) of any aircraft, vessel, vehicle or  other conveyance or animal used in carrying such 
article s, if such person has reason to believe that such aircraft, vessel, vehicle or other 
conveyance or animal is liable to be forfeited u nder the provisions of this Act;  
4[(iii) of any books of accounts and documents which in the opinion of such person, may 
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act and the person from whose 
custody such books of accounts or documents are seized shall be entitled to make copies 
thereof or to take extract s therefrom in the presence of an officer having the custody of such 
books of accounts or documents.] ] 
(3) Where any person sells any essential commodity in compliance with an order made with 
reference to clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2), there shall be paid to him the price therefore as hereinafter 
provided: ― 
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled price, if any, fixed under this section, 
be agreed upon, the  agreed  price;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the 
controlled price, if any;  
(c) where neither clause ( a) nor clause ( b) applies, the price calculated at the market rate 
prevailing in the locality at the date of sale.  
5[(3A) (i) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for controlling the 
rise in prices or preventing the hoarding, of any food -stuff in any locality, it may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, direct that notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the price at 
                                                      
1. The words “or cotton textiles” omitted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
2.  Ins. by Act  17 of 1961, s. 2.  
3. Subs. b y Act 66 of 1971, s. 2, for clause (j) (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 3, for sub -clause ( iii). 
5.  Ins. by Act 13 of 1957, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4 -6-1957).  5 
 which the food -stuff shall be sold in the locality in compliance with an order made with reference to 
clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of this sub -section.  
(ii) Any notification issued under this sub -section shall remain in fo rce for such period not 
exceeding three months as may be specified in the notification.  
(iii) Where, after the issue of a notification under this sub -section, any person sells foodstuff of 
the kind specified therein and in the locality so specified, in com pliance with an order made with 
reference to clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2), there shall be paid to t he seller as the price therefor―  
(a) where the price can, consistently with the controlled price of the foodstuff, if any, fixed 
under this section, b e agre ed upon, the agreed price;  
(b) where no such agreement can be reached, the price calculated with reference to the 
controlled price, if any;  
(c) where neither clause ( a) nor clause ( b) applies, the price calculated with reference to 
average market rate prev ailing in the locality during the period of three months immediately 
preceding the date of the notification.  
(iv) For the purposes of sub -clause ( c) of clause ( iii), the average market rate prevailing in the 
locality shall be determined by an officer autho rised by the Central Government in this behalf, with 
reference to the prevailing market rates for which published figures are available in respect of that 
locality or of a neighbouring locality; and the average market rate so determined shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any court.]  
1[(3B) Where any person is required, by an order made with reference to clause ( f) of sub -section 
(2), to sell to the Central Government or a State Government or to an officer or agent of such 
Government or to  a Corporation owned or controlled by such Governmen t, any grade or variety of 
foodgrains, edible oilseeds or edible oils in relation to which no notification has been issued under 
sub-section ( 3A), or such notification having been issued, has ceased to be  in force, there shall be paid 
to the person concerned, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub -section ( 3), an 
amount equal to the  procurement price of such food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils, as the case 
may be, specified by the  State Government, with the previous approval of the Central Government 
having regard to ― 
(a) the controlled price, if any, fixed  under this section or by or under any other law for the 
time being in force fo r such grade or variety of food grains, edible oi lseeds or edible oils;  
(b) the general crop prospects;  
(c) the need for making such gra de or variety of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils 
available at reasonable prices to the consumers, particularly the vulnerable sections of the 
consumers; and  
(d) the recommendations, if any, of the Agricultural Prices Commission with regard to the 
price of the con cerned grade or variety of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils.]  
2[(3C) Where any producer is required by an order made with reference to clause  (f) of sub -
section ( 2) to sell any kind of sugar (whether to the Central Government or to a State Government or 
to an officer or agent of such Government or to any other person or class of persons) whether a 
notification was issued under sub -section ( 3A) or otherwise, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub -section ( 3), there shall be paid to that producer only such amount as the Central Government 
may, by order, determine, having regard to — 
(a) the fair and remunerative price, if any, determined b y the Central Government as the price 
of sugarcane to be taken into account under this section;  
(b) the manufacturing cost of sugar;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3B). 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 2009, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3C) and the Explanations  (w.e.f.  1-10-2009).  6 
 (c) the duty or tax, if any, paid or payable thereon; and  
(d) a reasonable return on the capital employed in the business o f manufacturing of sugar:  
Provided that the Central Government may determine different prices, from time to time, for 
different areas or factories or varieties of sugar:  
Provided further that where any provisional determination of price of levy sugar has b een done in 
respect of sugar produced up to the sugar season 2008 -2009, the final determination of price may be 
undertaken in accordance with the provisions of this sub -section as it stood immediately before the 1st 
day of October, 2009.  
Explanation  1[I].— For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(a) “fair and remunerative price ” means the price of sugarcane determined by the Central 
Government under this section;  
(b) “manufacturing cost of sugar ” means the net cost incurred on conversion of sugarcane into 
sugar including net cost of transportation of s ugarcane from the purchase cent re to the factory 
gate, to the extent it is borne by the producer;  
(c) “producer ” means a person carrying on the business of manufacturing sugar;  
(d) “reasonable return on the capi tal employed ” means the return on net fixed assets plus 
working capital of a producer in relation to manufacturing of sugar including procurement of 
sugarcane at a fair and remunerative price determined under this section.]  
2[Explanation II .―For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expressions “fair and 
remunerative price ” referred to in clause ( a), “manufacturing cost of sugar ” referred to in clause ( b) 
and “reasonable return on the capital  employed ” referred to in clause ( d), of this sub -section do not 
include the price paid or payable under any order or any enactment of any State Government and any 
price agreed to between the producer and the grower or a sugarcane growers' co -operative society.]  
3[(3D) The Central Governmen t may direct that no producer, importer or exporter shall sell or 
otherwise dispose of or deliver any kind of sugar or remove any kind of sugar from the bonded go 
downs of the factory in which it is produced, whether such godowns are situated within the pr emises 
of the factory or outside or from the warehouses of the importers or exporters, as the case may be 
except under and in accordance with the direction issued by the Government:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not affect the pledging of such sugar  by any producer or 
importer in favour of any scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934)  or any corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transf er of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970), so, however, 
that no such hank shall sell the sugar pledged to it except under and in accordance with a direction 
issued by the Central Government.  
(3E) The Central Government may, from time to time, by general or  special order, direct any 
producer or importer or exporter or recognised dealer or any class of producers or recognised dealers, 
to take action regarding production, maintenance of stocks, storage, sale, grading, packing, marking, 
weighment, disposal, del ivery and distribution of any kind of sugar in the manner specified in the 
direction.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of sub -section ( 3D) and this sub -section, ― 
(a) “producer ” means a person carrying on the business of manufacturing sugar;  
(b) “recognised de aler'' means a person carrying on the business of purchasing, selling or 
distributing sugar;  
                                                      
1. The e xisting  Explanation  numbered as Explanation I  by Act 35 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2009).  
2. Explanation II  ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f.14 -6-2009).  7 
 (c) “sugar ” includes plantation whi te suga r, raw sugar and refined sugar, whether 
indigenously produced or imported. ] 
(4) If the Central Government is of opinion t hat it is necessary so to do for maint aining or 
increasing the production and supply of an essential commodity, it may, by order, authorize any 
person  (hereinafter referred to as an authorized controller) to exercise, with respect to the whole or 
any part of any such undertaking engaged in the production and supply of the commodity as may be 
specified in the order such functions of control as may be provided therein and so long as such order 
is in force with respect to any undertaking or part thereof, ― 
(a) the authorized controller shall exercise  his functions in accordance with any instructions 
given to  him by the Central Government, so, however, that he shall not have any power to give 
any direction inconsistent with the provisions of any enactment or any instrument determining the 
functions of the persons in -charge of the management of the undertaking, except in so far as may 
be specifically provided by the order; and  
(b) the undertaking or part shall be carried on in accordance with any directions given b y the 
authorised controller under the provisions of the order, and any person having any functions of 
management in relation to the undertaking or part shall comply with any such directions.  
(5) An order made under this section shall, ― 
(a) in the case of a n order of a general nature or affecting a class of persons, be notified in the 
Official Gazette; and  
(b) in the case of an order directed to a specified individual be served on such individual ― 
(i) by delivering or tendering it to that individual, or  
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the outer door or some other 
conspicuous part of the premises in which that individual lives, and a written report there of 
shall be prepared and witnessed by two persons living in the neighbourh ood. 
(6) Every order made under this section by the Central Government or by any officer or authority 
of the Central Government shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it 
is made.  
 4. Imposition of duties on State Governmen ts, etc .―An order made under section  3 may 
confer powers and impose duties upon the Central Government or the State Government or officers 
and authorities of Central Government or State Government, and may contain directions to any State 
Government or to o fficers and authorities thereof as to the exercise of any such powers or the 
discharge of any such duties.  
5. Delegation of powers .―The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that  1[the 
power to make orders or issu e notifications under section 3 ] shall, in relation to such matters and 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also by ― 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government , or 
(b) such State Government or such officer or such authority sub ordinate to a State 
Government , 
as may be specified in the direction.  
6. Effect of orders inconsistent with other enactments .―Any order made under section  3 shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in an y enactment other than 
this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
 2[6A. Confiscation of essential commodity .― 3[(1)] Where any  4[essential commodity is 
seized]  in pursuance of an order made under section  3 in relation thereto,  5[a report of such seizure  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1971, s. 3, fo r “the power  to make orders under section 3”  (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1966, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -9-1966).   
3. Section 6A renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 92 of 1976, s. 4  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 4, for “foodgrains, edible oil seeds or edible oils are seized”  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
5. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s.  4, for “it may be produced without  any unreasonable delay, before”  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   8 
 shall, without unreasonable delay, be made to]  the Collector of the district or th e Presidency town in 
which such 1[essential commodity is seized]  and whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the 
contraven tion of such order, the Collector  2[may, if he thinks it expedient so to do, direct the essential 
commodity so seized to be produced for inspection before  him, and if he is satisfied]  that there has 
been a contravention of the order  3[may order confiscatio n of― 
(a) the essential commodity so seized;  
(b) any package, covering or receptacle in which such essential commodity is found; and  
(c) any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in carrying such essential commodity:]  
Provided that without preju dice to any action which may be taken under any other  provision of 
this Act, no food grains or edible oilseeds in pursuance of an order made under section  3 in relation 
thereto from a pro ducer shall, if the seized food grains or edible oilseeds have been pro duced by  him, 
be confiscated under this section:  
4[Provided further that in the case of any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used for the 
carriage of goods or passengers for  hire, the owner of such animal, vehicle, vessel or other 
conveyance sha ll be given an option to pay, in lieu of its confiscation, a fine not exceeding the market 
price at the date of seizure of the essential commodity sought to be carried by such animal, vehicle, 
vessel or other conveyance.]  
4[(2) Where the Collector, on rece iving a report of seizure or on inspection of any essential 
commodity under sub -section  (1), is of the opinion that the essential commodity is subject to speedy 
and natural decay or it is otherwise expedient in the public interest so to do, he may ― 
(i) order the same to be sold at the cont rolled price, if any, fixed for such essential commodity 
under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force; or  
(ii) where no such price is fixed, order the same to be sold by public auction:  
Provid ed that in case of foodgrains, the Collector may, for its equitable distribution and 
availability at fair prices, order the same to be sold through fair price shops at the price fixed by the 
Central Government or by the State Government, as the case may be , for the retail sale of such 
foodgrains to the public.  
 (3) where any essential commodity is sold, as aforesaid, the sale proceeds thereof, after deduction 
of the expenses of any such sale or auction or other incidental expenses relating thereto, shall ― 
(a) where no order or confiscation is ultimately passed by the Collector,  
(b) where an order passed on appeal under sub -section ( 1) of section  6C so requires, or  
(c) where in a prosecution instituted for the contravention of the order in respect of which  an 
order of confiscation has been made under this section, the person concerned is acquitted,  
be paid to the owner  thereof or the person from whom it is seized.]  
6B. Issue of show cause notice before confiscation of food grains, etc. ―5[(1)] No order 
confi scating  6[any 7[essential commodity]  package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or 
other conveyance] shall be made under section  6A unless the owner of such  2[essential 
commodity]  package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance) or the person 
from whom  8[it is seized] ― 
(a) is given a notice in writing informing  him of the grounds on which it is proposed to 
confiscate the  8[essential commodity]  package, covering, receptacle, animal, vehicle, vessel or 
other conveyance];  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 4, for “food grains, edible oil seeds or edible oils are seized”  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
2. Subs. by  Act 92 of 1976, s. 4, for “if satisfied”  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).   
3. Subs. b y Act 30 of 1974, s. 4, for “may order confiscation of th e essential commodity so seized” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
4. Ins. by  Act 92 of 1976, s. 4 . 
5. Section 6B renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 30 of 1974, s.  5 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s.  5, for “any food grain,  edible oilseeds or edible oils”  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
7. Subs . by Act 30 of 1974, s.  5, for “essential commodity”  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
8. Subs . by Act 36 of 1967, s.  5, for “they are seized”  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  9 
 (b) is given an opportunity of making a presentati on in wiring within such reasonable time as 
may be specified in the notice against the ground of confiscation; and  
(c) is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
1[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no order co nfiscating any animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance shall be made under section  6A if the owner of the animal, vehicle 
vessel or other conveyance proves to the satisfaction of the Collector that it was used in carrying the 
essential commodity withou t the knowledge or connivance of the owner  himself,  his agent, if any, and 
the person in charge of the animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance and that each of them had 
taken all reasonable and necessary precautions against such use.]  
2[(3) No order co nfiscating any essential commodity package, covering, receptacle, animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance shall be invalid  merely by reason of any defect or irregularity in 
the notice, given under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), if, in giving such notic e, the provisions of that 
clause have been substantially complied with.]  
6C. Appeal.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of confiscation under section  6A may, 
within one month from the date of the communication to  him of such order, appeal to any judicial  
authority  appointed by the State Government concerned and the judicial authority shall, after giving 
an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, pass such order as it may think fit, confirming, modifying 
or annulling the order appealed against.  
(2) Where  an order under section  6A is modified or annulled by  such judicial authority, or where 
in a prosecution instituted for the contravention of the order in respect of which an order of 
confiscation has been made under section  6A, the person concerned is acqu itted, and in either case it 
is not possible for any reason to  3[return the essential commodity seized  ], 4[such persons shall, except 
except as provided by sub -section ( 3) of section 6A, be paid] the price therefore  5[as if the essential 
commodity,]  had been sol d to the Government with reasonable interest calculated from the day of the 
seizure of  6[the essential commodity]  7[and such price shall be determined ― 
(i) in the case of food grains, edible oilseeds or edible oils, in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -section ( 3B) of section  3; 
(ii) in the case of sugar, in accordance with the provisions of subsection ( 3C) of section  3 ; 
and 
(iii) in the case of an y other essential commodity, in accordance with the provisions of sub -
section ( 3) of section  3. ] 
6D. Award of confiscation not to interfere with other punishments .―The award of any 
confiscation under this Act by the Collector shall not prevent the inflict ion of any punishment to 
which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act.]  
8[6E. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases .―Whenever any essential commodity is seized in 
pursuance of an order made under section 3 in relation thereto, or any package, covering or receptacle 
in which such essential commodity is found, or any animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used 
in carrying such essential com modity is seized pendi ng confiscation under section 6 A, the Collector, 
or, as the case may be, the State Government concerned under section 6 C shall have, and, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, any 
court, tribunal or other authority  shall not have, jurisdiction to make orders with regard to the  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 30 o f 1974, s . 5 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).)  
2. Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s . 5 (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  
3. Subs . by Act 36 of 1967, s. 6, for “return the food grains or edible oilseeds or edible oils seized” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
4. Subs. by Act 92 of 1976, s.  6, for “such person shall be paid” .  
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 6, for “as if the food grains, e dible oilseeds or ed ible oils, as the case may be,” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).   
6. Subs.  by s. 6, ibid., for “articles”  (w.e.f.  30-12-1967).   
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “ and s uch price shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3B) of 
section 3  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
8. Subs. by Act 42 of 1986, s. 2 , for section 6E  (w.e.f. 9 -9-1986).  
 10 
 possession, delivery, disposal, release or distribution of such essential commodity, package, covering, 
receptacle, animal, vehi cle, vessel or other conveyance.]  
 7. Penalties .―1[(1) If any person contravenes any order made under Section 3 ,― 
(a) he shall be punishable,―  
(i) in the case of an order made with reference to clause ( h) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) 
of that section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be 
liable to fine, and  
(ii) in the case of any other or der, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than three months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a se ntence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months;  
(b) any property in respect of which the order has been contravened shall be forfeited to the 
Government;  
(c) any package, covering or receptacle in which the property is found and any animal, 
vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in carrying the property shall, if the court so orders , be 
forfeited to the Government.  
(2) If any person to wh om a direction is given under clause ( b) of sub -section  (4) of section 3 fails 
to comply with the directio n, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than three months but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months.  
(2A) If any person convicted of an offence under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or 
under sub -section ( 2) is again convicted of an offence under the same pro vision, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for the second and for every subsequent offence for a term which shall 
not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years a nd shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the court may, for any a dequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.  
(2B) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 2A), the fact  that an offence under sub -clause 
(ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) has caused no substantial harm to the 
general public or to any individual shall be an adequate and special reason for awarding a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than three months or six months, as the case m ay be.  
2[(3) Where a person having been convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) is again convicted 
convicted of an offence under that sub -section for contravention of an order in respect of an essential 
commodity, the court by which such person is convicted sh all, in addition to any penalty which may 
be imposed on him under that sub -section, by order, direct that  that person shall not carry on any 
business in that essential commodity for such period , not being less than six months, as may be 
specified by the Co urt in the Order. ] 
3[7A. Power of Central Government to recover certain amounts as arrears of land 
revenue.―(1) Where any person, liable to ― 
(a) pay any amount in pursuance of any order made under section 3, or  
(b) deposit any amount to the credit of any A ccount or Fund constituted by or in pursuance of 
any order made under that section,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 6, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 7 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
 11 
 makes any default in paying or depositing the whole or any part of such amount, the amount in respect 
of which such default has been made shall [whether such order was made  before or after the 
commencement of the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1984 (34 of 1984), and whether the 
liability of such person to pay or deposit such amount arose before or after such commencement ] be 
recoverable by Government together with si mple interest due thereon computed at the rate of  1[fifteen 
per cent.] per annum from the date of such default to the date of recovery of such amount, as an arrear 
of land revenue  2[or as a public demand].  
(2) The amount recovered under  sub-section ( 1) sha ll be dealt with in accordance with the order 
under which the liability to pay or deposit such amount arose.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or any 
contract to the contrary, no court, tribunal or other au thority shall grant any injunction or make any 
order prohibiting or restraining any Government from recovering any amount as an arrear of land 
revenue  2[or as a public demand] in pursuance of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(4) If any order, in pursuanc e of which any amount has been recovered by Governmen t as an 
arrear of land revenue 2[or as a public demand] under subsection ( 1) is declared by a competent court, 
after giving to the Government a reasonable opportunity of being heard, to be invalid, the G overnment 
shall refund the amount so recovered by it to the person from whom it was recovered, together with 
simple interest due thereon, computed at the rate of  1[fifteen per cent.] per annum, from the date of 
recovery of such amount to the date on which such refund is made.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “Government ” means the Government by which 
the concerned order under section 3 was made or where such order was made by an officer or 
authority subordinate to any Government, that Government.]  
8. Attempts and abetment .―Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets a contravention 
of, any order made under section 3 shall be deemed to have contravened that order.  
9.  False statement .―If any person, ― 
(i) when required by any order made under section 3 to make any statement or furnish any 
information, makes any statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material 
particular and which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false, or does not believe 
to be true, or  
(ii) makes any such statement as af oresaid in any book, account, record, declaration, return or 
other document which he is required by any such order to maintain or furnish,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to   3[five years,] or with fine, 
or with both.  
10. Offences by companies .―(1) If the person contravening an order made under section 3 is a 
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the  company as well as the company, 
shall be deemed  to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishme nt if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1986, s. 3, for  “six per cent.”  (w.e.f. 8 -9-1986).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 8 -9-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1967, s. 8, for “three years ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1967).  12 
 other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other o fficer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
1[10A. Offences to be cognizable .―Notwithstanding any thing contained in  2[the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] every offence punishable under this Act shall be 
“cognizable  3***]. 
4[10B. Power of court to publish name, place of business, etc., of companies convicted under 
the Act.―(1) Where any c ompany is convicted under this Act, it shall be competent for the court 
convicting the company to cause the name and place of business of the company, nature of the 
contravention, the fact that the company has been so convicted and such other particulars a s the court 
may consider to be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to be published at the expense of the 
company in such newspapers or in such other manner as the court may direct.  
(2) No publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be made until the period for preferring an appeal 
against the orders of the court has expired without any appeal having been preferred, or such an 
appeal, having been preferred, has been disposed of.  
(3) The expenses of any publication under sub -section ( 1) shall be recover able from the company 
as if it were a fine imposed by the court.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “company ” has the meaning assigned to it in 
clause ( a) of the Explanation of section 10.]  
10C. Presumption of culpable mental state .―(1) In any prosecution for any offence under this 
Act which requires a culpable mental s tate on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the 
existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.  
Explanation .―In this section, “culpable mental state ” includes intention, motive, knowledge of a 
fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to 
exist beyond rea sonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability.]  
11.  Cognizance of offences .―No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a person who is a 
public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of I860) 5[or any person 
aggrieved or any recognised consumer association, whether such person is a member of that 
association or not].  
6[Explanatio n.―For the purposes of this section and section 12AA, “recognised consumer 
association ” means a voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) or any other law for the time being in force.]  
7[12. Special provision regardi ng fine.―Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magistrate, 
or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered by the State Government in this 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1967, s.  9 (w. e.f. 30 -12-1967).  
2. Subs . by Act 30 of 1974, s . 7, for “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
3. The words “and bailable ” omitted by s . 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
5. Ins. by Ac t 73 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
6. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -5-1987).  
7. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 9 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  13 
 behalf, to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five thousand rupees on any person convicted of 
contravening an y order made under section 3. ] 
1[12A. Power to try summarily .―(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that a situation has 
arisen where, in  the interests of production, supply  or distribution of  2[any essential commodity not 
being an essential commodity referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2)] or trade or commerce therein 
and other relevant considerations, it is necessary that the contra vention of any order made under 
section 3 in relation to such essential commodity should be tried summarily, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such order to be a special order for purposes of 
summary trial under t his section, and every such notification shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
issued, before both Houses of Parliament:  
3[Provided that ― 
(a) every such notification issued after the commencement of the Essential Commodities 
(Amendment) Act, 1971, s hall, unless sooner rescinded, cease to operate at the expiration of two 
years after the publication of such notification in the Official Gazette;  
(b) every such notification in force immediately before such commencement shall, unless 
sooner rescinded, cea se to operate at the expiration of two years after such commencement:  
Provided further that nothing in the foregoing proviso shall affect any case relating to the 
contravention of a special order specified in any such notification if proceedings by way of summary 
trial have commenced before that notification is rescinded or ceases to operate and the provisions of 
this section shall continue to apply to that case as if that notification had not been rescinded or had not 
ceased to operate.]  
4[(2) Notwithstand ing anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
all, offences relating to ― 
(a) the contravention of an order made under section 3 with respect to ― 
5*   *   *   *  * 
(ii) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oil; or  
(iii) drugs; and  
(b) where any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in relation to a special order is i n 
force, the contravention of such special order,  
shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class specially empowered in 
this behalf by the State Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 
262 to 2 65 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful 
for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not e xceeding one year:  
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under 
this section, it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year ma y have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, 
undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an order 
to that effect and thereafter recall any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to he ar or 
re-hear the case in the manner provided by the said Code.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  6[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
1973 (2 of 1974),] there shall be no appeal by a convicted person in any case tried summarily under  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 1964, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for “any essential com modity”  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
3. Added by Act 66 of 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
5. Sub-clause ( i) omitted by Act 54 of 2006, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -2-2007).  
6. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for “the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)”  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  14 
 this section in which the Magistrate passes a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one 
month,  1[and of fine not exceeding two thousand rupees] whether or not any order of forfeiture of 
property or an order under  2[section 452] of the said Code is made i n addition to such sentences, but 
an appeal shall lie where any sentence  3*** in excess of the aforesaid limits is passed by the 
Magistrate.  
4[(4) All cases relating to the contravention of an order referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), 
not being a  special order, and pending before a Magistrate immediately before the commencement of 
the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 1974, and, where any notification is issued under sub -
section ( 1) in relation to a special order, all cases relating to the co ntravention of such special order 
and pending before a Magistrate immediately before the date of the issue of such notification, shall, if 
no witnesses have been examined before such commencement or the said date, as the case may be, be 
tried in a summary way under this section, and if any such case is pending before a Magistrate who is 
not competent to try the same in a summary way under this section, it shall be forwarded to a 
Magistrate so competent.]  
 5[12B. Grant of injunction, etc., by civil courts .―No civil court shall grant an injunction or 
make any order for any other relief, against the Central Government or any State Government or a 
Public officer in respect of any Act done or purporting to be done by such Government, or such 
officer in his offi cial capacity, under this Act or any order made thereunder, until after notice of the 
application for such injunction or other relief has been given to such Government or officer.]  
13. Presumption as to orders .―Where an order purports to have been made and  signed by an 
authority in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act, a court shall presume that such 
order was so made by that authority within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
14. Burden of proof in certain cases .―Wher e a person is prosecuted for contravening any order 
made under section 3 which prohibits him from doing  any act or being in possession of a thing 
without lawful authority or without a permit, licence or other document, the burden of proving that he 
has suc h authority, permit, licence or other document shall be on him.  
15. Protection of action taken under Act .―(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of any order made under section 3.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Gov ernment for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any 
order made under section 3.  
6[15A. Prosecution of public servants .―Where any person who is a public servant is accused o f 
of any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the 
discharge of his duty in pursuance of an order made under section 3, no court shall take cognizance of 
such offence except with the previous sanction ― 
(a) of the C entral Government, in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may 
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs 
of the Union;  
(b) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is emplo yed or, as the case may be, 
was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of 
the State.]  
16. Repeals and savings .―(1) The following laws are hereby repealed: ― 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1974, s. 10, for “or of fine not exceedi ng two thousand rupees or both” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
2. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid., for “section 517 ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
3. The words “of imprisonme nt or fine” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974) . 
4. Subs . by s. 10,  ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w. e.f. 22 -6-1974).   
5. Ins. by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1974).  
6.  Ins. by Act 92 of 1976, s. 8  (w.e.f. 2 -9-1976).  15 
 (a) the Essential Commodities Ordinance, 1955 (1 of 1955);  
(b) any other law in force in any State immediately before the commencement of this Act in 
so far as such law controls or authorises the control of the  production, supply and distribution of, 
and trade and commerce in, any essential commodity.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order made or deemed to be made by any authority 
whatsoever, under any law repealed hereby and in force immediately before the  commencement of 
this Act, shall, in so far as such order may be made under this Act, be deemed to be made under this 
Act and continue in force, and accordingly any appointment made, licence or permit granted or 
direction issued under any such order and in  force immediately before such commencement shall 
continue in force until and unless it is superseded by any appointment made, licence or permit granted 
or direction issued under this Act.  
(3) The provision of sub -section ( 2) shall be without prejudice to the provision contained in 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which shall also apply to the repeal of the 
Ordinance or other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) as if such Ordinance or other law had been an 
enactment.  16 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2A)  
ESSENTIAL  COMMODITIES  
(1) drugs.  
Explanation .―For the pu rposes of this Schedule, “ drugs ” has the m eaning assigned to it in clause 
(b) of section 3 of the  Drug s and Cosmetics Act, 1940;  
(2) fertilizer, w hether  inorganic, organic or mixed;  
(3) foodstuffs , including edible oilseeds and oils;  
(4) hank yarn made wholly from cott on; 
(5) petroleum and p etroleum products;  
(6) raw jute HI jute textiles;  
(7) (i) seeds of food -crops and seeds of fruits an d vegetables;  
(ii) seeds of cattle  fodder; and  
(iii) jute seeds. ] 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e. f. 12-2007).  
--------------------------The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT,  1955  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Application of Act . 
3. Definitions.  
4. Overriding effect of Act . 
HINDU MARRIAGES  
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage.  
6. [Omitted .]. 
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage.  
8. Registration of Hindu marriages.  
RESTITUTION  OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
9. Restitution of conjugal right.  
10. Judicial separation . 
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
11. Void marriages.  
12. Voidable marriages.  
13. Divorce.  
13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings.  
13B. Divorce by mutual consent.  
14. No petition for divorce to be presented within one year of marriage.  
15. Divorced persons when may marry again.  
16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages.  
17. Punishment of bigamy.  
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage . 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE  
19. Court to which petition shall be presented.  
20. Contents and verification of petitions.  
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908.  
21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases.  
21B. Special provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act.  
21C. Documentary evidence.  
22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published.  
23. Decree in proceedings.  
23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other proceedings . 
24. Maintenance pendente lite  and expenses of proceedings.  
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance.  
26. Custody of children.  
27. Disposal of property.  
28. Appeals from decrees and orders.  
 28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders.  2 
 SAVINGS AND REPEALS  
SECTIONS  
29. Savings . 
30. [Repealed .]. 
  3 
 THE HINDU MARRIAGE ACT,  1955  
ACT NO. 25 OF 19551 
[18th May, 1955 .] 
An act to amend and codify the law relating to marriage among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and applies also to 
Hindus domiciled in the territories  to which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.  
2. Application of Act .—(1) This Act applies — 
(a) to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat  or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or  Jew by religion, unless it is proved that any such person would not have been 
governe d by the Hindu law or by  any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters  dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed.  
Explanation. —The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be: — 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and  who is brought up as  a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; and   
(c) any person who is a convert or re -convert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothi ng contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of  any Scheduled tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the Constitution 
unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.  
(3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unl ess the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed  for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or  family:  
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy; and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been discontinued 
by the family;  
(b) “district court ” means, in any area fo r which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area the principal  civil court of original jurisdiction, and includes any other civil court which 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I and to 
Pondicherry (w.e.f 1 -10-1963) with modifications by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule I.  
 4 
 may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, as havin g 
jurisdiction in respect of the matters dealt with in this Act;  
(c) “full blood ” and “half blood ”—two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood 
when they are descended  from a common ances tor by the same wife and by half blood  when they are 
descended from a common ancestor but by different wives ; 
(d) “uterine  blood ”—two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they 
are descended from a common ancestress but by different husbands;   
Explanation .—In clauses ( c) and ( d), “ancestor ” includes the father and “ancestress ” the mother;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) (i) “sapinda  relationship ” with reference to any person extends as far as the third generation 
(inclusive) in the line  of ascent through the mother, and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of ascent 
through the father, the line being  traced upwards in each case from the person conc erned, who is to 
be counted as the first generation;   
(ii) two persons are said to be “sapindas ” of each other if one is a lineal ascendant of the 
other within the limits of  sapinda  relationship, or if they have a common lineal ascendant who is 
within the  limits of sapinda  relationship  with reference to each of them;  
(g) “degrees of prohibited relationship ”-two persons are said to be within the “degrees of 
prohibited relationship ”— 
(i) if one is a lineal ascendant of the other; or  
(ii) if one was the wife  or husband of a lineal ascendant or descendant of the other; or  
(iii) if one was the wife of the brother or of the father ’s or mother ’s brother or of the 
grandfather ’s or grandmother ’s brother of the other; or   
(iv) if the two are brother and sister, uncl e and niece, aunt and nephew, or children of brother 
and sister or of two brothers or of two sisters;  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clauses ( f) and (g), relationship includes — 
(i) relationship by half or uterine blood as well as by full blood;   
(ii) illegitimate blood relationship as well as legitimate;   
(iii) relationship by adoption as well as by blood;  
and all terms of relationship in those clauses shall be construed accordingly.  
4. Overriding effect of Act .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, — 
(a) any text rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is  inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act.  
HINDU MARRIAGES  
5. Conditions for a Hindu marriage .—A marriage may be so lemnized between any two Hindus, if 
the following conditions are fulfilled, namely :— 
(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;  
1[(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party — 
(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 2, for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  5 
 (b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such 
a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or  
(c) has been subject to recurre nt attacks of insanity  1***;] 
(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of  2[twenty -one years] and the bride, the age 
of 3[eighteen years] at the time of the marriage;  
(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship unless the custom or usage 
governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;  
(v) the parties are not sapindas  of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them 
permit s of a marriage between the two;  
4*                               *                             *                            *                         *                                * 
6. [Guardianship in marriage .]—Omitted  by the Child Marriage Restraint  (Amendment ) Act, 1978,  
(2 of 1978), s. 6 and Schedule  (w.e.f . 1-10-1978).  
7. Ceremonies for a Hindu marriage .—(1) A Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance 
with the customary rites and ceremonies of either party thereto.  
(2) Where such rites and ceremonies include the Saptapadi  (that is, the taking of seven steps by the 
bridegroom and the bride jointly before the sacred fire), the marriage becomes complete and binding 
when the seventh step is taken.  
8. Registration of Hindu marriages .—(1) For the purpose of facilitating the proof of Hindu 
marriages, the State Government may make rules providing that the parties to any such marriage may 
have the particulars relating to their marriage entered in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed in a Hindu Marriage Register kept for the purpose.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, if it is of 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, provide that the enterin g of the particulars referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall be compulsory in the State or in any part thereof, whether in all cases or in such 
cases as may be specified, and where any such direction has been issued, any person contravening any 
rule made in t his behalf shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees.  
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid before the State Legislature, as soon as may be, 
after they are made.  
(4) The Hindu Marriage Register shall at all reasonab le times be open for inspection, and shall be 
admissible as evidence of the statements therein contained and certified extracts therefrom shall, on 
application, be given by the Registrar on payment to him of the prescribed fee.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything  contained in this section, the validity of any  Hindu marriage shall in no 
way be affected by the omission to make the entry.   
RESTITUTION  OF CONJUGAL RIGHTS AND JUDICIAL SEPARATION  
9. Restitution of conjugal right .—5** * When either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable 
excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply, by petition to the district 
court, for restitution of conjugal rights and the court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made 
in such  petition and that there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree 
restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
6[Explanation .—Where  a question arises whether there has been reasonable excuse for withdrawal 
from the society, the burden of proving reasonable excuse shall be on the person who has withdrawn from 
the society.]  
7*                              *                         *                           *                             *                               *  
                                                           
1. The words “or epilepsy” omitted by Act 39 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule for “elighteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
3. Subs. by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid., for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
4. Clause ( vi) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 68 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  6 
 10. Judicial separation .—1[(1) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnised before or after the 
commencement of this Act, may present a petition praying for a decree f or judicial separation on any of 
the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 13, and in the case of a wife also on any of the grounds 
specified in sub -section ( 2) thereof, as grounds on which a petition for divorce might have been 
presented.]  
(2) Where a decree for judicial separation has been passed, it shall no longer be obligatory for the 
petitioner to cohabit with the respondent, but the court may, on the application by petition of either party 
and on being satisfied of the truth of the stateme nts made in such petition, rescind the decree if it 
considers it just and reasonable to do so.  
NULLITY OF MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE  
11. Void marriages .—Any marriage solemnised  after the commencement of this Act shall be null 
and void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto  2[against the other party], be so declared 
by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one of the conditions specified in clauses ( i), (iv) and ( v) of 
section 5.  
12. Voidable marriages .—(1) Any marriage solemnised, whether before or after the commencement 
of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, 
namely: — 
3[(a) that the marriage has not been consummated owing to the impo rence of the respondent; or]  
(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition specified in clause ( ii) of section 5; or  
(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of the guardian in marriage of the 
petitioner  4[was required under section 5 as it stood immediately before the commencement of the 
Child Marriag e Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978 (2 of 1978)], the consent of such guardian was 
obtained by force  5[or by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony or as to any material fact or 
circumstance s concerning the respondent]; or  
(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the 
petitioner.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1), no petition for annulling a marriage — 
(a) on the ground specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entertained if — 
(i) the petition is presented more than one year after the force had ceased to operate or, as the 
case may be, the  fraud had been discovered; or  
(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, lived with the other party to the marriage as 
husband or wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been 
discovered;  
(b) on the grou nd specified in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be entertained unless the court is 
satisfied— 
(i) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;  
(ii) that proceedings have been instituted in the case of a marriage solemnised before the 
commencement of this Act within one year of such commencement and in the case of marriages 
solemnised after such commencement within one year from the date of the marriage; and  
(iii) that marital intercourse with the consent of the pe titioner has not taken place since the 
discovery by the petitioner of the existence of  6[the said ground].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “i s required under section 5” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 6, for “or fraud” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the grounds for a decree” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  7 
 13. Divorce .—(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may, on a petition presented by either the husband or  the wife, be dissolved by a decree of divorce on the 
ground that the other party — 
1[(i) has, after the solemnization of the marriage, had voluntary sexual intercourse with any 
person other than his or her spouse; or  
 (ia) has, after the solemnization of th e marriage, treated the petitioner with cruelty; or  
 (ib) has deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately 
preceding the presentation of the petition; or]  
 (ii) has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another relig ion; or  
2[(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind, or has been suffering continuously or intermittently 
from mental disorder of such a kind and to such an extent that the petitioner cannot reasonably be 
expected to live with the respondent.  
Explanation. —In this clause, — 
(a) the expression “mental disorder ” means mental illness, arrested or incomplete 
development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any other disorder or disability of mind and 
includes schizophrenia;  
(b) the expression “psychopathic disorder ” means a persistent disorder or disability of mind 
(whether or not including sub —normality of intelligence) which results in abnormally aggressive 
or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of the other party, and whether or not it requires or 
is susce ptible to medical treatment; or]  
3*   *   *  *   * 
 (v) has  3* * * been suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form; or  
(vi) has  renounced the world by entering any religious order; or  
(vii) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of it, had that party been alive;  4*** 
5*                                  *                            *                      *                         *                           * 
6[Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “desertion ” means the desertion of the 
petitioner by the other party to the marriage without reasonable cause and without the consent or 
against the wish of such party, and includes the wilful neglect of the petitioner by the other party to the 
marriage, and its gram matical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.]   
7[(1A) Either party to a marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement of this Act, 
may also present a petition for the dissolution of the marriage by a decree of divorce on the ground — 
(i) that there has been no resumption of cohabitation as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of  8[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for judicial separation in a proceeding 
to which they were parties; or  
(ii) that there has been no restitution o f conjugal rights as between the parties to the marriage for a 
period of  8[one year] or upwards after the passing of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights in a 
proceeding to which they were parties.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Clause ( iv) omitted by Act 6 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  
4. The word “o r” omitted by Act 44 of 1964, s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1964).  
5. Clause s (viii) and ( ix) omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -12-1964).  
6. Ins. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1964,  s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -12-1964).  
8. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “two year s” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  8 
 (2) A wife may also present a  petition for the dissolution of her marriage by a decree of divorce on 
the ground, — 
(i) in the case of any marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act, that the husband 
had married again before such commencement or that any other wife of the husband married before 
such commencement was alive at the time of the solemnization of the marriage of the petitioner:  
Provided that in either case the other wife is alive at the time of the presentation of the petition; or  
(ii) that the husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or  
1[bestiality; or]  
2[(iii) that in a suit under section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956                 
(78 of 1956), or in a proceeding under secti on 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973               
(2 of 1974) (or under the corresponding section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898                 
(5 of 1898), a decree or order, as the case may be, has been passed against the husband  awarding 
maintenance to the wife notwithstanding that she was living apart and that since the passing of such 
decree or order, cohabitation between the parties has not been resumed for one year or upwards;  
(iv) that her marriage (whether consummated or not) was solemnized before she attained the age 
of fifteen years and she has repudiated the marriage after attaining that age but before attaining the 
age of eighteen years.  
Explanation. —This clause applies whether the marriage was solemnized before or after the 
commencement  of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976). ] 
3[13A. Alternate relief in divorce proceedings .—In any proceeding under this Act, on a petition for 
dissolution o f marriage by a decree of divorce, except in so far as the petition is founded on the grounds 
mentioned in clauses ( ii), (vi) and ( vii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13, the court may, if it considers it just 
so to do having regard to the circumstances of the case, pass instead a decree for judicial separation.  
13B. Divorce by mutual consent .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act a petition for dissolution 
of marriage by a decree of divorce may be presented to the district court by both the parties to a  marriage 
together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or after the commencement  of the Marriage Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of 
one year or more, that they have not been  able to live together and that they have mutually agreed that the 
marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of the 
presentation of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after the said 
date, if the petition is not withdrawn in the meantime, the court shall, on being satisfied, after hearing the 
parties and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized and tha t the 
averments in the petition are true, pass a decree of divorce declaring the marriage to be dissolved with 
effect from the date of the decree.]  
14. No petition for divorce to be prese nted within one year of marriage. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contai ned in this Act, it shall not be competent for any court to entertain any petition for 
dissolution of a marriage by a decree of divorce,  4[unless at the date of the presentation of the petition one 
one year has elapsed] since the date of the marriage:  
Provided  that the court may, upon application made to it in accordance with such rules as may be 
made by the High Court in that behalf, allow a petition to be presented  4[before one year has elapsed] 
since the date of the marriage on the ground that the case is on e of exceptional hardship to the petitioner 
or of exceptional depravity on the part of the respondent, but if it appears to the court at the hearing of the 
petition that the petitioner obtained leave to present the petition by any misrepresentation or conc ealment 
of the nature of the case, the court may, if it pronounces a decree, do so subject to the condition that the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 68 of 1976, s. 7, for “bestiality” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-2976).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words ( w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  9 
 decree shall not have effect until after the  1[expiry of one year] from the date of the marriage or may 
dismiss the petition without prejud ice to any petition which may be brought after  2[expiration of the said 
one year] upon the same or substantially the same facts as those alleged in support of the petition            
so dismissed.  
(2) In disposing of any application under this section for leave to present a petition for divorce before 
the 3[expiration of one year] from the date of the marriage, the court shall have regard to the interests of 
any children of the marriage and to the question whether there is a reasonable probability of a 
reconciliation between the parties before the expiration of the  4[said one year].  
15. Divorced persons when may marry again .—When a marriage has been dissolved by a decree of 
divorce and either there is no right of appeal against the decree or, if there is suc h a right of appeal, the 
time for appealing has expired without an appeal having been presented, or an appeal has been presented 
but has been dismissed, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry again.  
5*                             *                        *                              *                                *                             *  
6[16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable marriages .—(1) Notwithstanding that a marriage 
marriage is null and void under section 11, any child of such marriage who would have been legitimate if 
the marriage had been valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born before or after the 
commencement  of the Marriage Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not a decree 
of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to 
be void otherwise than on a petition under this Act.  
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a voidable marriage under section 12, any ch ild 
begotten or conceived before the decree is made, who would have been the legitimate child of the parties 
to the marriage if at the date of the decree it had been dissolved instead of being annulled, shall be 
deemed to be their legitimate child notwiths tanding the decree of nullity.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed as conferring upon any 
child of a marriage which is null and void or which is annulled by a decree of nullity under section 12, 
any rights in or t o the property of any person, other than the parents, in any case where, but for the 
passing of this Act, such child would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any such rights by 
reason of his not being the legitimate child of his parents.]  
17. Punishment of bigamy .—Any marriage between two Hindus solemnized after the 
commencement of this Act is void if at the date of such marriage either party had a husband or wife 
living; and the provisions of sections 494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code, 186 0 (45 of 1860), shall 
apply accordingly.  
18. Punishment for contravention of certain other conditions for a Hindu marriage .—Every 
person who procures a marriage of himself or herself to be solemnized under this Act in contravention of 
the conditions specified in clauses ( iii), (iv), 7[and ( v)] of section 5 shall be punishable — 
 8[(a) in the case of contravention of the condition specified in clause  (iii) of section 5, with 
rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.]  
(b) in the case of a contravention of the condition specified in clause ( iv) or clause ( v) of                  
section 5, with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend 
to one  thousand rupees, or with both;  9* * * 
10*                      *                             *                            *                              *                                   *  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 9, for “expiry of three ye ars” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expir ation of the said one year ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “expiry of three years” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “said three  years” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Proviso omitted by s.10 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for s. 16 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
7. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule, for “( v) and ( vi)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
8. Subs. by Act 6 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 30 -10-2007).  
9. The word “and” omitted by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
10. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 6 and Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  10 
 JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE  
1[19. Court to which petition shall be presented .—Every petition under this Act shall be presented 
to the District Court within the local limits of whose ordinary original civil jurisdiction: — 
(i) the marriage was solemnized, or  
(ii) the respondent, at the time  of the presentation of the petition, resides, or  
(iii) the parties to the marriage last resided together, or  
2[(iiia) in case the wife is the petitioner, wher she is residing on the date of presentation of the 
petition; or ] 
(iv) the petitioner is residing  at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case where the 
respondent is at that time, residing outside the territories to which this Act extends, or has not been 
heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons who w ould naturally have 
heard of him if he were alive. ] 
20. Contents and verification of petitions .—(1) Every petition presented under this Act shall state 
as distinctly as the nature of the case permits the facts on which the claim to relief is founded  3[and,  
except in a petition under section 11, shall also state] that there is no collusion between the petitioner and 
the other party to the marriage.  
(2) The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be verified by the petitioner or 
some other  competent person in the manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and may, at the 
hearing, be referred to as evidence.  
21. Application of Act 5 of 1908 .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to such 
rules as the High Cour t may make in this behalf, all proceedings under this Act shall be regulated, as far 
as may be, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
4[21A. Power to transfer petitions in certain cases .—(1) Where — 
(a) a petition under this Act has been presented to a district court having jurisdiction by a party to 
a marriage praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce 
under section 13, and  
(b) another petition under this Act has been presented thereafter by the other party to the marriage 
praying for a decree for judicial separation under section 10 or for a decree of divorce under section 
13 on any ground, whether in the same district court or in a different district court, in the same State 
or in a different State,  
the pe titions shall be dealt with as specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) In a case where sub -section ( 1) applies, — 
(a) if the petitions are presented to the same district court, both the petitions shall be tried and 
heard together by that district court;  
(b) if th e petitions are presented to different district courts, the petition presented later shall be 
transferred to the district court in which the earlier petition was presented and both the petitions shall 
be heard and disposed of together by the district court  in which the earlier petition was presented.  
(3) In a case where clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) applies, the court or the Government, as the case may 
be, competent under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to transfer any suit or proceeding 
from  the district court in which the later petition has been presented to the district court in which the 
earlier petition is pending, shall exercise its powers to transfer such later petition as if it had been 
empowered so to do under the said Code.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 12, for s. 19 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 13, for “and shall also State”  (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  11 
 21B. Spec ial provision relating to trial and disposal of petitions under the Act .—(1) The trial of a 
petition under this Act shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in respect of 
the trial, be continued from day to day until its c onclusion unless the court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded.  
(2) Every petition under this Act shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour  shall be 
made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of service of notice of the petition on the 
respondent.  
(3) Every appeal under this Act shall be heard as expeditiously as possible, and endeavour shall be 
made to conclude the hearing wi thin three months from the date of service of notice of appeal on the 
respondent.  
21C. Documentary evidence .—Notwithstanding anything in any enactment to the contrary, no 
document shall be inadmissible in evidence in any proceeding at the trial of a petiti on under this Act on 
the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered.]  
1[22. Proceedings to be in camera and may not be printed or published .—(1) Every proceeding 
under this Act shall be conducted in camera and it shall not be lawful for any person to  print or publish 
any matter in relation to any such proceeding except a judgment of the High Court or of the Supreme 
Court printed or published with the previous permission of the court.  
(2) If any person prints or publishes any matter in contravention of  the provisions contained in           
sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.]  
23. Decree in proceedings .—(1) In any proceeding under this Act, whether defended or not, if the 
court is satisfied that  
(a) any of the grounds for granting relief exists and the petitioner  2[except in cases where the 
relief is sought by him on the ground specified in sub -clause ( a), sub -clause ( b) or sub -clause ( c) of 
clause ( ii) of section 5] is not in any way taking advantage  of his or her own wrong or disability for 
the purpose of such relief, and  
(b) where the ground of the petition is the ground specified  3* * *  in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 13, the petitioner has not in any manner been accessory to or connive d at or condoned the 
act or acts complained of, or where the ground of the petition is cruelty the petitioner has not in any 
manner condoned the cruelty, and  
2[(bb) when a divorce is sought on the ground of mutual consent, such consent has not been 
obtained by force, fraud or undue influence, and]  
(c) 4[the petition (not being a petition presented under section 11)] is not presented or prosecuted 
in collusion with the respondent, and  
(d) there has not been any unnecessary or improper delay in institu ting the proceeding, and  
(e) there is no other legal ground why relief should not be granted, then, and in such a case, but 
not otherwise, the court shall decree such relief accordingly.  
(2) Before proceeding to grant any relief under this Act, it shall be  the duty of the court in the first 
instance, in every case where it is possible so to do consistently with the nature and circumstances of the 
case, to make every endeavour to bring about reconciliation  between the parties:  
5[Provided that nothing contain ed in this sub -section shall apply to any proceeding wherein relief is 
sought on any of the grounds specified in clause ( ii), clause ( iii), clause ( iv), clause ( v), clause ( vi) or 
clause ( vii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 15, for s. 22 (w.e.f . 27-5-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. The words, bracket, letter of figure  “in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10 or” omitted by s. 16, ibid.                              
(w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “ the petition” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Added by  s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  12 
 2[(3) For the purpose of aiding the court in bringing about such reconciliation, the court may, if the 
parties so desire or if the court thinks it just and proper so to do, adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable 
period not exceeding fifteen days and refer the matter to any perso n named by the parties in this behalf or 
to any person nominated by the court if the parties fail to name any person, with directions to report to the 
court as to whether reconciliation can be and has been, effected and the court shall in disposing of the 
proceeding have due regard to the report.  
(4) In every case where a marriage is dissolved by a decree of divorce, the court passing the decree 
shall give a copy thereof free of cost to each of the parties.]  
1[23A. Relief for respondent in divorce and other  proceedings .—In any proceeding for divorce or 
judicial separation or restitution of conjugal rights, the respondent may not only oppose the relief sought 
on the ground of petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion, but also make a counter -claim for any relief 
under this Act on that ground; and if the petitioner ’s adultery, cruelty or desertion is proved, the court 
may give to the respondent any relief under this Act to which he or she would have been entitled if he or 
she had presented a petition seeking  such relief on that ground.]  
24. Maintenance pendente lite  and expenses of proceedings .—Where in any proceeding under this 
Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has no independent 
income sufficient for her or  his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the 
application of the wife or the husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the 
proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the petitioner ’s own 
income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court to be reasonable.  
2[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and such monthly 
sum during the proceeding, shall, as far as possible , be disposed of within sixty days from the date of 
service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the case may be.]  
25. Permanent alimony and maintenance .—(1) Any court exercising jurisdiction under this Act 
may, at the time of passing any decree or at any time subsequent thereto, on application made to it for the 
purpose by either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, order that the respondent shall  3* * * pay to 
the applicant for her or his maintenance and support such gross sum or such monthly or periodical sum 
for a term not exceeding the life of the applicant as, having regard to the respondent ’s own income and 
other property, if any, the income and other property of the applicant  4[the conduct of the parties and other 
circumstances of the cas e], it may seem to the court to be just, and any such payment may be secured, if 
necessary, by a charge on the immovable property of the respondent.  
(2) If the court is satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances of either party at any time after  
it has made an order under sub -section ( 1), it may, at the instance of either party, vary, modify or rescind 
any such order in such manner as the court may deem just.  
(3) If the court is satisfied that the party in whose favour an order has been made unde r this section 
has re -married or, if such party is the wife, that she has not remained chaste, or, if such party is the 
husband, that he has had sexual intercourse with any woman outside wedlock,  5[it may at the instance of 
the other party vary, modify or rescind any such order in such manner as the court may deem just].  
26. Custody of children .—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may, from time to time, pass 
such interim orders and make such provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper w ith respect to 
the custody, maintenance and education of minor children, consistently with their wishes, wherever 
possible, and may, after the decree, upon application by petition for the purpose, make from time to time, 
all such orders and provisions with  respect to the custody, maintenance and education of such children as 
might have been made by such decree or interim orders in case the proceeding for obtaining such decree 
were still pending, and the court may also from time to time revoke, suspend or va ry any such orders and 
provisions previously made:  
                                                           
1.  Ins by Act 68 of 1976, s. 17, (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3.  The words “while the applicant remains unmarried” omitted by  Act 68 of 1976, s. 1 8 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for certain words. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “it shall rescind the order” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  13 
 1[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children, 
pending the proceeding for obtaining such decree, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty  
days from the date of service of notice on the respondent.]  
27. Disposal of property .—In any proceeding under this Act, the court may make such provisions in 
the decree as it deems just and proper with respect to any property presented, at or about the ti me of 
marriage, which may belong jointly to both the husband and the wife.  
2[28. Appeals from decrees and orders .—(1) All decrees made by the court in any proceeding under 
this Act shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable as decre es of the court made in 
the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, and every such appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals 
ordinarily lie from the decisions of the court given in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(2) Orders made by the court in any proceeding under this Act under section 25 or section 26 shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be appealable if they are not interim orders, and every such 
appeal shall lie to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie fro m the decisions of the court given in 
exercise of its original civil jurisdiction.  
(3) There shall be no appeal under this section on the subject of costs only.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a  3[period of ninety days ] from the date 
of the decree or order.  
28A. Enforcement of decrees and orders .—All decrees and orders made by the court in any 
proceeding under this Act shall be enforced in the like manner as the decrees and orders of the court made 
in the exercise of its  original civil jurisdiction for the time being in forced. ] 
SAVINGS AND REPEALS  
29. Savings .—(1) A marriage solemnized between Hindus before the commencement of this Act, 
which is otherwise valid, shall not be deemed to be invalid or eve r to have been invalid by reason only of 
the fact that the parties thereto belonged to the same gotra or pravara  or belonged to different religions, 
castes or sub -divisions of the same caste.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right recognised by custom or 
conferred by any special enactment to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnized 
before or after the commencement of this Act.  
(3) Nothing conta ined in this Act shall affect any proceeding under any law for the time being in 
force for declaring any marriage to be null and void  or for annulling or dissolving any marriage or for 
judicial separation pending at the commencement of this Act, and any su ch proceeding may be continued 
and determined as if this Act had not been passed.  
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions contained in the Special 
Marriage Act, 1954, (43 of 1954) with respect to marriages between Hindus solemnized under that Act, 
whether before or after the commencement of this Act.  
30. [Repeals ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 26-12-1960) . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001) . 
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 2003, s. 5, for “period of thirty days” (w.e.f. 23 -12-2003).  
--------------------------The Manipur (Courts) Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR (COURTS) ACT, 1955  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
COURT OF THE JUDICAL  COMMISSIONER  
3. Establishment of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
4. Appointment of Judicial Commissioner and Additional Judicial Commissioner.  
5. Casual vacancy in the office of the Judicial Commissioner.  
6. Rank, precedence and responsibility of Judicial Commissioner.  
7. Exercising of jurisdiction by Judicial Commissioner and Additional Judicial Commissioner.  
8. Civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
9. Registrar and ministerial officers of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
10. Superintendence and control of su bordinate court . 
11. Registers, books, accounts and statements to be kept by the Judicial Commissioner.  
12. Procedure of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
13. Admission and removal of advocates,  vakils and pleaders.  
14. Court of the Judicial Commissioner to be a court of record.  
15. Place of sitting of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
CHAPTER III  
SUBORDINATE  COURTS  
 
16. Classes of subordinate civil courts.  
17. Civil districts and district judges.  
18. Additional district judges.  
19. Subordinate judges and munsiffs.  
20. District court to be principal civil court of original jurisdiction.  
21. Original jurisdiction of district courts.  
22. Original jurisdiction of courts of subordinate judges and munsiffs.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Local limits of  the jurisdiction of courts of subordinate judges and munsiffs.  
24. Small causes jurisdiction of subordinate judges and munsiffs . 
25. Exercise by subordinate judges and munsiffs of jurisdiction of district courts in certain    
proceedings.  
26. Place of sittings of courts.  
27. Administrative control of courts.  
28. District Judge's power to distribute business.  
29. Seals of courts.  
30. Ministerial officers of the courts.  
31. Delegation of powers of district judges and district courts in certain cases.  
32. Appeals from original decrees.  
33. Appeals from appellate decrees.  
34. Revisional powers of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
35. Court fees payable on applications for revision.  
36. Temporary vacancy in the office of district judge.  
37. Delegation o f powers of district judges.  
38. Temporary vacancy in the office of a subordinate judge or munsiff.  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL  AND MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  
39. Power to confer powers of civil courts on officers in Hill Areas and procedure before the courts of  
such officers.  
40. Power of the Judicial Commissioner to make rules.  
41. Presiding officers of courts not to try suits and cases in which they are interested.  
42. Certain decisions to be according to custom or personal law . 
43. Holidays . 
44. Pending proce edings . 
45. Repeals and savings . 
46. Declaration of the Judicial Commissioner's Court as a High Court for certain purposes.  
  3 
 THE MANIPUR (COURTS) ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1955  
[30th Decembe r, 1955 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Judicial Commissioner ’s Court and other Courts in 
Manipur . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur (Courts) Act, 
1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the 1[Union territory of Manipur] . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(i) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of Manipur;  
(ii) “civil suit ” includes every suit of a civil nature not expressly or impliedly classed otherwise by 
any law for the time being in force;  
(iii) “district court ” means the court of the district judge and includes the court of the additional 
district judge;  
(iv) “hill areas ” mean such areas in the hill tracts of the 1[Union territory of Manipur]  as the Chief 
Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be hill areas;  
(v) “small cause suit ” means a suit of the nature cognizable by a court of small causes under the 
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887( 9 of 1887 ); 
(vi) “value ” in relation to a suit means the amount or value of the subject -matter of the suit.  
CHAPTER I I 
COURTOF THE  JUDICIAL  COMMISSIONER  
3. Establishment of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—There shall be established for the 
1[Union territory of Manipur]  a court to be known as the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur 
which shall consist of the Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any.  
4. Appointment of Judicial Commissioner and Additional Judicial Commissioner .—(1) The 
Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any, shall be appointed by, and shall 
hold office during the pleasure of, the President.  
(2) A person shall not be appointed as Judicial Commissioner or Additional Jud icial Commissioner 
unless he is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of a High Court under clause ( 2) of article 217 of the 
Constitution or unless he was, immediately before the commencement of this Act, the Judicial 
Commissioner of Manipur.  
5. Casual vaca ncy in the office of the Judicial Commissioner .— On the occurrence of a vacancy in 
the office of the Judicial Commissioner, the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any, or if there is no 
Additional Judicial Commissioner, the senior -most district judge shall, pending the appointment of the 
Judicial Commissioner, act as the Judicial Commissioner.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A.O. (No. 3), 1956 for “State of Manipur” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1956).  
2. 1st March, 1956, vide Chief Commissioner, Manipur ’s  notification  No. J/12/1956, dated 3rd February, 1956.  
 4 
 6. Rank, precedence and responsibility of Judicial Commissioner .—The Judicial Commissioner 
shall have rank and precedence before the Additional Judicial Commissi oner and shall be responsible for 
the administration of, and generally for the distribution of business in, the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner.  
7. Exercising of jurisdiction by Judicial Commissioner and Additional Judicial Commissioner .—
Subject to such  orders as the Judicial Commissioner may make as regards the distribution of business 
between himself and the Additional Judicial Commissioner, the jurisdiction of the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner may be exercised by the Judicial Commissioner or by t he Additional Judicial 
Commissioner.  
8. Civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—Save as otherwise 
provided by this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner 
shall, with reference to any  civil or criminal proceeding under any law for the time being in force in the 
1[Union territory of Manipur] , be the highest court of appeal, revision or reference.  
9. Registrar and ministerial officers of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—(1) The Judicial 
Commissioner may appoint a Registrar and such other ministerial officers as may be necessary for the 
administration of justice by the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and for the exercise of the powers and 
the performance o f the duties conferred or imposed on the Court by or under this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force.  
(2) The Judicial Commissioner may make rules for delegating to the Registrar such powers and duties 
of a judicial, quasi -judicial or non -judic ial nature as he thinks fit; and the ministerial officers shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties of a quasi -judicial or non -judicial nature as the Judicial 
Commissioner may direct.  
10. Superintendence and control of subordinate court s.—(1) The  general superintendence and 
control of all courts in the 1[Union territory of Manipur]  shall vest in, and all such courts shall be 
subordinate to, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
(2) In exercise of the powers of general superintendence and control  vested in it but without prejudice 
to the generality of such powers, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner may, — 
(a) call for returns from such courts;  
(b) direct  the transfer of any suit, proceeding, case or appeal from any subordinate court to any 
other court of equal or superior jurisdiction;  
(c) make rules and issue general directions and prescribe forms for regulating practice and 
procedure of subordinate cour ts; 
(d) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such 
courts.  
11. Registers, books, accounts and statements to be kept by the Judicial Commissioner .—(1) The 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall keep such  registers, books and accounts as may be necessary for 
the transaction of the business of the Court and shall forward to the Chief Commissioner such of these 
registers, books and accounts and such statements of the work done in the Court as may, from time to time, 
be required by the Chief Commissioner.  
(2) The Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall also comply with such requisitions as may be made 
by the Central Government or the Chief Commissioner for certified copies of, or extracts from, the records 
of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner or any court subordinate thereto.  
12. Procedure of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898), the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall record evidence and judgments in such manner and prescribe 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  A.O. (No. 3), 1956 for “State of Manipur” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1956).  
 5 
 such forms to be used in proceedings before it, as it may direct by rules made by it with the sanction of the 
Chief Commissioner.  
13. Admis sion and removal of advocates, vakils and pleaders .—(1) The Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner may, subject to such rules as it may with the sanction of the Chief Commissioner make, 
admit proper persons to be advocates, vakils and pleaders in any court in the 1[Union territory of Manipur] 
and may remove or suspend from practice on reasonable cause any person so admitted and may authorize 
such advocates, vakils and pleaders to plead or to act or to plead and act for parties and accused persons.  
(2) No person other than an advocate, vakil or pleader shall be allowed to plead or to act for parties 
and accused persons except that any party may appear, plead or act on his own behalf or on behalf of 
another party if so authorized.  
14. Court of the Judic ial Commissioner to be a court of record .—The Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner shall be a court of record and shall have all powers of such court including the power to 
punish for contempt of itself.  
15. Place of sitting of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—The Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner shall sit at Imphal or at such other place or places, if any, as the Judicial Commissioner 
may, with the approval of the Chief Commissioner, from time to ti me, appoint.  
CHAPTER III  
SUBORDINATE  COURTS  
16. Classes of subordinate civil courts .—In addition to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and 
the courts of small causes established under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887  (IX of 1887), 
and the courts established under any other law for the time being in force, there shall be the following 
classes of civil courts in  the 1[Union territory of Manipur] , namely:— 
(i) the district court;  
(ii) the court of a subordinate judge;  
(iii) the court of a munsiff:  
Provided that the court of a subordinate judge shall be established only with effect from such date as 
the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
17. Civil districts and district judges .—(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the Chief Commissioner 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, divide the 1[Union territory of Manipur] into civil districts and 
sub-divisions, alter the limits or the number of these districts and sub -divisions an d determine the 
headquarters of each district and sub -division . 
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall, after consultation with the Judicial Commissioner, appoint as many 
persons as he thinks necessary to be district judges and shall post one of these persons to  each district as 
district judge of that district:  
Provided that the same person may, if the Chief Commissioner thinks fit, be appointed to be district 
judge of two or more districts.  
18. Additional district judges .—(1) When the business pending before the  court of a district judge 
requires the aid of an additional district judge for its speedy disposal, the Chief Commissioner may, after 
consultation with the Judicial Commissioner, appoint such number of additional district judges as may be 
necessary.  
(2) The additional district judges so appointed shall discharge any of the functions of a district judge 
which the district Judge may assign to them and in the discharge of those functions they shall exercise the 
same powers as the district judge.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A.O. (No. 3), 1956 for “State of Manipur” (w.e.f. 1 -3-1956).  
 6 
 19. Subordinate judges and munsiffs .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, after consultation with the 
Judicial Commissioner, fix the number of subordinate judges and munsiffs to be appointed and if there is a 
vacancy in that number,  may, subject to the rules, if a ny, made under sub -section ( 2), appoint such person 
as is nominated by the Judicial Commissioner to the vacancy.  
(2) The Chief Commissioner may, after consultation with the Judicial Commissioner, make rules as to 
the qualifications of persons to be appoint ed as subordinate judges and munsiffs.  
20.  District court to be principal civil court of original jurisdiction .—The district court shall be 
the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in the district.  
21. Original jurisdiction of district courts .—Save as otherwise provide d by any other law for the 
time being in force, the district court, shall, subject to the provisions of section 15 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), have original jurisdiction in all civil suits without limit as reg ards the value.  
22. Original jurisdiction of courts of subordinate judges and munsiffs .—The jurisdiction in 
original civil suits as regards the value to be exercised by a subordinate judge or a munsiff shall be 
determined by the Chief Commissioner in such manner as he thinks fit, after consultation with the Judicial 
Commissioner:  
Provided that in no case shall the jurisdiction of a munsiffbe without limit.  
23. Local limits of the jurisdiction of courts of subordinate judges and munsiffs .—(1) The  local 
limits of the jurisdiction of the court of a subordinate judge or a munsiff shall be such as the Chief 
Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define.  
(2) When the Chief Commissioner posts a subordinate judge to a district, the lo cal limits of the district 
shall, in the absence of any direction to the contrary, be the local limits of his jurisdiction.  
24. Small causes jurisdiction of subordinate judges and munsiffs .—The Judicial Commissioner 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, confer within such local limits as he thinks fit, upon any 
district judge, subordinate judge or munsiff, the jurisdiction of a judge of the court of small causes under 
the Provincial S mall Cause Courts Act, 1887  (9 of 1887 ), for the trial of suits of the nature cognizable by 
such courts upto such value not exceeding five hundred rupees, as he thinks fit and may withdraw any 
jurisdiction so conferred.  
25. Exercise by subordinate judges a nd munsiffs of jurisdiction of district courts in certain 
proceedings .—(1) The Judicial Commissioner may, by general or special order, authorize any subordinate 
judge or munsiff  to take cognizance of, or any district judge to transfer to a subordinate judge or a munsiff 
under his administrative control, any proceeding or class of proceedings specified in such order, under — 
(a) the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 1925 ); or 
(b) the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890  (8 of 1890 ); or 
(c) the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920  (5 of 1920 ). 
(2) The district judge may withdraw any such proceeding taken cognizance of by, or transferred to, a 
subordinate judge or a munsiff  and may either himself d ispose of them or transfer it for disposal to any 
other competent court under his administrative control.  
(3) Proceedings taken cognizance of by, or transferred to, a subordinate judge or a munsiff under this 
section shall be disposed of by him subject to the rules applicable to like proceedings when disposed of by 
the district judge:  
Provided that an appeal from an order of the munsiff in any such proceedings shall lie to the district 
judge.  
(4) An appeal from the order of the district judge on appeal from the order of a munsiff under this 
section shall lie to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner if a further appeal from the order of the district 
judge is allowed by the law for the time being in force.  
26. Place of sittings of courts .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, by order, fix a place or places at 
which any court constituted under this Chapter is to be held.  7 
 (2) The place or places so fixed may be beyond the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided by an order under this section, a court constituted under this Act may 
be held at any place within the local limits of its jurisdiction.  
27. Administrative control of courts .—Subject to the general superintendence and control of the 
Court of the Judicial Commissioner, the district judge shall have administrative control over all the civil 
courts under this Chapter within the local limits of his jurisdiction.  
28. District Judge's power to distribute b usiness .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), the district judge may, by written order, direct that any business 
cognizable by his court and the courts under his control shall be distributed among such courts, and in such 
manner, as he thinks fit:  
Provided that no direction issued under this section shall empower any court to exercise any power and 
deal with any business beyond the limits of its jurisdiction.  
29. Seals of courts .—Every court under this C hapter shall use a seal of such form and dimension as 
are prescribed by the Chief Commissioner.  
30. Ministerial officers of the courts .—(1) Ministerial officers of the district court shall be appointed 
by the district judge.  
(2) Ministerial officers of civil courts under the administrative control of the district judge shall be 
appointed by the district judge.  
(3) Every appointment under this section shall be subject to such rules as the Judicial Commissioner 
may make in this behalf.  
(4) Any order passed  by the district judge under this section shall be liable to be reversed or modified 
by the Judicial Commissioner.  
31. Delegation of powers of district judges and district courts in certain cases .—The district judge 
may, with the previous sanction of the J udicial Commissioner, delegate to the judge of any court under his 
administrative control all or any of the powers conferred on a district judge by section 27 and section 28 of 
this Act and on a district court by section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), to be 
exercised by the judge in any specified portion of the district subject to the control of the district judge.  
32. Appeals from original decrees .—Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in 
force, appeals from decrees  or orders of courts exercising original jurisdiction shall lie as follows: — 
(a) from a decree or order of a munsiff  in any suit and of a subordinate judge in a suit the value of 
which does not exceed five thousand rupees, to the court of the district judge; and  
(b) in all other cases, to the court of the Judicial Commissioner.  
33. Appeals from appellate decrees .—A seco nd appeal shall lie to the court of the Judicial 
Commissioner from an appellate decree or order of a district court on any ground on which a second 
appeal lies under section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ). 
34.Revisional powers of the Court of the Judicial Commissioner .—In addition to the powers 
conferred by section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner may, on application made to it, call for the record of any case which has been d ecided by a 
civil court subordinate to it and in which no appeal lies to it and if the Court of the Judicial Commissioner 
is of opinion that there is an important question of law or custom and the question requires further 
consideration, the Court of the J udicial Commissioner may make such order in the case as it thinks fit:  
  8 
 Provided that — 
(i) no application shall be admitted after the expiration of ninety days from the date of the decision 
in respect of which the application is made unless the applicant satisfies the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner that he had sufficient cause for not making application within that period;  
(ii) on any such application the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall not revise the decision of 
the court below except in so f ar as such decision involves a question of law or custom in respect of 
which the application has been admitted; and  
(iii) when any such application has been admitted the Court of the Judicial Commissioner shall, 
subject to clause ( ii) of this proviso, trea t the matter of the application as if it were an appeal.  
Explanation  1.—The question of procedure is not a question of law or custom within the meaning 
of this section.  
Explanation  2.—In computing the period of limitation mentioned in clause ( i) of this proviso and 
in all other respects not herein specified, the period of limitation of the application shall be governed 
by the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908  (5 of 1908 ). 
35. Court fees payable on applications for revision .—(1) The court fees payable on applications to 
the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the exercise of its jurisdiction under section 34 shall be such as 
are prescribed by the Chief Commissioner in consultation with the Judicial Commissioner.  
(2) If the Court of the Judici al Commissioner, on an application in respect of which the court fee 
payable under sub -section ( 1) has been paid, sets aside or modifies a decree or order of the court below or 
remands the case for further decision, the Court of the Judicial Commissioner m ay grant to the applicant a 
certificate authori sing him to receive back from the Collector of the district in which the court below is 
situated or from such other officer as the Chief Commissioner may authorise by notification in the Official 
Gazette, the full amount of such court fee or such part thereof as the Court of the Judicial Commissioner 
having regard to the circumstances of the case may think fit.  
36. Temporary vacancy in the office of district judge .—In the event of death of a district judge or of 
his being prevented from performing his duties by illness or other cause or of his absence from the civil 
district on leave, the additional district judge, if any, in the district or where there is no additio nal district 
judge, the senior -most subordinate judge, or as the case may be, the senior -most munsiff in the district 
shall assume charge of the district court without interruption of his ordinary jurisdiction and being so in 
charge shall perform the dutie s of the district judge with respect to the filing of suits and appeals, receiving 
pleadings, execution of processes, return of writs and the like, and shall be designated as the additional 
district judge or the subordinate judge or the munsiff, as the cas e may be, in charge of the district and shall 
continue in such charge until the office of the district judge has been resumed by him or assumed by an 
officer duly appointed thereto.  
37. Delegation of powers of district judges .—Any district judge leaving he adquarters and proceeding 
on duty to any place in the district may delegate to the additional district judge, if any, or where there is no 
such additional district judge, to a subordinate judge or, as the case may be, to a munsiff at the 
headquarters, the power of performing such duties enumerated in section 36 as may be emergent and such 
officer shall be designated as the additional district judge or the subordinate judge or the munsiff, as the 
case may be, in charge of the headquarter.  
38. Temporary vacan cy in the office of a subordinate judge or munsiff .—In the event of death, 
suspension or temporary absence of a subordinate -judge or a munsiff, the district judge may empower any 
other subordinate judge or munsiff of the same civil district to continue the  duties of the vacated court of 
the subordinate judge or munsiff either at the place of such court or of his own court but in every such case 
the register and record of the court shall be kept distinct.  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL  AND MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  
39. Power to confer powers of civil courts on officers in Hill Areas and procedure before the 
courts of such officers .—(1) The Chief Commissioner after consultation with the Judicial Commissioner 9 
 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, invest, by name or in virtue of office, any officer in the hill 
areas with the powers of any civil court under this Act and upon such investiture the provisions of this Act 
shall, so far as they can be made applicable, apply to him as if he were a judge of the court with the powers 
of which he is invested.  
(2) Where the place at which the court of an officer invested with powers under sub -section ( 1) is to be 
held, has not been fixed under section 26, the court may be held at any place within the local limits of its 
jurisdiction.  
(3) The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 ), shall apply to all suits and proceedings before the 
court of an officer invested with powers under sub -section ( 1) subject to the following exceptions, 
namely:—  
(a) a defendant in a suit may, instead of filing a written statement, make an oral statement of his 
defence which shall be recorded by the court;  
(b) all applications by parties in any suit or proceeding may be made orally before the court;  
(c) no appearance, a pplication or act in or to the court, required or authori sed by law to be made or 
done by a party in such court shall be made or done by a pleader (as defined in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908 )) save with the permission of the court;  
(d) it shall be sufficient for the court to make a memorandum of the substance of the evidence of 
any witness examined by it and it shall not be necessary for the court to take down evidence of any 
witness in writing at length unless the court is, on the applicat ion of any party or otherwise, satisfied 
that there is any special reason for so doing.  
40. Power of the Judicial Commissioner to make rules .—The Court of the Judicial Commissioner 
may make rules consistent with this Act and any other law for the time being in force, providing for all or 
any of the following ma tters, namely: — 
(a) the supervision of all courts subordinate to the Court of the Judicial Commissioner and their 
inspection;  
(b) the translation of any papers filed in the Court of the Judicial C ommissioner and the 
preparation of paper -books for the hearing of appeals and the copying, typing or printing of any such 
papers or translations and the recovery from the persons at whose instance or on whose behalf papers 
are filed , all the expenses there by incurred;  
(c) the fees to be charged for processes issued by a civil court or by any officer of any such court 
and the fee payable in any suit or proceeding, in any such court by any party to such suit or proceeding 
in respect of the fees of the pleader  of any other party to such suit or proceeding;  
(d) the manner in which the proceedings of civil courts shall be kept and recorded, and the manner 
in which paper -books for the hearing shall be prepared and the granting of copies;  
(e) the various matters re lating to the officers of the court;  
(f) the persons to be, permitted to act as petition -writers in the court subordinate thereto or act as 
pleaders' clerks;  
(g) the issue of licences to persons referred to in clause ( f), the conduct of business by them and 
the scale of fees to be charged by them;  
(h) the authority by which breaches of such rules shall be investigated and the penalty which may 
be imposed.  
41. Presiding officers of courts not to try suits and cases in which they are interested .—(1) The 
presiding officer of a court shall not try any suit, proceeding or other case, or hear any appeal, to which he 
is a party or in which he is personally interested.  
(2) No presiding officer shall hear an appeal from any judgment, decree, sentence or order pa ssed or 
made by himself.  10 
 (3) Where any such suit, proceeding, case or appeal as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section 
(2) comes before any such officer, he shall transmit forthwith the record of such suit, proceeding, case or 
appeal as the case may be, to the court to which he is immediately subordinate with the report of the 
circumstances attending the reference.  
(4) The superior court may transfer the suit, proceeding, case or appeal either to itself or to any court 
under its administrative con trol competent to decide it.  
 42. Certain decisions to be according to custom or personal law .—(1) Where in any suit or 
proceeding, it is necessary for any court under this Act to decide any question regarding succession, 
inheritance, marriage or caste or any religious usage or institution, any custom ( if such there be ) having the 
force of law, orany personal law, governing the parties, or the property of the parties to such suit or 
proceeding shall form the rule of decision except in so far as such custom or personal law has, by 
legislative enactment, been altered or abolished.  
(2) In cases not provided for by sub -section ( 1) or by any other law for the time being in force, the 
court shall decide the suit or proceeding according to justice, equity and good conscience.  
 43. Holidays .—(1) Subject to the approval of the Chief Commissioner, the Judicial Commissioner 
shall prepare a list of days to be observed in each year as closed holidays in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner and the civil courts subordina te to that Court.  
(2) The list of holidays shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(3) A judicial act done by a court on a day specified in the list shall not be invalid by reason only of its 
having been done on that day.  
44. Pending proceedings .—(1) Any suit, proceeding, case or appeal pending in a court immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall, upon the commencement of this Act, be deemed to be 
transferred to the court exercising under this Act jurisdiction which corresponds, as far as m ay be, to the 
jurisdiction of the court in which the suit, proceeding, case or appeal was pending and the court to which 
the suit, proceeding, case or appeal is deemed to be transferred shall proceed to try, hear and determine the 
matter as if it had been pending in that court.  
(2) Any appeal from a judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made by a court and not appealed 
against before the commencement of this Act shall, after such commencement, lie to the court exercising 
under this Act jurisdiction which corresponds, as far as may be, to the jurisdiction of the court to which 
such appeal would have lain if this Act had not been passed and had not come into force.  
(3) Any judgment, decree, sentence or order passed or made before the commencement of th is Act by 
any court shall be deemed for the purpose of execution to have been passed by a court constituted under 
this Act which corresponds, as far as may be, to the court which passed or made the judgment, decree, 
sentence or order as the case may be:  
Provided that nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be construed as extending 
period of limitation to which any suit, proceeding, case or appeal may be subject.  
 
45. Repeals and savings .—(1) The Manipur State Courts Act  1947, as amended by the Manipur State 
Courts (Amendment) Order, 1950, is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any appointment or 
delegation made, order, Instrument or direction issued, rule or regulation mad e under that Act) shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue in 
force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the relevant 
provisions of this Act.  
46. Declaration of the Judicial Commissioner's Court as a High Court for certain purposes .—
The Court of the Judicial Commissioner established under section 3 is hereby declared to be a High Court 
for the purposes of articles 132,  133 and 134 of the Constit ution; and the provisions of the Judicial 
Commissioners' Courts (Declaration as High Courts) Act,  1950 (15 of 1950 ), shall apply to that Court as 
they apply to a Judicial Commissioner's Court in existence at the commencement of this Act.  
--------------------------The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE MEDICINAL AND TOILET PREPARATIONS (EXCISE DUTIES) ACT, 1955  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF DUTIES  
3. Duties of excise to be levied and collected  on certain goods.  
4. Rebate of duty on alcohol, etc., supplied for manufacture of dutiable goods . 
5. Recovery of sums due to Government . 
6. Certain operations to be subject to licences . 
7. Offences and penalties . 
8. Power of Courts to order forfeiture . 
POWERS AND DUTIES  OF OFFICERS AND LANDHOLDERS  
9. Power to arrest . 
10. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce documents in inquiries under this Act . 
11. Officers required to assist Excise Officers . 
12. Owners or occupiers of land to report manufacture of contraband dutiable goods . 
13. Punishment for connivance at offences . 
14. Searches and arrests how to be made . 
15. Disposal of persons arrested . 
16. Inquiry how to be made by excise officers against arrested persons forwarded to them . 
17. Vexatious search, seizure, etc., by excise officer . 
18. Failure of excise officers on duty.  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
19. Power to make rule s. 
20. Bar of suits and limitation of suits and other legal proceedings.  
21. Repeals and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE MEDICINAL AND TOILET PREPARAT IONS (EXCISE DUTIES) ACT, 19551 
ACT NO. 16 OF 1955  
[27th April , 1955.]  
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of duties of excise on medicinal and toilet 
preparations containing alcohol, 2[narcotic drug or narcotic].  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Medicinal and Toilet 
Preparat ions (Excise Duties) Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such d ate3as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “alcohol ” means ethyl alcoho l of any strength and purity having the chemical c omposition C2 
H5 OH;  
4[(aa) “coca derivative ” means — 
(i) crude cocaine, that is, any extract of coca leaf which can b e used, directly or indirectly for 
the manufacture of cocaine;  
(ii) ecgonine, that is, laevo -ecgonine having the chemical formula C 9 H15 NO 3 H2O, and all 
the derivatives of laevo -ecgonine from  which it can be recovered; and  
(iii) cocaine,  that is, methyl -benzoyl -laevo -ecgonine having the chemical form ula C 17 H21 
NO 4, and its salts;  
(ab) “coca leaf ” means — 
(i) the leaf and young twigs of any coca plant, that is,  of the Erythroxylon coca (Lamk ) and 
the Erythroxylon novo -granatense (Hiern.) and their varieties, and of any other species of this 
genus which the Central Government may, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
coca plants fo r the purposes of this Act; and  
(ii) any mixture thereof, with  or without neutral materials;]  
(b) “collecting Government ” means the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State 
Government which is entitled to collect the duties levied un der this Act;  
4[(bb) “derivative of opium ” means — 
(i) medicinal opium,  that is, opium which has under gone the processes necessary  to adapt it 
for medicinal use;  
(ii) prepared opium, that is, any product of opium obtained by any series of operations 
designed to transform opium into an extract suitable for smoking, and the dross or other residue 
remaining after opium is smoked;  
(iii) morphine, that is, the principal alkaloid of opium having the chemical formula C 17 H19 
NO 3, and its salts, and its derivativ es;] 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule. , and to Pondicherry  
(w.e.f. 1 -10-1963) by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1976, s. 39, for “ opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drug or narcotic” (w.e.f.  27-05-1976 ). 
3. 1st April, 1957, vide notification No. S.R.O. 892, dated 9th March , 1957 , see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 . 
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 27 -05-1976).  3 
 (c) “dutiable goods ” means the medicinal and toilet preparations specified in the Schedule as 
being subject to the duties o f excise levied under this Act;  
(d) “excise officer ” means an officer of the Excise Department of any State and includes any 
person empowered by the collecting Government to exercise all or any of the powers of an  excise 
officer under this Act;  
1[(e) “Indian h emp” means — 
(i) the leaves, small stalks and flowering or fruiting tops of the Indian hemp plant (Cannabis 
sativa L.), including all forms k nown as bhang, siddhi  or ganja ; 
(ii) charas, that is, the resin obtained from the Indian hemp plant, which has not been 
submitted to any manipulations other than those neces sary for packing and transport;  
(iii) any mixture, with or without neutral materials, of any of the above forms of Indian hemp 
or an y drink prepared therefrom; and  
(iv) any extract or tincture of an y of t he above forms of Indian hemp;]  
(f) “manufacture ” includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of the 
manufacture of any dutiable goods;  
(g) “medicinal preparation ” includes all drugs which are a remedy or prescription prepared for 
internal or external use of human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used for or in 
the treatment, mitigation or prevention of dise ase in human beings or animals;  
2[(h) “narcotic drug ” or “narcotic ” means a substance which is coca leaf, or  coca derivative, or 
opium, or derivative of opium, or Indian hemp and shall include any other substance, capable of 
causing or producing in human beings dependence, tolerance and withdrawal syndromes and which 
the Central Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, declare to be a narcotic drug or 
narcotic;]  
3[(i) “opium ” means — 
(1) the capsules of the poppy (Papaversomniferum (L), whether in their original form or cut, 
crushed or powdered and whether or not juic e has been extracted therefrom;  
(2) the spontaneously coagulated juice of such capsules which has not been submitted to any 
manipulations other than those necessary  for packing and transport; and  
(3) any mixture, with or without neutral materials, of a ny of the above forms of opium,  
and inc ludes any derivative of opium;]  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “toilet preparation ” means any preparation which is intended for use in the toilet of the human 
body or in perfum ing apparel of any descriptio n or any substance intended to cleanse, improve or 
alter the complexion, skin, hair or teeth, and in cludes deodorants and perfumes.  
LEVY AND COLLECTION OF DUTIES  
3. Duties of excise to be levied and collected on certain goods .―(1) There shall be levied duties of 
excise, at the rates specified in the Schedule, on all dutiab le goods manufactured in India.  
(2) The dutie s aforesaid shall be leviable — 
(a) where the dutiable goods are manufactured in bond, in the State in which such g oods are 
released from a b onded warehouse for home consumption, whether such State is t he State of 
manufacture or not;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1 976, s. 39, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -05-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 27 -05-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 5 of 1964, s. 64, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 28 -4-1964).  4 
 (b) where the dutiable goods are not manufactured in bond, in the State in whi ch such goods are 
manufactured.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this  Act, the duties aforesaid shall be collected in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .―Dutiable goods are said to be manufactured in bond within the meaning of this section 
if they are allowed to be manufactured without payment of any duty of exci se leviable under any law for 
the time being in  force in respect of alcohol, 1[narcotic drug or narcotic] which is to be used as an 
ingredient in  the manufacture of such goods.  
4. Rebate of duty on alcohol, etc., supplied for  manufacture of dutiable goods .―Where 
alcohol1[narcotic drug or narcotic ] had been supplied to a manufacturer of any dutiable goods for use as 
an ingredient of such goods by, or under the authority of, the collecting Government and a duty of excise 
on the goods so supplied had already been recovered by such Government under an y law for the time 
being in force, the collecting Government shall, on an application being made to it in this behalf, grant in 
respect of the duty of excise leviable under this Act, a rebate to such manufacturer of the excess, if any, of 
the duty so recov ered over th e duty leviable under this Act.  
5. Reco very of sums due to Government .―In respect of the duty of excise and any other sums of 
any kind payable to the collecting Government under any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules 
made thereunder,  the excise officer empowered by the said rules to levy such duty or require the payment 
of such sums, may deduct the amount so payable from any money owing to the person from whom such 
sums may be recoverable or due, which may be in his hands or under his  disposal or control or may 
recover the amount by attachment and sale of dutiable goods belonging to such person; and if the amount 
payable is not so recovered, he may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from 
the person liable to pay the sum and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person resides or 
conducts his business, and the said Collector on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from 
the said person the amount specified therein in the same man ner as an arrear of land revenue.  
6. Certain operat ions to be subject to licences .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, provide that from such date as may be specified in the notification, no person shall 
engage in the production or manufacture of any dutiable goods or of any specified component parts of 
ingredients of such goods or of specified containers of such goods or of labels of such containers except 
under the authority and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this Act.  
(2) Every licence under sub -section ( 1) shal l be granted for such area, if any, for such period, subject 
to such restrictions and conditions, and in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
7. Offences and penaltie s.―If any person — 
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of a no tifica tion issued under section 6; or  
(b) evades the payment of any duty of excise payable under this Act; or  
(c) fails to supply any information which he is required by rules made under this Act to supply or 
(unless with a reasonable belief, the burden o f proving which shall be upon him, that the information 
supplied by him is true) sup plies false information; or  
(d) attempts to commit or abets the commission of any offence mention ed in clause ( a) or  
clause ( b), 
he shall for every such offence be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
8. Power  of Courts to order forfeiture .―Any Court trying any offence under section 7 may order 
the forfeiture to the  collecting Government of any dutiable goods in respect of which the Court is satisfied 
that an offence under this Act has been committed, and may also order the forfeiture of any alcohol, drugs 
or materials by means of which the offence has been committed  and of any receptacles, packages or 
coverings in which any such goods or articles are contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1976, s. 39, for “opium, Indian hemp or other narcotic drug or narcotic” (w.e.f. 27 -05-1976).  5 
 conveyances used in carrying such goods or articles and any implements or machinery used in  the 
manufacture of such  goods.  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND LANDHOLDERS  
9. Power to arrest .―(1) Any excise officer duly empowered by rules made in this behalf may arrest 
any person whom he has reason to believe to be liabl e to punishment under this Act.  
(2) Any person accused or reasonably suspected of committing an offence under this Act or any rules 
made thereunder, who, on demand of any excise officer duly empowered by rules made under this Act, 
refuses to give his name and residence, or who gives a name or residence  which such officer has reason to 
believe to be false may be arrested by such officer in order that his name an d residence may be 
ascertained.  
10. Power to summon persons to give evidence and produce docume nts in inquiries under this 
Act.―(1) Any excise of ficer duly empowered by rules made in this behalf shall have power to summon 
any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or 
any other thing in any inquiry which such officer is making for a ny of the p urposes of this Act.  
(2) A summons to produce docum ents or other things under sub -section ( 1) may be for the production 
of certain specified documents or things or for the production of all documents or things of a certain 
description in the possession or under the c ontrol of the person concerned.  
(3) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authorised  agent as 
such officer may direct and all persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth on any subject 
respecting which he is examined or make statements and produce such documents and o ther things as 
may be required:  
Provided that the exemptions u nder section 132 and section 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) shall apply to requisitions for  attendance under this section.  
(4) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
section 1 93 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
11. Officers requ ired to assist Excise Officers .―All officers of Customs and Central Excise, and 
such other officers of the Central Government as may be specified in this behalf, and all police offi cers 
and all officers engaged in the collection of land revenue are hereby empowered and required to assist 
excise officer s in the execution of this Act.  
12. Owners or occupiers of land to report manufactur e of contraband dutiable goods .―Every 
owner or occupier of land and the agent of any such owner or occupier in charge of the management of 
that land, if dutiable goods are manufactured thereon in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, shall, in the abse nce of reasonable excuse, be bound to give notice of such 
manufacture to a magistrate or to an officer of the Excise, Customs, Police or Land Revenue Department 
immediatel y the fact comes to his notice.  
13. Punishm ent for connivance at offences .―Any owner or occupier of land or any agent of such 
owner or occupier in charge of the management of that land, who wilfully connives at any offence against 
the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder shall, for every such offence, be punishable with 
impr isonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to fi ve hundred 
rupees or with both.  
14. Searc hes and arrests how to be made .―All arrests and searches made under this Act or under 
any rules made thereunder shall be carried  out in accordance with the provisions of the Co de of Criminal 
Procedure, 18981(5 of 1898) , relating respectively to search es and arrests under that Code.  
15. Disposal of persons arrested .―(1) Every person arrested under this Act shall be forwarded 
without  delay to the nearest excise officer empowered to send persons so arrested to a magistrate or if 
there is no  such excise officer within a reasonable distance to the officer in charge  of the nearest police 
station.  
                                                           
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  6 
 (2) The officer in charge of a police stat ion to whom any person is forwarded under sub -section ( 1) 
shall either admit him to bail to appear before a magistrate having jurisdiction, or in default of bail 
forward him without delay  in custody to such Magistrate.  
16. Inquiry how to be made by excise officers against arre sted persons forwarded to them .―(1) 
When any person is forwarded under section 15 to an excise officer empowered to send persons so 
arrested to a magistrate, the excise officer shall proceed to inquire into the charge against h im. 
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), the excise officer may exercise the same powers, and shall be 
subject to the same provisions, as the officer in charge of a police station may exercise and is subject to 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1 898), when i nvestigating a cognizable case:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the excise officer is of opinion that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of 
suspicion against the accused person, he shall either admit him to bail to appear before a magistra te 
having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody wi thout delay to such magistrate;  
(b) if it appears to the excise officer that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of 
suspicion against the accused person, he shall release the accused person on his executing a bond, 
with or without sureties as the excise officer may direct , to appear, if and when so required, before the 
magistrate having jurisdiction and shall make a full report of all the particulars of the case to hi s 
official superior.  
(3) All officers exercising any powers under section 15 or this section shall so exerc ise their powers 
as to ensure that every person who is arrested and detained in custody is produced before the nearest 
magistrate within a period of twenty -four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest to the Court of the magistrate.  
17. Vexatious search, s eizure, etc. , by excise officer. ―(1) Any officer exercising powers under this 
Act or under the rules made thereunder who — 
(a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches or causes to be searched any p lace, 
conveyance or vessel;  
(b) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any person;  
(c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the movable property of any person on pretence of 
seizing or searching for any article liable to confiscation under this Act;  
(d) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of any person, without having reason to 
believe that such act is required  for the execution of his duty;  
shall, for every such offence, be punishable with fine which may  extend to tw o thousand rupees.  
(2) Any person wilfully and maliciously giving false information and so causing an arrest or a search 
to be made under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which may extend  to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
18. Failure of  excise officers on duty .―Any excise officer who ceases or refuses to perform, or 
withdraws himself from, the duties of his office, unless he had obtained the express written permission of 
his superior o fficer or has given such superior officer two months ’ notice in writing of his intention or has 
other lawful excuse, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to three months ’ pay, or with both.  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
19. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fo regoing power, such rules may — 
(i) provide for the assessment and collection of duties levied under this Act, the authorities by 
whom functions under this Act are to be discharged, the issue of notices requiring payment, the 
manner in which the dutie s shall be payable and the recovery of  duty not paid;  7 
 (ii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions, or subject to such conditions as the Central 
Government may think fit, the manufacture, or any process of the manufacture, of dutiable goods or 
of any component parts or ingredients or containers thereof, except on land or pre mises approved for 
the purpose;  
(iii) regulate the removal of dutiable goods from the place where they are stored or m anufactured 
or subjected to any process of production or manufa cture and their transport to or from the premises 
of a licensed person, or a bo nded warehouse, or to a market;  
(iv) regulate the production or manufacture 1[or any process] of production or manufacture, the 
possession and storage of dutiable goods or of any component parts or ingredients or containers 
thereof, so far as such regulation is essential for the proper levy and collection o f duties levied under 
this Act;  
(v) provide for the employment of excise officers to supervise the carrying out of  any rule s made 
under this Act;  
(vi) require a manufacturer or the licensee of a warehouse to provide accommodation within the 
precincts of his factory or warehouse for excise officers employed to supervise the carrying out of 
rules made under this Act and prescrib e the scale of such accommodation;  
(vii) provide for the appointment, licensing, management and supervision of bonded warehouses 
and the procedure to be followed in entering dutiable goods into and clearing goods from such 
warehouses or in the movement of dutiable goods from one bonded ware house to another;  
(viii) provide for the distinguishing of excisable goods which have been manufactured under 
licence, of materials which have been imported under licence and of goods on which duty has been 
paid or which are exempt from duty under this Act ; 
(ix) impose on persons engaged in the manufacture, storage or sale (whether on their own account 
or as brokers or commission agents) so far as such imposition is essential for the proper levy and 
collection of the dutie s levied under this Act, the duty of furnishing information, keeping records and 
making returns and prescribe the nature of such information and form of such records and returns, the 
particulars to be contained therein and the manner i n which they shall be  verified;  
(x) require that dutiable goods shall not be sold or offered or kept for sale except in prescribed 
containers, bearing a banderol, stamp or label of such nature and affixed in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed;  
(xi) provide for the issue of licences and transport permits and the fees, if any, to be charged 
therefor;  
(xii) provide for the detention of dutiable goods, plant, machinery or material for th e purpose of 
exacting the duty;  
(xiii) provide for the confiscation of dutiable goods in resp ect of which a breach of any rule made 
under this Act has been committed, and also for the confiscation of any alcohol, drugs or materials by 
means of which the breach has been committed and of any receptacle, packages or covering in which 
such goods or ar ticles are contained, and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in 
carrying such goods or articles and any implements or machinery used in  the manufacture of such 
goods;  
(xiv) provide for the levy of a penalty not exceeding two thousand rupees for a breach o f any rule 
made under this Act;  
(xv) provide for the procedure in connection with such confiscation and the imposition of such 
penalty, the maximum limits up to which particular classes of excise officers may adjudge such 
confiscation or penalty, appeals from orders of such officers and revision of such orders by some 
higher authority, the time -limit for such appeals and revisions and the disposal of goods and articles 
confiscated;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “of any process” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  8 
 (xvi) authorise and regulate the compounding of offence s against, or liabilities incurred under, 
this Ac t or the rules made thereunder;  
(xvii) authorise and regulate the inspection of factories and provide for the taking of samples or 
for the making of tests of any substance produced therein and for the inspec tion or search of any 
place, conveyance or vessel used for the production, storage, sale or transport of dutiable goods in so 
far as such inspection or search is essential for the proper levy and collection of th e duties levied 
under this Act;  
(xviii) prov ide for the grant of a rebate of the duty paid on dutiable goods which are  exported out 
of India or shipped for consumption on a vo yage to any port outside India;  
(xix) exempt  any dutiable goods from the whole or any part of the duty levied under this Act 
where in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary to grant such exemption in the 
interest of the trade  or in the public interest;  
(xx) notify in the Official Gaz ette lists of the names and descriptions of preparations which would 
fall for assessment under any particular item of the Schedule or for regulating their manufactu re, 
transport and distribution;  
(xxi) authorise particular classes of excise officers to pro vide by written instructions for 
supplemental matters arising out of any rule made by the Central  Government under this section.  
(3) Where any confiscation or penalty has been adjudged in respect of a breach of any rule under this 
Act, which is also an off ence under section 7, the person concerned shall not be  prosecuted under that 
section.  
1[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of th irty days which may b e comprised in one 
session or 2[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the ru le or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validi ty of anything pr eviously done under that rule.]  
20. Bar of suits and limitation of sui ts and other legal proceedings .―(1) No suit or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against the collecting Government or against any officer in respect of any order 
passed in good faith or any act in good faith done or ord ered to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against the collecting 
Government or against any officer for anything done or ordered to be done under this Act after the 
expiration of six months from the accrual of the cause of action or from the date of the act or order 
complained of.  
21. Repe als and savings .―If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force in 
any State any law cor responding to this Ac t, that law is hereby repealed:  
Provided that all rules made, notifications issued, licences or permits granted, powers conferred under 
any law hereby repealed shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, have the same for ce and 
effect as if they had been respectively made, issued, granted or conferred under this Act and by the 
authority empowered hereby in that behalf.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1961, s. 2, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2  and the Schedule, for “in two successive sessions, and if before  the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the session immediately following” (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  9 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
Item 
No. Description of dutiable goods  Rate of duty  
(1) (2) (3) 
Medicinal Preparations  
1. Allopathic Medicinal Preparations : 
(i) Medicinal preparations containing alcohol which are 
not capable of being consumed a s ordinary alcoholic 
beverages ―  
 (a) Patent or proprietary medicines  Twenty per cent .ad valorem . 
 (b) Others  Twenty per cent .ad valorem . 
 (ii) Medicinal preparations containing alcohol which are 
capable of being consumed a s ordinary alcoholic 
beverages ―  
 (a) Medicinal preparations which contain known active 
ingred ients in therapeutic quantities  Twenty per cent .ad valorem . 
 (b) Others  Twenty per cent .ad valorem . 
 (iii) Medicinal preparations not containing alcohol but 
conta ining narcotic drug or narcotic  Twenty per cent. ad valorem . 
2. Medicinal preparations in Ayurvedic, Unani or other 
indigenous systems of medicine ―  
 (i) Medicinal preparations containing self -generated 
alcohol which are not capable of being consumed as 
ordinary alcoholic beverages  Four per cent. ad valorem.  
 (ii) Medicinal preparations containing self -generated 
alcohol which are capable of being consumed as 
ordinary alcoholic beverages  Four per cent. ad valorem.  
 (iii) All others containing alcohol which are prepared by 
distillation or to which alcohol has been ad ded Six per cent. ad valorem . 
 (iv) Medicinal preparations not containing alcohol but 
conta ining narcotic drug or narcotic  Twenty per cent. ad valorem. 
3. Homeopathic preparations containing alcohol  Four per cent. ad valorem . 
Toilet preparations 
4. Toilet preparations containing alcohol or narcotic drug or 
narcotic  Fifty per cent. ad valorem . 
 Explanation I .―“Patent or proprietary medicines ” means any medicinal preparation 
which bears either on itself or on its container or both, a name which is not specified in a 
monograph in a pharmacopoeia, formulary or other publications notified in this behalf by 
the Central Government in the Official Ga zette, or which is a brand name, that is, a name or 
a registered trade -mark under the Trade and Merchandise M arks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) or 
any other mark such as a symbol, monogram, label, signature or invented words or any 
writing which is used in relati on to that medical preparations for the purpose of indicating 
or so as to indicate a connection in the course of trade between the preparation and some 
person having the right either as proprietor or otherwise to use the name or mark with or 
without any in dication of the identity of that person. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2000 , s. 115 and the Sixth Schedule (w.e.f.  1-3-2003 ). 10 
  Explanation II .―Where any article is chargeable to duty at a rate dependent on the value 
of the article, such value shall be deemed to be the value as determined in accordance with 
the provisions of section 4 of t he Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944). 
 Explanation III .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Explanation II , the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify any dutiable goods, in 
relation to which it is required, under the provisions of the 1[Legal MetrologyAct, 2009  
(1 of 2010)]  or the rules made thereunder or under any other law  for the time being in force, 
to declare on the package thereof the retail sale price of such goods, to which the provisions 
of clause ( 2) shall apply.  
(2) Where dutiable goods specified under clause ( 1) are chargeable to duty with 
reference to value, then , notwithstanding anything contained in Explanation II , such value 
shall be deemed to be  retail price declared on such goods less such amount of abatement, if 
any, from such retail price as the Central Government may allow by notification in the 
Official G azette.  
(3) The Central Government may, for the purpose of allowing any abatement under  
clause ( 2), take into account the duty of excise, sales tax and other taxes, if any, payable on 
such goods.  
(4) Where on the package of any dutiable goods more than one retail sale price is 
declared, the maximum of such retail sale shall be deemed to be the retail sale price for the 
purposes of clause ( 2). 
(5) Where different retail sale prices are declared on different packages for the sale of 
any dutiable goods in p ackaged form in different areas, each such retail sale price shall be 
the retail sale price for the purposes of valuation of the dutiable goods intended to be sold in 
the area to which the retail sale price relates.  
(6) For the purpose of this Explanation , “retail sale price” means the maximum price at 
which the excisable goods in packaged form may be sold to the ultimate consumer and 
includes all taxes local or otherwise, freight, transport charge, commission payable to 
dealers, and all charges towards adv ertisement, delivery, packing, forwarding and the like, 
as the case may be, and the price is the sole consideration for such sale. ] 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2011, s. 76, for “ Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 (60 of 1976) ” (w.e.f. 8 -4-2011).  
--------------------------The Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE PRISONERS (ATTENDANCE IN COURTS) ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1955  
[20th September, 1955 .] 
An Act to provide for the attendance in courts of persons confined in prisons for obtaining their 
evidence or for answering a criminal charge.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Prisoners (Attendance in 
Courts) Act,  1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, — 
(a) “confinement in a prison ”—references to confinement in a prison, by whatever form of word s, 
include references to confinement or detention in a prison under any law providing for preventive 
detention;  
(b) “prison” includes— 
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, 
to be a subsidiary jail; and  
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or other institution of a like nature;  
2[(c) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof.]  
3. Power of courts to require appearance of prisoners to give evidence or answer a charge. —(1) 
Any civil or criminal court may, if it thinks that the evidence of any person confined in any prison is 
material in any matter pending before it, make an order in the form set forth in the First Schedule, 
directed to the officer in charge of the prison:  
Provided that no civil court shall make an order under this sub -section in respect of a person confined 
in a prison situated outside the State in which the court is held.  
(2) Any criminal court may, if a charge of an offence against a person confined in any prison is made 
or pending before it, make an order in the form set forth in the Second Schedule, directed to the officer in 
charge of the prison.  
(3) No order made under this section by a civil court which is subordinate to a district judge  shall 
have effect unless it is countersigned by the district judge; and no order made under this section by a 
criminal court which is inferior to the court of a magistrate of the first class shall have effect unless it is 
countersigned by the district mag istrate to whom that court is subordinate or within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction that court is situate.  
 
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1956, vide notification No. S.R. O. 3447, dated 8th November, 1955, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,        
Part II, sec. 3.  
2. Subs. by Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1-11-56). 2 
 (4) For the purposes of sub -section ( 3), a court of small causes outside a presidency town or the city 
of Hyderabad shall be deemed to be sub ordinate to the district judge within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction such court is situate.  
4. Power of State Government to exempt certain persons from operation of section 3 .—(1) The 
State Government may, having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or special 
order, direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he or they 
may be confined, and thereupon so long as any such order remains in force, the provisions of section 3 
shall n ot apply to such person or class of persons.  
(2) Before making an order under sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall have regard to the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the nature of the offence for which or the grounds on which the confinement has bee n ordered 
in respect of the person or  class of persons;  
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to 
be removed from the prison;  
(c) the public interest, generally.  
5. Prisoners to be brought up .—Upon delivery of any order made under section 3 to the officer in 
charge of the prison in which the person named therein is confined, that officer shall cause him to be 
taken to the court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present in the court a t the time of such 
order mentioned, and shall cause him to be detained in custody in or near the court until he has been 
examined or until the judge or presiding officer of the court authorises him to be taken back to the prison 
in which he was confined.  
6. Officer in charge of prison when to abstain from carrying out order .—Where the person in 
respect of whom an order is made under section 3 — 
(a) is, in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, declared to be unfit to be removed from 
the prison where he is confined  by reason of sickness or other infirmity; or  
(b) is under committal for trial; or  
(c) is under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary investiga tion; or  
(d) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the tim e required for 
removing him under this Act and for  taking him back to the prison in which he is confined,  
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the order and shall send to the court 
from which the order had been issued a state ment of reasons for so abstaining:  
Provided that such officer as aforesaid shall not so obstain where — 
(i) the order has been made by a criminal court; and  
(ii) the person named in the order is confined under committal for trial or under remand pending 
trial or pending a preliminary  investigation and is not declared in accordance with the rules made in 
this behalf to be unfit to be removed from the prison where he is confined by reason of sickness or 
other infirmity; and  
(iii) the place, where the eviden ce of the person named in the order is required, is not more than 
five miles distant from the  prison in which he is confined.  
  3 
 7. Commissions for examination of prisoners .—In any of the following cases, that is to say, — 
(a) where it appears to any civil court that the evidence of a person confined in a prison is 
material in any matter pending  before it and that the attendance of such person in court cannot be 
secured by reason of the provisions of section 6 or of an order under section 4 or of the distric t judge 
declining under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 to counter  sign an order for removal; or  
(b) where it appears to any civil court as aforesaid that the evidence of a person confined in a 
prison which is situated outside  the State in which, or is more than fifty miles distant from the place at 
which, such court is held is material in any such matter,  
the court may, if it thinks fit, issue a commission under the provisions of the Code of Civil          
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the examination of the person in the prison in which he is confined.  
8. Certain provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Code of Civil Procedure to 
apply .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act and any rules made there under, the provisions of the 
Code of Civil P rocedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as the 
case may be, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the examination on commission or otherwise of 
any person confined in a prison as they apply in relation to t he examination on commission of any other 
person.  
9. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the procedure for obtaining the countersignature of an order made under section 3;  
(b) the authority by whom and the manner in which a declaration that a person confined in prison 
is unfit to be remo ved therefrom, may  be made;  
(c) the conditions, including payment of costs and charges, subject to which an order made under 
section 3 by a civil court may be  executed;  
(d) the manner in which a process directed against any person confined in a prison issu ed from 
any court may be served upon him;  
(e) the escort of persons confined in a prison to and from courts in which their attendance is 
required and for their custody  during the period of such attendance;  
(f) the amount to be allowed for the costs and cha rges of such escort; and  
(g) the guidance of officers in all other matters connected with the enforcement of this Act.  
10. Repeal .—(1) Part IX of the Prisoners Act, 1900 (3 of 1900) and the First and Second Schedules 
to the said Act are hereby repealed.  
(2) If immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force in any Part B State to which 
this Act extends any law corresponding to the provisions of this Act, that law shall, in so far as it relates 
to matters dealt within this Act, stand repea led on such commencement:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken under any such law, shall be deemed to have been 
done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to have effect 
accordingly, unless and until supersed ed by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 4 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 1) of section 3]  
Court of  
To the officer in charge of  the …………………………………………..  (State name of prison ). 
You are hereby required to produce                        , now confined in                                        , under  
safe and sure conduct before the Court of                                       at                                                    
on the                                         day of                                          next by                                        of the 
clock in the forenoon of the same day, there to give evidence in a matter now pending before the said 
Court, and after the said                                      has then and there given his evidence before the said 
Court or the said Court has dispensed with his further attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe 
and sure conduct back to the prison.  
The                                           day of  
A. B.  
(Countersigned)  C.D. 
 
____________  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 2) of section 3]  
Court of  
To the officer in charge of  the …………………………………………..  (State name of prison ). 
You are hereby required to produce                        , now confined in                                        , under 
safe and sure conduct before the Court of                                       at                     on the                                
day of                                    next by                            of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, there to 
answer a charge now pending before the said Court, and after such charge has been disposed of or the said 
Court has dispensed with his further attendance,  cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct 
back to the said prison.  
The                                           day of  
A. B.  
(Countersigned)  C.D. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Prize Competitions Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE PRIZE COMPETITIONS ACT, 1955  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Interpretation.  
4. Prohibition of prize competitions where the prize offered exceeds one thousand rupees a 
month.  
5. Licensing of prize competitions where the prize offered does not exceed one thousand 
rupees a month.  
6. Licences for prize competitions.  
7. Promoters of prize competitions to keep accounts and submit the same to the licensing 
authority.  
8. Power to cancel  or suspend licences.  
9. Penalty for promoting or conducting any prize competition in contravention of the 
provisions of sections 4 and 5.  
10. Penalty for failure to keep and submit accounts.  
11. Penalty for other offences in connection with prize competit ions.  
12. Offences by Corporations.  
13. Power of licensing authority to call for and inspect accounts and documents.  
14. Power of entry and search.  
15. Forfeiture newspapers and publications containing prize competition s. 
16. Appeals.  
17. Licensing authori ty and other officers to be public servants.  
18. Jurisdiction to try offences.  
19. Protection of action taken under this act.  
20. Power to make rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
  
THE PRIZE COMPETITIONS ACT, 1955  
ACT N O. 42 OF 19551 
 [22nd October , 1955.]  
An Act to provide f or the control and regulation of prize competitions.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the control and regulation of prize Competitions;  
AND WHEREAS  the Legislatures of the States of Andhra, Bombay, Madras, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, 
Hyderabad, Madhya B harat, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and Saurashtra have passed 
resolutions in terms of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution in relation to the above -mentioned 
matter and matters ancillary thereto in so far as such matters are matters enume rated in List II in the 
Seven th Schedule to the Constitution ;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ―  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Prize Competitions 
Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to 2[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were 
comprised in] the States of Andhra, Bombay, Madras, Orissa,  Uttar Pradesh, Hyderabad, Madhya 
Bharat, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and Saurashtra and all Part C States.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “licensing authority ” means any officer or authority appointed by the State Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of gr anting licences under this Act;  
(b) “money ”  includes a cheque, postal -order or money -order;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “prize competition ” means any competition (whether called a cross -word prize 
competition, a missing -word prize competition, a picture prize com petition or by any other name) 
in which prizes are offered for the solution of any puzzle based upon the building up, 
arrangement, combination or permutation, of letters, words, or figures.  
3. Interpretation .―For the purposes of this Act, ― 
 (a) references to printing shall be construed as including references to writing and oth er 
modes of representing or re -producing letters, words or figures in a visible form; and  
(b) documents or other matters shall be deeme d to be distributed if they are distributed to 
persons or places within or outside the territories to which this Act extends and the word 
distribution' shall be construed accordingly.  
4. Prohibition of prize competitions where the prize offered exceeds one  thousand rupees a 
month .―No person shall promote or conduct any prize competition or competitions in which the 
total value of the prize or prizes (whether in cash or otherwise) to be offered in any mo nth exceeds 
one thousand rupees ; and in every prize competition, the number of e ntries shall not exceed two 
thousand.  
                                                      
1. Extended to and brought into force in Dadar and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1.7.65) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 & Sch. I. 
Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 & sch. Extended to the Union territory of Pondicherry by 
Act 26 of 1968, s.3 and Schedule. 2. 1st April, 1956, vide Notification No. S.R.  O. 766, dated 31st March, 1956, 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, P art II, sec. 3,  
2. Ins. by A . O. (No. 3 ), 1956.  
3. 1st April, 1956, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 766, dated 3 1st March, 1956, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3. 3 
 5. Licensing of prize competitions where the prize offered does not exceed one thousand 
rupees a month. ―Subject to the provisions of section 4, no person shall promote or conduct any 
prize competition or competitions i n which the total value of the prize or prizes (whether in cash or 
otherwise) to be offered in any month does not exceed one thousand rupees unless he has obtained in 
this behalf a licence granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules  made 
thereunder.  
6. Licences for prize competitions .―(1) Every person desiring to obtain a licence referred to in 
section 5 shall make an application in writing to the licensing authority in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) On the receipt of such application, the licensing authority, after ma king such inquiry as it 
considers necessary, shall, by order in writing, either grant the licence or refuse to grant the licence.  
(3) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence it shall record a brief statement of the 
reasons for such refusa l and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant.  
(4) The fees on payment of which,  the period for which, the con ditions subject to which, and the 
form in which, a licence may be granted shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Promoters of prize competitions to keep accounts and submit the same to the licensing 
authority .―Every person who promotes or conducts a prize competition in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall keep accounts relating to such competition 
and subm it to the licensing authority a statement of accounts in such form and at such intervals as 
may be prescribed.  
8. Power to cancel or suspend licences .―(1) The licensing authority may, after giving the 
holder of any licence under this Act a reasonable oppor tunity of being heard, cancel or suspend the 
licence on any one or more o f the following grounds, namely :― 
 (a) that there has been a breach of any of the conditions subject to which the licence was 
granted;  
(b) that the holder of the licence has contrave ned any of the provisions of section 7.  
(2) Whenever a licence is cancelled or suspended the licensing authority shall record a brief 
stateme nt of the reasons for such can cellation or suspension and furnish a copy thereof to the person 
whose licence has b een cancelled or suspended.  
9. Penalty for promoting or conducting any prize competition in contravention of the 
provisions of sections 4 and 5 .―If any person promotes or conducts any prize competition in 
contravention of the provisions of section 4 or section 5, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupe es, or 
with both.  
10. Penalty for failure to keep and submit accounts .―If any person liable under section 7 to 
keep accounts or to submit statements of accounts fails to keep accounts or to submit statements of 
accounts as required by that section or keeps  accounts or submits statements of accounts which are 
false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend t o five hundred rupees, or with both, but nothing contained in this section shall affect the 
provisions contained in section 8. 
11. Penalty for other offences in connection with prize competitions .―If any person with a 
view to the promotion or conduct of any prize competition except in accordance with the provisions 
of a licence under this Act or in contravention of the provisions of this Act or in connection with  any 
prize competition promoted or conducted except in accordance with such provisions ― 
(a) prints or publishes any ticket, coupon or other document for use in the prize competition; 
or  4 
 (b) sells or distributes or offers or advertises for sale or distribution, or has in his possession 
for the purpose of sale or distribution any ticket, coupon or other document for use in the prize 
competition; or  
(c) prints, publishes or distributes, or has in his possession for the purpose of publication or 
distribution,  
 (i) any advertisement of the prize competition, or  
(ii) any list (whether complete or not) of prize winners in the prize competition, or  
(iii) any such matter descriptive of, or otherwise relating to, the prize competition as is 
calculated to act as an inducement to persons to participate  in that prize competition or any 
other prize competition ; or  
(d) brings, or invites any person to send, into the territories to which this Act extends, for the 
purpose of sale or distribution, any ticket, coupon or other document for use in, or any 
adve rtisement of, the prize competition ; or  
(e) sends, or attempts to send, out of the territories to which this Act extends any money or 
valuable thing received in respect of the sale or distribution of any ticket, coupon or other 
document for use in the pr ize competition ; or  
(f) uses any premises, or causes or knowingly permits any premises to be used, for p urposes 
connected with the pro motion or conduct of the prize competition ; or  
(g) causes or procures or attempts to procure any person to do any of t he above -mentioned 
acts,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
12. Offences by Corporations .―(1) If any person guilty of an offence under this, Act is a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to gross n eglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished according ly. 
 Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “company ”  means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals ; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
13. Power of licensing authority to call for and inspe ct accounts and documents .―The 
licensing authority may ― 
(a) require any person promoting or conducting a prize competition to produce before it the 
accounts and other documents kept by such person or to furnish to it such other information 
relating to the prize competition as it may require;  
(b) inspect at all reasonable times the accounts and other documents kept by such person.  5 
 14. Power of entry and search .―(1) It shall be lawful for any police -officer not below the rank 
of Sub -inspector authorised by th e State Government in this behalf by general or special order in 
writing, ― 
 (a) to enter if necessary by force, whether by day or night, with such assistants as he 
considers necessary, any premises which he has reason to suspect, are being used for purpose s 
connected with the promotion or conduct of any prize competition in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act;  
(b) to search the premises and the persons whom he may find herein ; 
(c) to take into custody and produce before a Magistrate all such person s as are conc erned or 
against whom a reason able complaint has been made or credible information has been received or 
a reasonable suspicion exists of their having been concerned with the user of such premises for 
purposes connected with, or with the promot ion or conduct of, any prize competition in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act; and  
(d) to seize all things found therein which are intended to be used or reasonably suspected to 
have been used in connection with such prize competition.  
(2) All searches under this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
15. Forfeiture newspapers and publications containing prize competition s.―Where any 
newspaper or other publication contains any prize competition promoted or conducted  in 
contravention of the provi sions of this Act or except in accordance with the provisions of licence 
under this Act or any advertisement in relation thereto, th e State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare every copy of the newspaper and every copy of the publication 
containing the prize competition or the advertisement, to be forfeited to Government.  
16. Appeals .―Any person aggrieved b y the decision of the licensing authority refusing to grant a 
licence or cancelling or suspending a licence may, within such time as may be prescribed, prefer an 
appeal to the State Government and the decision of the State Government on such appeal shall b e 
final.  
17. Licensing authority and other officers to be public servants .―The licensing authority and 
any other officer acting under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
18. Jurisdiction to try offences .―No Court inferior to that of a Presidency M agistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act.  
19. Protection of action taken under this act .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the licensing authority or any other officer of the Governmen t for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
20. Power to make rules .―(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publicat ion, make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the form and manner of application f or a licence and the fees, if any, for such licence;  
(b) the period for which, the conditions subject to which and the form in which, a licence may 
be granted;  
(c) the form in which and the intervals at which statements of  accounts shall be submitted to 
the licensing authority;  
(d) the time within which an appeal against a decision of the licensing authority may be 
preferred to the State Government;  
(e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
--------------------------The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE PROTECTION OF CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, 1955  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Punishment for enforcing religious disabilities . 
4. Punishment for enforcing social disabilities . 
5. Punishment for refusing to admit person to hospitals, etc . 
6. Punishment for refusing to sell goods or render services.  
7. Punishment for other offences arising out of “untouchability  
7A. Unlawful compulsory labour when to be deemed to be a practice of “untouchability  
8. Cancella tion or suspension of licences in certain cases.  
9. Resumption or suspension of grants made by Government.  
10. Abetment of offence . 
10A. Power of State Government to impose collective fine . 
11. Enhanced penalty on subsequent conviction.  
12. Presumption by Courts in certa in cases.  
13. Limitation of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts.  
14. Offences by companies.  
14A. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
15. Offences to be cognizable and triable summarily.  
15A. Duty of State Government to ensure that the rights accruing from the abolition  of 
“untouchability” may be availed of by the concerned persons.  
16. Act to override other laws . 
16A. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, not to apply to persons above the age of fourteen years.  
16B. Power to make rules.  
17. Repeal.  
THE  SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE PROTECTION O F CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 22 OF 19551 
[8th May, 1955 .] 
An Act to prescribe punishment for the  2[preaching and practice of “Untouchability ”] for the 
enforcement of any disability arising therefrom and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  3[the Protection of Civil          
Rights Act], 1955.  
(2) It extends  to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
5[(a) “civil rights ” means any right accruing to a person by reason of the abolition of 
“untouchability ” by article 17 of the Constitution;]  
6[(aa)] “hotel ” includes a refreshment room, a boarding house, a lodging house, a coffee house 
and a cafe;  
7[(b) “place ” includes a hou se, building and other structure and premises; and also includes a tent, 
vehicle and vessel;]  
(c) “place of public entertainment ” includes any place to which the public are admitted and in 
which an entertainment is provided or field.  
Explanation .—“Entertai nment ” includes any exhibition performance, game, sport and any other 
form of amusement;  
(d) “place of public worship ” means a place, by whatever name known, which is used as a place 
of public religious worship or which is dedicated generally to, or is used generally by persons 
professing any religion or belonging to any religious denomination or any section thereof, for the 
performance of any religious service, or for offering prayers therein,  8[and includes — 
(i) all lands and subsidiary shrines appurtenant or attached to any such place ; 
(ii) a privately owned place of worship which is, in fact, allowed by the owner there of to be 
used as a place of public worship; and  
(iii) such land or subsidiary shrine appurtenant to such privately owned place of worship as is 
allowed by the owner thereof to be used as a place of public religious worship;]  
                                                           
1. Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modification by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by 
Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2  and Schedule I (w.e.f. 1 st July, 1965) and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule I           
(w.e.f.  1st October, 1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 2, for “practice of Untouchability” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “t he Untouchability (Offences) Act” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
4. 1st June, 1955, vide notification No.  S.R.O. 1109(E), dated the 23 rd May, 1955, see Gazette of India, 1955, Extraordinary          
Part II, s. 3.  
5. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19-11-1976).  
6. Clause ( a) relettered as clause ( aa) by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
8. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  3 
 1[(da) “prescribed ” means presc ribed by rules made under this Act;  
(db) “Scheduled Castes ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 24) of article 366 of the 
Constitution;]  
(e) “shop ” means any premises where goods are sold either wholesale or by retail or both 
wholesale and by retail  2[and includes — 
(i) any place from where goods are sold by a hawker or vendor or from a mobile van or cart;  
(ii) a laundry and a hair cutting saloon;  
(iii) any other place where services are rendered to customers].  
3. Punishment for enforcing religious disabilities .—Whoever on the ground of “untouchability ” 
prevents any person — 
(a) from entering any place of public worship which is open to other persons professing the same 
religion  3* * * or any section thereof, as suc h person; or  
(b) from worshipping or offering prayers or performing any religious service in any place of 
public worship, or bathing in, or using the waters of, any sacred tank, well, spring or water -course 
4[river or lake or bathing at any ghat of such ta nk, water -course, river or lake] in the same manner and 
and to the same extent as is permissible to the other persons professing the same religion  3* * * or any 
section thereof, as such person,  
5[shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than six 
months and also with fine which shall be not less than one hundred rupees and not more than five hundred 
rupees].  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and  section 4 persons professing the Buddhist, Sikh or 
Jaina religion or persons professing the Hindu religion in any of its forms or developments including 
Virashaivas, Lingayats, Adivasis, followers of Brahmo, Prarthana, Arya Samaj and the Swaminarayan 
Samp raday shall be deemed to be Hindus.  
4. Punishment for enforcing social disabilities .—Whoever on the ground of “untouchability ” 
enforces against any person any disability with regard to — 
(i) access to any shop, public restaurant, hotel or place of public en tertainment; or  
(ii) the use of any utensils, and other articles kept in any public restaurant, hotel,  dharamshala,  
sarai  or musafirkhana  for the use of the general public or of  6[any section thereof]; or  
(iii) the practice of any profession or the carrying on of any occupation, trade or                    
business  7[or employment in any job]; or  
(iv) the use of, or access to, any river, stream, spring, well, tank, cistern, water -tap or other 
watering place, or any bathing ghat, burial or cremation ground, any sanitary convenience, any road, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 9-11-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
3. The words “or belonging to the same religious denomination” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
7. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
 4 
 or passage, or any other place of public resort which other members of the public, or  1[any section 
thereof], have a right to use or have access to; or  
(v) the use of, or access to, any place used for a charitable or a public purpose maintained wholly 
or partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public or  1[any section thereof]; or  
(vi) the enjoyment of any benefit under a charitable trust created for the be nefit of the general 
public or of  1[any section thereof]; or  
(vii)   the use of, or access to, any public conveyance; or  
(viii) the construction, acquisition, or occupation of any residential premises in any locality, 
whatsoever; or  
(ix) the use of any  dharamshala,  sarai  or musafirkhana  which is open to the general public, or 
to 1[any section thereof]; or  
(x) the observance of any social or religious custom, usage or ceremony or  2[taking part in, or 
taking out, any religious, social or cultural procession];  or 
(xi) the use of jewellery and finery,  
3[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than six 
months and also with fine which shall be not less than one hundred rupees and not more than five hundred 
rupees].  
4[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “enforcement of any disability ” includes any 
discrimination on the ground of “untouchability ”.] 
5. Punishment for refusing to admit person to hospitals, etc. —Whoever on the ground of 
“untouchability ”— 
(a) refuses admission to any person to any hospital, dispensary, educational institution or any 
hostel  5***, if such hospital, dispensary, educational institution or hostel is established or maintained 
for the benefit of the general public or any section thereof ; or 
(b) does any act which discriminates against any such person after admission to any of the 
aforesaid institutions,  
6[shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not more than six 
months and also with fine which shall be not less than one hundred rupees and not more than five hundred 
rupees].  
6. Punishment for refusing to sell goods or rende r services .—Whoever on the ground of 
“untouchability ” refuses to sell any goods or refuses to render any service to any person at the same time 
and place and on the same terms and conditions at or which such goods are sold or services are rendered 
to other  persons in the ordinary course of business  7[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of 
not less than one month and not more than six months and also with fine which shall be not less than one 
hundred rupees and not more than five hundred rupees] . 
7. Punishment for other offences arising out of “untouchability ”.—(1) Whoever — 
(a) prevents any person from exercising any right accruing to him by reason  of the abolition of 
“untouchability ” under Article 17 of the  Constitution; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “tak ing part in any religious procession” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
5. The words “attached thereto” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
 5 
 (b) molests, injures,  annoys, obstructs or causes or attempts to cause  obstruction to any person in 
the exercise of any such right or molests, injures,  annoys or boycotts any person by reason of his 
having exercised any such right;  or 
(c) by words, either spoken or written, or  by signs or by visible  representations or otherwise, 
incites or encourages any person or class of  persons or the public generally to practice 
“untouchability ” in any  form whatsoever;  1[or] 
1[(d) insults or attempts to insult, on the ground of  “untouchability ”, a member of a Scheduled 
Caste;]  
2[shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not  more than six 
months, and also with fine which shall be not less than one  hundred rupees and not more than five 
hundred r upees].  
3[Explanation I  ].—A person  shall be deemed to boycott another person who — 
(a) refuses to let to such other person or refuses to permit such other  person, to use or occupy any 
house or land or refuses to deal with, work for  hire for , or do business with, such other person or to 
render to him or receive  from him any customary service, or refuses to do any of the said things on 
the terms on which such things would be commonly done in the ordinary course of  business; or  
(b) abstains  from such social, professional or business relations as he would  ordinarily maintain 
with such other person.  
1[Explanation II .—For the purpose of clause ( c) a person shall be deemed to incite or encourage the  
practice of “untouchability ”— 
(i)  if he, dire ctly or indirectly, preaches “untouchability ” or its  practice in any form; or  
(ii) if he justifies, whether on historical, philosophical or religious  grounds or on the ground of 
any tradition of the caste system or on any other  ground, the practice of “untouchability ” in any 
form.]  
1[(1A) Whoever commits any offence against the person or property of any individual as  a repraisal or 
revenge for his having exercised any right accruing to him by  reason of the abolition of “untouchability ” 
under article 17 of the  Constitution, shall, where the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a  term 
exceeding two years, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall  not be less than two years 
and also with fine.]  
(2) Whoever — 
(i) denies t o any person belonging to his community or any section thereof any  right or privilege 
to which such person would be entitled as a member of  such community or section, or  
(ii) takes any part in the ex -communication of such person, on the ground that  such pe rson has 
refused to practice “untouchability ” that such person has done  any act in furtherance of the objects of 
this Act,  
[shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than one month and not  more than six 
months and also with fine which sh all be not less than one hundred  rupees and not more than five hundred 
rupees.]  
4[7A. Unlawful compulsory labour when to be deemed to be a practice of “untouchability ”.—(1) 
(1) Whoever compels any person, on the ground of “untouchability ”, to do  any scavenging or sweeping or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 9, (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
3. The existing Explanation renumbered  as Explanation  I  by s. 9,  ibid., (w.e.f 19 -11-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 10 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  6 
 to remove any carcass or to flay any animal, or to  remove the umbilical cord or to do any other job of a 
similar nature shall be  deemed to have enforced a disability arising out of “untouchability ”. 
(2) Whoever is deemed under  sub-section ( 1) to have enforced a disability arising  out of 
“untouchability ” shall be punishable with imprisonment for a  term which shall not be less than three 
months and not more than six months and  also with fine which shall not be less than one hundr ed rupees 
and not more than  five hundred rupees.  
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this section, “compulsion ” includes a threat of social or  economic 
boycott.]  
8. Cancellation or suspension of licences in certain cases .—When a person who is convicted of an 
offence under section 6 holds any licence under any law for the time being in force in respect of any 
profession, trade, calling or employment in relation to which the offence is committed, the court trying 
the offence may without prejudice to any other penalty to which such person may be liable under that 
section, direct that the licence shall stand cancelled or be  suspended for such period as the court may 
deem fit, and every order of the court so cancelling or suspend ing a licence shall have effect as if it had 
been passed by the authority competent to cancel or suspend the licence under any such law.  
Explanation .—In this section, “licence ” includes a permit or a permission.  
9. Resumption or suspension of grants made b y Government .—Where  the manager or trustee of a 
place of public worship  1[for any  educational institution or hostel] which is in receipt of a grant of land or  
money from the Government is convicted of an offence under this Act and such  conviction is not reversed 
or quashed in any appeal or revision, the Government  may, if in its opinion the circumstances of the case 
warrant such a course,  direct the supension or resumption of the whole or any part of such grant.  
10. Abetment of offence .—Whoever  abets any offence under this Act shall be punishable with the 
punishment  provided for the offence.  
2[Explanation .— A public  servant who wilfully neglects the investigation of any offence punishable 
under  this Act shall be deemed to have abetted an offence punishable  under this Act.]  
3[10A. Power of State Government to impose collective fine .—(1) If, after an inquiry in the 
prescribed manner, the State Government is satisfied  that the inhabitants of an area are concerned in, or 
abetting the commission of,  any offence punishable under this Act, or harbo uring persons concerned in 
the commission of such offence or failing to render all the assistance in their  power to discover or 
apprehend the offender or offenders or suppressing material  evidence of the commission of such offence, 
the State Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, impose a collective fine on such  
inhabitants and apportion such fine amongst the inhabitants who are liable  collectively to pay it, and such 
apportionment shall be made accord ing to the  State Government ’s judgment of the respective means of 
such inhabitants and in  making any such apportionment the State Government may assign a portion of 
such fine to a Hindu undivided family to be payable by it:  
Provided  that the fine apportion ed to an inhabitant shall not be realised until the  petition, if any, filed 
by him under sub -section ( 3), is disposed of.  
(2) The notification made under sub -section ( 1) shall be proclaimed in the area by  beat of drum or in 
such other manner as the State G overnment may think best in  the circumstances to bring the imposition of 
the collective fine to the notice  of the inhabitants of the said area.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 12,  ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  7 
 (3) (a) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of the collective fine under  sub-section ( 1) or by the 
order of apportionment, may, within the prescribed  period, file a petition before the State Government or 
such other authority as  that Government may specify in this behalf for being exempted from such fine or  
for modification of the order o r apportionment:  
Provide d that no fee shall be charged for filing such petition.  
(b) The State Government or the authority specified by it shall, after giving to the  petitioner a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may  think fit:  
Provided  that the amount of the fine exempted or reduced under this section shall not be  realisable 
from any person, and the total fine imposed on the inhabitants of an  area under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
deemed to have been reduced to that extent.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything con tained in sub -section ( 3), the State Government may  exempt the 
victims of any offence punishable under this Act or any person who  does not, in its opinion, fall within 
the category of persons specified in  sub-section ( 1), from the liability to pay the coll ective fine imposed 
under  sub-section ( 1) or any portion thereof.  
(5) The portion of collective fine payable by any person (including a Hindu  undivided family) may be 
recovered in the manner provided by the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), for  the recovery 
of fines imposed by a  Court as if such portion were a fine imposed by a Magistrate.]  
11. Enhanced penalty on subsequent conviction .—Whoever having already been convicted of an 
offence under this Act or of an abetment of such offence is again convicted of any such offence or 
abetment,  1[shall, on conviction, be punishable — 
(a) for the second offence, with imprisonment for a term of not less than six months and not more 
than one year, and also with fine which shall be not less than two hundred r upees and not more than 
five hundred rupees;  
(b) for the third offence or any offence subsequent to the third offence with imprisonment for a 
term of not less than one year and not more than two years, and also with fine which shall be not less 
than five h undred rupees and not more than one thousand rupees].  
12. Presumption by Courts in certain cases .—Where any act constituting an offence under this Act 
is committed in relation to a member of a Scheduled Caste  2***, the Court shall presume, unless the 
contrary is proved, that such act was committed on the ground of “untouchability ”. 
13. Limitation of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts .—(1) No Civil Court shall entertain or continue any 
suit or proceeding or shall pass any decree or order if the claim involved in such suit or proceeding or if 
the passing of such decree or order or if such execution would in any way be contrary to the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) No Court shall, in adjudicating any matter or executing any decr ee or order, recognise any custom 
or usage imposing any disability on any person on the ground of “untouchability ”. 
14. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was  committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
2. The words , brackets and figures  “as defined in clause ( 24) of article 366 of the Constitution” omitted by s. 15, ibid.                   
(w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  8 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent of any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be gui lty of that offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
1[14A. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or a State Government for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or a State Government 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act.]  
2[15. Offences to be cognizable and triable summarily .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2  of 1974),  every offence punishable under this Act shall be 
cognizable and every such  offence, except where its punishable with imprisonment for a minimum term  
exceeding three months, may be tried summarily by a Judicial Magistrate of the  first class or in a 
metropolitan area by a Metropolitan Magistrate in accordance  with the procedure specified in the said 
Code.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974), when 
any public servant is alleged to have committed the offence of  abetment of an offence punishable under 
this Act, while acting or purporting to  act in the discha rge of his official duty, no Court shall take 
cognizance of  such offence of abetment except with the previous sanction — 
(a) of the Central Government, in the case of a person employed in connection  with the affairs of 
the Union; and  
(b) of the State Govern ment, in the case of a person employed in connection  with the affairs of a 
State.  
15A.  Duty of State Government to ensure that the rights accruing from the abolition  of 
“untouchability ” may be availed of by the concerned persons .—(1) Subject to such rules as the 
Central Government may make in this behalf, the  State Government shall take such measures as may be 
necessary for ensuring that  the rights arising from the abolition of “untouchability ” are made  available to, 
and are availed of by the persons subjec ted to any disability  arising out of “untouchability ”. 
(2) In particular, and  without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such  
measures may include — 
(i) the provision of adequate facilities, including legal aid, to the persons  subjected to any 
disability arising out of “untouchability ” to enable  them to avail themselves of such rights;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for s. 15 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  9 
 (ii) the appointment of officers for initiating or exercising supervision over  prosecutions for the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act;  
(iii) the setting up of special courts for the trial of offences under this  Act; 
(iv) the setting up of Committees at such appropriate levels as the State  Government may think fit 
to assist the State Government in formulating or  implementing such measures ; 
(v) provision for a periodic survey of the working of the provisions of this  Act with a view to 
suggesting measures for the better implementation of the  provisions of this Act;  
(vi) the identification of the areas where persons are under any disability  arising out of 
“untouchability ” and adoption of such measures as would ensure  the removal of such disability from 
such areas.  
(3) The Central Government shall take such steps as may be necessary to coordinate the  measures 
taken by the State Government s under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The Central Government shall, every year, place on the Table of each House of Parliament , a 
report on the measures taken by itself and by the State Governments in  pursuance of the provision s of this 
section.]  
16. Act to override  other laws .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provision s of 
this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, or any custom or usage or any instrument hav ing effect by virtue of any such law 
or any decree or order of any Court or other authority.  
1[16A. Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, not to apply to persons above the age of fourteen 
years .—The provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), shall not apply to any 
person above the age of fourteen years who is found guilty of having committed any offence punishable 
under this Act.]  
16B. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rul es to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree  that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly done under 
that rule.]  
17. Repeal .—The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent to which 
they or any of the provisions contained therein correspond or are repugnant to this Act or to any of the 
provisions contained therein.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 106 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1976).  10 
 THE  SCHEDULE  
(See section 17)  
  1. The Bihar Harijan (Removal of Civil Disabilities) Act, 1949 (Bihar Act XIX of 1949).  
  2. The Bombay Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Act, 1946 (Bombay Act X of 1947).  
  3. The Bombay Harijan  Temple Entry Act, 1947 (Bombay Act XXXV of 1947).  
  4. The Central Provinces and Berar Scheduled Castes (Removal of Civil Disabilities) Act, 1947 
(Central Provinces and Berar Act XXIV of 1947).  
  5. The Central Provinces and Berar Temple Entry Authorisati on Act,  1947 (Central Provinces and 
Berar Act XLI of 1947).  
  6. The East Punjab (Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities) Act, 1948 (East Punjab Act XVI     
of 1948).  
  7. The Madras Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1938 (Madras Act XXI of 1938).  
  8. The Orissa Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1946 (Orissa Act XI of 1946).  
  9. The Orissa Temple Entry Authorisation Act, 1948 (Orissa Act XI of 1948).  
10. The United Provinces Removal of Social Disabilities Act, 1947 (U.P. Act XIV of 1947).  
11. The West Bengal Hindu Social Disabilities Removal Act, 1948 (West Bengal Act XXXVII          
of 1948).  
12. The Hyderabad Harijan Temple Entry Regulations, 1358 F (No. LV of l358 Fasli).  
13. The Hyderabad Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Regulatio ns, 1358F (No. LVI of 135 8. 
Fasli).  
14. The Madhya Bharat Harijan Ayogta Nivaran Vidhan, Samvat 2005 (Madhya Bharat Act No. 15    
of 1949).  
15. The Removal of Civil Disabilities Act, 1943 (Mysore Act XLII of 1943).  
16. The Mysore Temple Entry Authorisation Act,  1948 (Mysore Act XIV of 1948).  
17. The Saurashtra Harijan (Removal of Social Disabilities) Ordinance (No. XL of 1948).  
18. The Travancore -Cochin Removal of Social Disabilities Act, 1125K (Travancore -Cochin Act VIII 
of 1125).  
19. The Travancore -Cochin Temp le Entry (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1950 (Travancore -Cochin 
Act XXVII of 1950).  
20. The Coorg Scheduled Castes (Removal of Civil and Social Disabilities) Act, 1949 (Coorg Act I  
of 1949).  
21. The Coorg Temple Entry Authorisation Act, 1949 (Coorg Act II  of 1949).  
--------------------------The State Bank of India Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION AND SHARE CAPITAL OF STATE  BANK 
3. Establishment of the State Bank.  
4. Authorised capital.  
5. Issued capital.  
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING OF THE IMPERIAL  BANK TO STATE  BANK 
6. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Imperial Bank to the State Bank.  
7. Transfer of service of existing officers and employees of the Imperial Bank to the St ate Bank.  
8. Existing provident and other funds of the Imperial Bank.  
9. Compensation to be given to shareholders of Imperial Bank.  
CHAPTER IV  
SHARES  
10. Transferability of shares.  
10A. Right of registered shareholders to nominate.  
11. Restrictions on voting rights.  
12. Shares to be approved securities.  
13.  Register of shareholders.  
13A. Register of beneficial owners.  
14. [Omitted. ] 
15. Trusts not to be entered on the register of shareholders.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT  
16. Offices, branches and agencies.  
17. Management.  
18. Central Board to be guided by directions of Central Government.  
19. Composition of the Central Board.  
19A. Qualifications for election of directors elected by shareholders.  
19B. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors.  
20. Term of office of chairman, managing director, etc. 
21. Local Boards.  
21A. Term of office of members of Local Board . 
21B. Powers of Local Board.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
21C. Local Committees.  
22. Disqualifications for directorship of Central Board or membership of Local Boards or 
Committees.  
23. Vacation of office of directors, etc.  
24. Removal from office of directors, etc.  
24A. Suppression of Central Board in certain cases.  
25. Casual vacancies.  
26. Remuneration of directors.  
27. Powers and remuneration of chairman.  
28. [Omitted .] 
29. Powers and remuneration of managing director . 
30. Executive and other committees of the Central Board . 
31. Meetings of the Central Board.  
31A. Meetings of Local Boards . 
CHAPTER VI  
BUSINESS OF THE STATE  BANK 
32. State Bank to act as agent of the Reserve Bank . 
33. Other business which the State Bank may transact.  
34. Business which the State Bank may not transact.  
35. State Bank may acquire the business of other Banks . 
35A.  Arrangement with the State Bank on appointment of directors to prevail.  
CHAPTER VII  
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
36. Integration and Development Fund.  
37. Reserve Fund.  
38. Disposal  of profits.  
38A. Transfer of unpaid or unclaimed dividend.  
39. Books to be balanced each year.  
40. Returns.  
41. Audit.  
42. Balance s heet, etc., of State Bank may be discussed at general meeting.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. State Bank may appoint officers and other employees.  
43A. Bonus.  
44. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy.  
45. Bar to liquidation of State Bank.  
46. Indemnity of directors and members of Local Boards and Local Committees, etc.  
47. Defects in appointment or constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings.  
48. [Omitted.] 
49. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
50. Power of Central Board to make regulations.  
51. Requirements of foreign law to be complied with in certain cases.  
52. [Omitte d.] 
53. [Repealed .] 
54. [Repealed .] 
55. No proceeding to lie in India against Imperial Bank after appointed day.  
56. References to the Imperial Bank, the Bank of Bengal, etc., in other laws.  3 
 SECTIONS  
57. Dissolution of Imperial Bank, etc.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.   
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —[Repealed .] 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. —[Repealed .] 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —[Repealed .] 
  4 
 THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 23 OF 19551 
[8th May , 1955.]  
An Act to constitute a State Bank for India, to transfer to it the undertaking of the Imperial Bank 
of India and to provide for other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEAEAS  for the extension of banking facilities on a large scale, more particularly in the rural and 
semi-urban areas, and for diverse other public purposes it is expedient to constitute a State Bank for I ndia, 
and to transfer to it the undertaking of the Imperial Bank of India and to provide for other matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State Bank of India Act, 1955.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Central Board ” means the Central Board of Directors of the State Bank;  
3[(bb) “chairman ” means the chairman of the Central Board;]  
(c) “goods ” includes bullion, wares and merchandise;  
(d) “Imperial Bank ” means the Imperial Bank of India constituted under the Imperial Bank of 
India Act, 1920 (47 of 1920);  
3[(dd) “Local Board ” means a Local Board constituted under section 21;]  
(e) “prescribed ” means pr escribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(f) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(g) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under this Act;  
4*                                 *                                  *                      *                                  *  
5*   *   *  *   * 
6[(j) “workman ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).]  
  
                                                             
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the first Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965); 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and first Schedule (w.e.f. 1-10-1963); and Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 
and Schedule.  
2. 1st July, 1955, vide notification No. S.R.O. 1077, dated 14th May, 1955, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
4. Clause ( h) omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 3  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).   
5. Omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  5 
 CHAPTER II  
INCORPORATION AND SHARE CAPITAL OF STATE  BANK 
3. Establishment of the State Bank. —(1) A Bank to be called the State Bank of India shall be 
constituted to carry on the business of banking and other business in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and f or the purpose of taking over the undertaking of the Imperial Bank.  
(2) The  1[Central Government], together with such other persons as may from time to time become 
shareholders in the State Bank in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall, so long  as they are 
shareholders in the State Bank, constitute a body corporate with perpetual succession and a common seal 
under the name of the State Bank of India, and shall sue and be sued in that name.  
(3) The State Bank shall have power to acquire and hold property, whether movable or immovable, 
for the purposes for which it is constituted and to dispose of the same.  
2[4. Authorised capital. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised capital of the State 
Bank shall be five thousand crores of rupees divided into five hundred crores of fully paid -up shares often 
rupees each:  
Provided that the Central Board may reduce the nominal or face value of the shares, and divide the 
authorised capital into such denomination as it may decide with the approval of the Reserve Bank:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, increase or 
reduce the authorised capital so however that the shares in all cases shall be fully paid -up shares.]  
5. Issued capital. —(1) The issued capital of the State Bank shall, on the appointed day, be five 
crores, sixty -two lakhs and fifty thousand rupees divided into five lakhs, sixty -two thousand and five 
hundred shares, all of which shall, on the appointed day, stand allotted to the  Reserve Bank in lieu of the 
shares of the Imperial Bank  3[transferred to and vested in it under section 6].  
4[(2) The issued capital of the State Bank shall consist of equity shares or equity and preference 
shares:  
Provided that the issue of preference sh ares shall be in accordance with the guidelines framed by the 
Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each class of such 
preference shares (whether perpetual or irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions  subject 
to which, each class of preference shares may be issued:  
Provided further that the Central Board may from time to time increase, with the previous approval of 
the Reserve Bank and the Central Government, whether by public issue or rights issue or preferential 
allotment or private placement, in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed, the issued capital 
by the issue of equity or preference shares:  
Provided also that the Central Government shall, at all times, hold not less than fifty -one per cent. of 
the issued capital consisting of equity shares of the State Bank.]  
(3) No increase in the issued capital beyond twelve crores and fifty lakhs of rupees shall be made 
under sub -section ( 2) without the previous sanction of the Central Government . 
5[(4) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), the Central Board may increase from time 
to time, by way of issuing bonus shares to existing equity shareholders, the issued capital in such manner 
as the Central Government may, after consult ation with the Reserve Bank, direct.  
(5) The State Bank may, accept the money in respect of shares issued towards increase in the issued 
capital in instalments, make calls, forfeit unpaid shares and re -issue them, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.]  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 2, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 3, for section 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1955, s. 2, for “transferred to it by paragraph 2 of the First Schedule ”  (w.e.f. 21 -9-1955)  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 4, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  6 
 CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING OF THE IMPERIAL  BANK TO STATE  BANK 
6. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Imperial Bank to the State Bank. —(1) Subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, on the appointed day,  
(a) all shares in the capital of the Imperial Bank shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Reserve Bank, free of all trusts, liabilities and encumbrances, and  
(b) the undertaking of the Imperial Bank shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the State Bank.  
(2) The un dertaking of the Imperial Bank shall be deemed to include all rights, powers, authorities 
and privileges, and all property, movable and immovable, including cash balances, reserve funds, 
investments and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of,  such property as may be in the 
possession of that bank immediately before the appointed day, and all books, accounts, and documents 
relating thereto, and shall also be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind 
then existing  of that bank.  
1[(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, 
agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature 
subsisting or having effect immediately befo re the appointed day and to which the Imperial Bank is a 
party or which are in favour of the Imperial Bank shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of 
the State Bank, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effec tually as if 
instead of the Imperial Bank the State Bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in 
favour of the State Bank].  
(4) If on the appointed day any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature, is pending 
by or agains t the Imperial Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer to the State Bank of the undertaking of the Imperial Bank or of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other p roceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced 
by or against the State Bank.  
7. Transfer of service of existing officers and employees of the Imperial Bank to the State 
Bank. —(1) Every officer or other employee of the Imperial Bank (excepting the mana ging director, the 
deputy managing director and other directors) in the employment of the Imperial Bank immediately 
before the appointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, become an officer or other employee, as 
the case may be, of the State Bank, a nd shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the 
same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension, gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointe d day if the 
undertaking of the Imperial Bank had not vested in the State Bank, and shall continue to do so  unless and 
until his employment in the State Bank is terminated or until his remuneration, terms or conditions are 
duly altered by the State Bank.  
(2) Any person who, on the appointed day, is entitled to or is in receipt of, a pension or other 
superannuation or compassionate allowance or benefit from the Imperial Bank or any provident, pension 
or other fund or any authority administering such fund sha ll be entitled to be paid by, and to receive from, 
the State Bank or any provident, pension or other fund or any authority administering such fund the same 
pension, allowance or benefit so long as he observes the conditions on which the pension, allowance or 
benefit was granted, and if any question arises whether he has so observed such conditions, the question 
shall be determined by the Central Government and the decision of the Central Government thereon shall 
be final.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), no appointment made or 
promotion, increment in salary, pension, allowance or any other benefit granted to any person after the 
19th day of December, 1954, and before the appointed day which would not ordinar ily have been made or 
granted or which would not ordinarily have been admissible under the rules or authorisations of the 
Imperial Bank or of any provident, pension or other fund in force prior to the 19th day of December,  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1955, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 21 -9-1955).  7 
 1954, shall have effect or be payable or claimable from the State Bank or from any provident, pension or 
other fund or from any authority administering the fund, unless the Central Government has, by general or 
special order, confirmed the appointment, promotion or increment or has dir ected the continued grant of 
the pension allowance or other benefit as the case may be.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employes of the 
Imperial Bank from that Bank to the State Bank shall not entitle such officer or other employees to any 
compensation under that Act or other law, and no such claim shall be entertained by any Court, Tribunal 
or other  authority.  
(5) Any person holding office as managing director, deputy managing director, director or member of 
any Local Board of the Imperial Bank immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed to have 
vacated his office as such on the appointed da y, and notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in 
any other law for the time being in force or in any agreement or contract, he shall not be entitled to any 
compensation from the Imperial Bank or the State Bank for the loss of office or for the p remature 
termination of any agreement or contract relating to his employment, except such pension, compensation 
or other benefit which the State Bank may grant to him, having regard to what that person would have 
received as an officer of the Imperial Bank  if this Act had not been passed and if he had retired from his 
employment in the ordinary course.  
(6) Where any managing director, deputy managing director, director, officer or other employee of 
the Imperial Bank has, after the 19th day of December, 1954 , and before the appointed day, been paid any 
sum by way of compensation or gratuity, the State Bank shall be entitled to claim refund of any sum so 
paid if the payment is not confirmed by the Central Government by general or special order.  
8. Existing pro vident and other funds of the Imperial Bank. —For the persons who immediately 
before the appointed day are the trustees of the following funds, that is to say, — 
(a) the Imperial Bank of India Employees Provident Fund;  
(b) the Imperial Bank of India Employee s Pension and Guarantee Fund;  
(c) the Bank of Bombay Officers Pension and Guarantee Fund;  
(d) the Bank of Madras Pension and Gratuity Fund; and  
(e) the Bank of Madras Officers Provident and Mutual Guarantee Fund;  
there shall be substituted as trustees such  persons as the Central Government may, by general or special 
order, specify.  
9. Compensation to be given to shareholders of Imperial Bank. —(1) Every person who 
immediately before the appointed day is registered as a holder of shares in the Imperial Bank s hall be 
entitled to compensation in accordance with the provisions contained in the First Schedule.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the rights inter se between the holder of any 
share in the Imperial Bank and any other person who may have an interest in such share, and such other 
person shall be entitled to enforce his interest against the compensation awarded to the holder of such 
share, but not against the Reserve Bank.  
CHAPTER IV  
SHARES  
10. Transferability of shares. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the shares of the 
State Bank shall be freely transferable.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle the  1[Central Government] to transfer any shares 
held by it in the State Bank if such transfer will res ult in reducing the shares held by it to less than  2[fifty - 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 4, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by 27 of 2010, s. 5, for “fifty-five per cent. of the issued capital ” (w.e.f. 15-9-2010).  8 
 one per cent. of the issued capital consisting of equity shares,] of the State Bank.  
1[10A. Right of registered shareholders to nominate. —(1) Every individual registered shareholder 
may, at any t ime, nominate, in the prescribed manner, an individual to whom all his rights in the shares 
shall vest in the event of his death.  
(2) Where the shares are registered in the name of more than one individual jointly, the joint holders 
may together nominate i n the prescribed manner, an individual to whom all their rights in the shares shall 
vest in the event of the death of all the joint holders.  
(3) Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in any other law f or the time being in force or in any 
disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, where a nomination in respect of shares is made in the 
prescribed manner and which purports to confer on the nominee the right to vest the shares, the nominee 
shall, on the death of the shareholder or, as the case may be, on the death of all the joint holders, become 
entitled to all the rights of the shareholder or, as the case may be, of all the joint holders, in relation to 
such shares and all other persons shall be excluded unless the nomination is varied or cancelled in the 
prescribed manner.  
(4) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the individual registered holder of the shares 
to make nomination to appoint, in the prescribed manner, any person to become entitled to the shares in 
the event of his death during the minority of the nominee.]  
2[11. Restrictions on voting rights. —No shareholder, other than the  3[Central Government], shall be 
entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any shares held by him in excess of ten per cent. of the 
issued capital:  
Provided that such shareholder shall be entitled to exercise voting rights at such higher percentage as 
the Central Government may, after consultation with the 3[Central Government ], specify.]  
4[Provided further that the shareholder holding any preference share capital in the State Bank shall, in 
respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolutions placed before the State Bank which 
directly affect the rights attached to his preference shares:  
Provided also that no preference shareholder, other  than the Central Government, shall be entitled to 
exercise voting rights in respect of preference shares held by him in excess of ten per cent, of total voting 
rights of all the shareholders holding preference share capital only.]  
12. Shares to be approve d securities. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter 
mentioned in this section, the shares of the State Bank shall be deemed to be included among the 
securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and al so to be approved 
securities for the purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), and the 5[Banking Regulations Act, 
1949 (10 of 1949)].  
6[13. Register of shareholders. —(1) The State Bank shall keep at its Central Office, a register, in 
one or more boo ks of the shareholders, and shall enter therein the following particulars so far as they may 
be available: — 
(i) the names, addresses and occupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of the shares 
held by each shareholder, distinguishing each share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a shareholder; and  
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
7[Provided that nothing in this sub -sectio n shall apply to the shares held with a depository.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 3, for section 11 (15 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 5, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
4. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
5. Su bs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 4, for “Banking Companies, 1949 ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 13 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
7. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997). 9 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the State Bank to 
keep the register of shareholders  1[in computer floppies or diskettes or any other electronic form] sub ject 
to such safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extract from, the register of shareholders, certified to be a true copy under the hand of an officer of the 
State Bank authorised in this behalf, shall, in all legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence.]  
2[13A. Register of beneficial owners. —The register of beneficial owners maintained by a depository 
under section 11 of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996), shall be deemed to be a register of 
shareholders for the purposes of this Act.]  
14. [Branch registers .]Omitted by the  State Bank of India  (Amendment ) Act, 1993 (3 of 1994), s. 6 
(w.e.f. 15-10-1993).  
3[15. Trusts not to be entered on the register of shareholders. —No notice of any trust, express, 
implied or constructive, shall be entered on the register of shareholders or be receivable by the State 
Bank.]  
4[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a depository in respect of shares held by i t as a 
registered owner on b ehalf of the beneficial owners.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of section 13, section 13A and this section, the expressions 
“beneficial owner ”, “depository ” and “registered owner ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to 
them in clauses ( a), (e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996).]  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT  
16. Offices, branches and agencies. —(1) Unless otherwise provided by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, the Central Office of the State Bank shall be at  5[Mumbai, and shall 
also be known as Corporate Centre].  
(2) The State Bank shall have local head offices in  6[Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai] and at such other 
places in India as the Central Government , in consultation with the Central Board, may determine.  
(3) The State Bank shall maintain as its branches or agencies, all branches or agencies of the Imperial 
Bank which were in existence  7[in India] immediately before the appointed day, and no such bran ch may 
be closed without the previous approval of the Reserve Bank.  
(4) The State Bank may establish branches or agencies at any place in or outside India in addition to 
the branches or agencies referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), the State Bank shall establish not less than 
four hundred branches in addition to the branches referred to in sub -section ( 3) within five years of the 
appointed day or such extended period as the Central Government may specify  in this behalf, and the 
places where such additional branches are to be established shall be determined in accordance with any 
such programme as may be drawn up by the Central Government from time to time in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank and the Stat e Bank, and no branch so established shall be closed without the previous 
approval of the Reserve Bank . 
17. Management. —(1) The general superintendence and direction of the affairs and business of the 
State Bank shall be entrusted to the Central Board which may exercise all powers and do all such acts and 
things as may be exercised or done by the State Bank and are not by this Act expressly directed or 
required to be done by the State Bank in general meeting.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 8, for “in computer floppies or d iskettes ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1993, s. 7, for section 15 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
4. The proviso  and Explanation  ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010,  s. 9, for “Bombay ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “Bombay, Calcutta and Madras ”  (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. Ins. by Act 33 of 1955, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1955).  10 
 (2) The Central Board in discharging its fun ctions shall act on business principles, regard being had to 
public interest.  
18. Central Board to be guided by directions of Central Government. —(1) In the discharge of its 
functions 1*** the State Bank shall be guided by such directions in matters of pol icy involving public 
interest as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Governor of the Reserve Bank and the 
chairman of the State Bank, give to it.  
(2) 2[All directions shall be given by the Central Government]  and, if any question arises wh ether a 
direction relates to a matter of policy involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government 
thereon shall be final.  
19. Composition of the Central Board. —3*** The Central Board shall consist of the following, 
namely:  
(a) a chairman  4*** to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank  5***. 
6[(b) such number of managing directors not exceeding four, as may be appointed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank;]  
7*   *   *   *  * 
(c) if the total amount of the holdings of the shareholders, other than the  8[Central Government], 
whose names are on the  9[register of shareholders] three months before the date fixed for election of 
directors is — 
(i) not more than ten per cent. of the tota l issued capital, two directors,  
(ii) more than ten per cent. but not more than twenty -five per cent. of such capital three 
directors, and  
(iii) more than twenty -five per cent. of such capital, four directors, to be elected in the 
prescribed manner by such  shareholders;  
10[(ca) one director, from among the employees of the State Bank, who are workmen, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in the manner provided in the rules made under this Act;  
(cb) one director, from among such of the employees of the State Bank, as are not workmen, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in the manner provided in the rules made under this Act];  
(d) not less than two and not more than six directors to be nominated by the Central 
Government  11***, from among persons hav ing special knowledge of the working of co -operative 
institutions and of rural economy or experience in commerce, industry, banking or finance;]  
(e) one director to be nominated by the Central Government; and  
12[(f) one director, possessing necessary expert ise and experience in matters relating to regulation 
or supervision of commercial banks to be nominated by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of the Reserve Bank.]  
 
                                                             
1. The words “including those relating to a subsidiary bank ” omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 6, for “All directions given by the Central Government shall be given through the Reserve Bank ” 
(w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
3. The brackets  and figure “(1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15-10-1993).  
4. Certain words omitted by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
5. The words “and a vice -chairman ” omitted  by Act 27 of 2010, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. Omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
8. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 7, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
9. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 8, for “Principal register ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
10. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
11. The words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
12. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  11 
 1*   *    *   *  * 
2[19A. Qualifications for election of directors elected by shareholders. —(1) The directors elected 
under clause ( c) of section 19 shall — 
(a) have special knowledge or experience in respect of one or more of the following areas, 
namely: — 
(i) agriculture and rural economy,  
(ii) banking,  
(iii) co-operation,  
(iv) econ omics,  
(v) finance,  
(vi) law,  
(vii) small -scale industry,  
(viii) any other area the special knowledge of, and experience in, which in the opinion of the 
Reserve Bank shall be useful to the State Bank;  
(b) represent the interests of depositors; or  
(c) repre sent the interests of farmers, workers and artisans.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no person shall be eligible to 
be elected as director under clause ( c) of section 19 unless he is a person having fit and proper status 
based upon track record, integrity and such other criteria as the Reserve Bank may notify from time to 
time in this regard and the Reserve Bank may specify in the notification issued under this sub -section, the 
authority to determine the fit and proper status, the manner of such determination, the procedure to be 
followed for such determinations and such other matters as may be considered necessary or  incidental 
thereto.  
(3) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that any director of the State Bank elected under clause 
(c) of section 19 does not fulfil the requirements of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), it may, after giving to such 
director and the State B ank a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order, remove such director.  
(4) On the removal of a director under sub -section ( 3), the Central Board shall co -opt any other 
person fulfilling the requirements of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), as a director in p lace of the person so 
removed, till a director is duly elected by the shareholders of the State Bank in the next annual general 
meeting; and the person so co -opted shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the shareholders of the 
State Bank as a directo r. 
19B. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors. —(1) If the Reserve Bank is of the 
opinion that in the interest of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the State Bank 
or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to time and by order in writing appoint, with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more persons as additional directors of the 
State Bank.  
(2) Any person appointed as additional director under sub -section ( 1) shall, — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not 
exceeding three years or such further periods not exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve Bank 
may, by order, specify;  
  
                                                             
1. Sub-section ( 2) and ( 3) omitted by Act 35 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010,  s. 11 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  12 
 (b) not incur any obligation or l iability by reason only of his being an additional director or for 
anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in 
relation thereto; and  
(c) not be required to hold qualification shares in the State Bank . 
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of the total number of directors of the State Bank any 
additional director appointed under this section shall not be taken into account.]  
20. Term of office of chairman, managing director, etc. —(1) 1[The ch airman,  2*** and each 
managing director] shall hold office for such term not exceeding five years, as the Central Government 
may fix when appointing them and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the terms of office of the chairman,  2*** or a managing director, as the case may be, at 
any time before the expiry of the term fixed under sub -section ( 1) by giving him notice of not less than 
three months in writing or three months ’ salary and allowances in lieu of such notice; and the chairman, 
2*** or a managing director, as the case may be, shall also have the right to relinquish his office at any 
time before the expiry of the term so fixed by g iving to the Central Government notice of not less than 
three months in writing.]  
4*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in section 19 and  5*** a director elected under clause ( c)  6*** 
of 7[that section] shall hold office for  8[three y ears] and  9*** 10*** and shall be eligible for re -
election  11***: 
12[Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.]  
13[(3A) 14[subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 4), a director] appointed under clause  
(ca) or clause  (cb) 15[of section 19 or nominated under clause  (d) of that section] shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding three years, as the Central Government may specify  16*** and shall be eligible  17[for 
re appointment or re -nomination, as  the case may be: ]] 
12[Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.]  
18[(4) A director appointed under clause  (ca) or clause  (cb) 19[of section 19 or nominated under clause  
(d) or clause ( e) or clause ( f) of that section] shall hold office during the pleasure of the authority 
appointing or nominating him, as the case may be.]  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for “The chairman and the vice-chairman ” (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
2. The words “, vice -chairman ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976) . 
4. Omitted by  s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
5. The words , brackets and figures  “and in sub -section ( 5)” omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s.12 (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
6. The words , brackets and figures  “of sub -section ( 1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15-10-1993).  
7. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
8. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “four year s” (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
9. The words “and thereafter until his successor shall have been duly elected ” omitted by Act 45 o f 20 06, s. 14                      
(w.e.f. 16-10-2006). 
10. The words “or nominated ” omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s. 12 (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
11. The words “or re nomination ” omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
12. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
13. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
14. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 12, for “A director ” (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
15. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
16. The words “and thereafter until his successor shall have been du ly appointed or nominated ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 12 
(w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
17. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
18. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
19. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 9, for  certain words (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  13 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
2[21. Local Boards. —(1) There shall be constituted at each place where the State Bank has a local 
head office, a Local Board which shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
3[(a) the chairman, ex officio  or the managing director nominated by the chairman;]  
4[(b) all such directors elected or nominated to the Central Board under clause ( c) or clause ( d) of 
section 19 as are ordinarily resident in the area falling within the jurisdiction of the local head office;]  
(c) six members to be nominated by the Central Government  5***; 
6*   *   *  *   * 
(e) 7[the Chief General Manager] of the local head office, appointed by the State Bank, ex officio . 
8[(2) Where as a result of the establishment of any local head office (hereinafter referred to as the new 
local head office) for any area which is already falling within the jurisdiction of another local head office 
(hereinaf ter referred to as the existing local head office) a Local Board (hereinafter referred to as the new 
Local Board) is constituted for the new local head office, any person who is, at the time of such 
Constitution, holding office as a member of a Local Board  (hereinafter referred to as the existing Local 
Board) for an existing local head office under clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) and is ordinarily resident in the 
area falling within the jurisdiction of the new local head office, shall cease to hold office as member of 
the existing Local Board and shall become a member of the new Local Board and shall on becoming such 
member be deemed to have been nominated to the new Local Board and shall hold office as such member 
for the unexpired portion of his term of offi ce as a mem ber of the existing Local Board. ] 
(3) Any vacancy caused in the existing Local Board as a result of any member thereof becoming a 
member of the new Local Board under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a casual vacancy and be 
filled in accorda nce with the provisions of section 25.  
9*   *   *   *   * 
10[(5) The  11[Central Government] shall, in consultation with the chairman, appoint — 
(a) a member of a Local Board nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) to be the president 
thereof; and  
(b) a member of a Local Board holding office under  clause  (b) or nominated under clause ( c) of 
that sub -section to be the   vice-president thereof.]  
12[21A. Term of office of members of Local Board .—13[(1) Subject to the provisions contained in 
this section and in sub-section ( 2) of section 21, a member of a Local Board — 
(a) nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 shall hold office for such term, not 
exceeding  three years, as the Central Government may specify in this behalf 14***; 
  
                                                             
1. Omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s. 12 (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
2. Subs. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 5, for section 21 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 13, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994,  s. 10, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
5. The words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 10(w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
7. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 5, for “the Secretar y and Treasurer ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
8. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 10, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
9. Omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
10. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
11. Subs. by Act 27of 2010, s. 13, for “Governor of the Reserve Bank ”  (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
12. Ins. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
13. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988,  s. 13, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
14. The words “and thereafter until his successor has been duly  nominated ” omitted by Act 45 of 2006, s. 15 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  14 
 (b) elected u nder clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 shall hold office for three years and  
1***,  
and shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding s ix years.]  
2*   *   *   *   *  
(3) A director of the Central Board becoming a member of a Local Board by virtue of the provisions 
of clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 shall cease to hold office as such member on his ceasing to 
be a director or on  his ceasing to be ordinarily resident in the relevant area.  
(4) The president and the vice -president of a Local Board shall each hold office for two years or the 
remaining period of his office as a member of the Local Board, whichever is shorter, and shal l be eligible 
for re -appointment so long as he is a member of the Local Board.  
3[(5) A member of a Local Board nominated under clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 shall 
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.]  
4[21B. Powers of Lo cal Board. —In respect of the area falling within the jurisdiction of the local 
head office for which the Local Board has been constituted, a Local Board shall, subject to such general 
or special direction as the Central Board may give from time to time, ex ercise such powers and perform 
such duties and functions as may be entrusted or delegated to it by the Central Board.]  
21C. Local Committees .—5[(1) A Local Committee may be constituted by the Central Board for any 
area and shall consist of such number of m embers as may be prescribed.  
6[(2) The chairman or the managing director nominated by him shall be an ex officio  member of every 
such Local Committee.]  
(3) A Local Committee shall exercise such powers and perform such functions and duties as the 
Central Bo ard may confer on or assign to it.]  
22. Disqualifications for directorship of Central Board or membership of Local Boards or 
Committees. —(1) No person shall be qualified to be a director of the Central Board or a member of a 
Local Board or of a Local Committee if — 
(a) he holds the office of director, provisional director, promoter, agent or manager of any 
banking company already established or advertised as about to be established; or  
(b) he is a salaried officer of Government not specially authorised by the Central Government to 
be a director or member; or  
(c) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of Government on a charge of corruption 
or bribery; or  
(d) he holds any office of profit under the State Bank other than the office of 
chairman,  7*** 8[managing director] or  9[ 10[Chief General Manager or legal or technical adviser] ]; or 
  
                                                             
1. The words “and thereafter until his successor has been duly nominated ” omitted by Act 45 of 2006, s. 15 (w.e.f. 16 -10-2006).  
2. Omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 11 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
3. Ins . by Act 66 of 1988, s. 13 (w.e.f. 8 -7-1992).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 14, for section 21B (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1964, s.6 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 15, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. The word “vice-chairman ” omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f 15 -9-2010).  
8. Subs. by Act 26 of 1959, s. 2, for “or managing director ” (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
9. Ins. by Act 35 of 19 64, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
10. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 7, for “secretary and treasurer ” (w.e.f. 26 -6-1974).  15 
 1[(da) in the case of a director appointed under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) 2*** of section 19, — 
(i) he is not serving in the State Bank or has not been serving in it for a continuous period of 
at least five years; and  
(ii) he is of such age that there is a likelihood of his attaining the age of superannuation 
during his term of office as a director; or]  
(e) he is or at any time has been adjudicated an insolvent o r has suspended payment of his debts 
or has compounded with his creditors; or  
(f) he is declared lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or  
(g) he is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude; or  
3[(h) in the case of an elected director, h e is not registered as a holder in his own right of 
unencumbered shares in the State Bank, either as sole holder or as first named holder when jointly 
held, of a nominal value of at least five thousand rupees.]  
(2) No two persons who are partners of the sa me firm or are directors of the same private company or 
one of whom is an agent of the other or holds a power of attorney from a firm of which the other is a 
partner may be directors of the Central Board or members of the same Local Board or Local Committe e at 
the same time.  
(3) The appointment, nomination or election as director or member of a Local Board or of a Local 
Committee of any person who is a member of Parliament or the Legislature, of any State shall be void 
unless within two months of the date o f his appointment, nomination or election he ceases to be a member 
of Parliament or the State Legislature, and if any director or member of a Local Board or of a Local 
Committee is elected or nominated as a member of Parliament or any State Legislature, he  shall cease to 
be a director or member of the Local Board or of Local Committee as from the date of such election or 
nomination, as the case may be.  
4[(4) In this section, — 
(a) “banking company ” has the same meaning as in the  5[Banking Regulation Act, 1949                 
(10 of 1949)];  
(b) “manager ” means the chief executive officer, by whatever name called, of a Banking 
company;  
(c) “private company ” has the same meaning as in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)].  
23 .Vacation of office of directors, e tc.—If a director of the Central Board or a member of a Local 
Board or a Local Committee — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 22; or  
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in writing under his hand, in the case of the  6[chairman  7*** 
and amanaging director] to the Central Government and in the case of other directors or members of 
Local Boards or Committees, to the Central Board, and the resignation is accepted; or  
(c) is absent without leave of the Central Board, the L ocal Board or the Local Committee of 
which he is a director or member, as the case may be, for more than three consecutive meetings 
thereof;  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 7 (w.e.f. 26 -6-1974).  
2. The word s, brackets and figure  “of sub -section ( 1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 16, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 13, for “Banking Companies Act, 1949 ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for “the chairman and vice -chairman ” (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
7. The word “, vice -chairma n” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 17 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  16 
 1[Provided that nothing in clause ( c) shall apply to the chairman  in rela tion to his m embership  of a 
Local Board or of a Local Committee. ] 
24. Removal from office of directors, etc. —(1) The Central Government may, after consulting the 
Reserve Bank, remove from office  2[the chairman  3*** or a managing director.]  
4*   *   *   *   * 
(3) The Central Government,  5*** may remove from office any director6[appointed under clause ( ca) 
or clause ( cb) or nominated under clause( d) 7[of section 19]  8[or any member of a Local Board nominated 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21] and 9[appoint or nominate, as the case may be], in his 
stead another person to fill the vacancy.  
(4) The shareholders, other than the  10[Central Government], may, by a resolution passed by majority, 
of the votes of such shareholders holding in the aggregate  not less than one -half of the share capital held 
by all such shareholders, remove any director elected under clause  (c) 11***of section 19 and elect in his 
stead another person to fill the vacancy.  
12*   *   *   *   * 
(6) No person shall be removed from his  office under sub -section ( 1) 13*** or sub -section ( 3) unless 
he has been given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal.  
14[24A. Supersession  of Central Board in certain cases. —(1) Where the Central Government, on 
the recommendation of the Reserve Bank is satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing the 
affairs of the State Bank being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors or the 
State Bank or for securing the proper management of the State Bank, it is  necessary so to do, the Central 
Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the Central Board for a 
period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that the period of supersession of the Central Bo ard may be extended from time to time, so, 
however, that the total period shall not exceed twelve months.  
(2) On supersession of the Central Board under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, appoint an Administ rator (not being an officer of the Central 
Government or a State Government) who has experience in law, finance, banking, economics or 
accountancy, for such period as it may determine.  
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions to the Administrat or as it may consider 
necessary and the Administrator shall be bound to follow such directions.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, upon making the order of supersession of the 
Central Board — 
(a) the chairman, managing director and other di rectors shall, as from the date of supersession, 
vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on beh alf of the Central 
Board, or by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the State Bank, shall, until the Central 
                                                             
1. The proviso added by Act 2 1 of 195 7, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for “the chairman or the vice -chaiman ” ( w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
3. The word “, vice -chairman ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 18 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Omitted by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
5. The words “after consulting the Reserve Bank, ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 18 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 8, for “nominated under c lause ( d)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 14, for “sub-section ( 1) of section 19 ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964). 
9. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 8 for “nominate ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
10. Subs. by Act  32 of 2007, s. 8, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
11. Certain words omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
12. Omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
13. The words , bracket and figure  “or sub -section ( 2)” omitted by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4 ( w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
14. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 19 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  17 
 Board is reconstituted, be exercised and discharged by the Administrator appointed under                       
sub-section ( 2): 
Provided that the powers exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such 
power is also exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the State Bank.  
(5) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, consti tute a committee of 
three or more persons who have experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to assist 
the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.  
(6) The committee shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of pro cedure as may be 
specified by the rules made under this Act.  
(7) The salary and allowances of the Administrator and the members of the committee shall be such 
as may be specified by the rules made under this Act and be payable by the State Bank.  
(8) On and  before the expiration of two months before the expiry of the period of supersession of the 
Central Board, the Administrator of the State Bank shall call the general meeting of the State Bank to 
elect new directors and re -constitute the said Board.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
contract, no person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or termination of his office on 
supersession of the Central Board.  
(10) The Administrator  appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall vacate office immediately after the           
re-constitution of the Central Board.]  
25. Casual vacancies. —1[(1) If the chairman,  2*** or a managing director is rendered incapable of 
discharging his duties by reason of infirmity or otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in 
circumstances not involving the vacation of his office, the Central Government may, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, appoint another person to officiate in the vacancy.]  
3[(2) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the term of office of a director, other than the 
Chairman,  2*** or a managing director or  4[a director appointed under clause ( ca) or 5[clause ( cb) of 
section 19 or of a member of a Local Board other than the Chief Gener al Manager]  the vacancy shall be 
filled — 
(a) in the case of an elected director, by election; and  
(b) in the case of a director nominated under clause ( d) of section 19 or a member of a Local 
Board nominated under clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 1, by nomination  6***: 
Provided that where the duration of the vacancy in the office of an elected director is likely to be less 
than six months, the vacancy may be filled by the remaining directors] by co -opting a person not 
disqualified under section 22. ] 
(3) A person elected or nominated or co -opted, as the case may be,  7[under sub -section ( 2)] shall hold 
office for the unexpired portion of the term of his predecessor.  
8[(4) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the term of office of a director a ppointed under 
clause  (ca) or clause  (cb) 9*** of section 19, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the said 
clause  (ca) or as the case may be, clause  (cb), and the director so appointed shall hold office for the period 
specified under sub -sectio n (3A) of section  20.] 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) w.e.f. 11 -6-1976 ). 
2. The word “, vice -chairman ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act  35 of 1964, s. 9, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 15, for certain words , brackets, letters and figure  (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
6. The words “in consul tation with the Reserve Bank ” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 9, for “under this section ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
8. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
9. The words , brackets and figure “by sub -section ( 1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  18 
 26. Remuneration of directors. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sections 27, 
28 and 29, the directors shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the Central 
Board or of any of its Committees and for attending to any other work of the State Bank as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no fees shall be payable to a managing 
director or any other director who is an officer of the Central Governm ent or the Reserve Bank.  
27. Powers and remuneration of chairman. —(1) The Chairman shall preside at all mee tings of the 
Central Board and subject to such general or special directions as the Central Board may give, exercise all 
such powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the State Bank.  
(2) The chairman shall receive such salary, fees, allowances and perquisites1[as may be determined 
by the Central Government].  
2*   *   *   *   *  
28. [Power s and remuneration of vice -chairman .] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Amendment ) 
Act, 2010 (27 of 2010), s. 21 ( w.e.f. 15-9-2010).  
29. Powers and remuneration of managing director .—(1) A managing director — 
(a) shall be a whole -time officer of the State Bank;  3*** 
(b) subject to the general control of the chairman 4***, shall exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be entrusted or delegated to him by the Central Board  5[; and]  
5[(c) when authorised by the chairman, shall preside at the meetings of the Cent ral Board in his 
absence.]  
(2) A managing director shall receive such salary and allowances6[as may be determined by the 
Central Government].  
7*   *   *   *   * 
30. Executive and other committees of the Central Board .—The Central Board may constitute 
such and so many committees, including an executive committee, of itself as it deems fit to exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may, subject to such conditions, if any, as the Central Board may 
impose, be delegated to them by the Central Board.  
31. Meetings of the Central Board. —8[(1) The Central Board shall meet at such time and place and 
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed; and the meeting of the Central Board may be he ld by participation of the directors of the 
Central Board through videoconferencing or such other electronic means, as may be prescribed, which are 
capable of recording and recognising the participation of the directors and the proceedings of such 
meetings  are capable of being recorded and stored:  
Provided that the Central Government may in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify the matters which shall not be discussed in a meeting of the Central Board 
held thro ugh videoconferencing or such other electronic means.  
(2) All questions at the meeting shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the directors present in 
the meeting or through videoconferencing or such other electronic means and in the case of equality of 
votes the chairman or, in his absence, the managing director authorised by the chairman shall have a 
second or casting vote.]  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
2.  The p roviso omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 27 of 2010, s. 22 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. The words “and the vice -chairman ” omitted by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
5. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Subs. by Act 73 of 1976, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
7.  The p roviso omitted by s. 4,  ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -6-1976).  
8. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 23, for sub -section ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  19 
 (3) A director who is directly or indirectly concerned or interested in any contract, loan, arrangement 
or proposal en tered into or proposed to be entered into by or on behalf of the State Bank shall at the 
earliest possible opportunity disclose the nature of his interest to the Central Board and shall not be 
present at any meeting of the Central Board when any such contr act, loan, arrangement or proposal is 
discussed unless his presence is required by the other directors for the purpose of eliciting information, 
and no director so required to be present shall vote on any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal.  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to such director by reason only of his 
being — 
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) holding not more than two per cent. of the paid -up capital 
in any public company as defined in the Companie s Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any corporation 
established by or under any law for the time being in force in India or any co -operative society with 
which or to which the State Bank has entered into or made, or proposes to enter into or make, a 
contract, loan,  arrangement or proposal; or  
(ii) a director ex officio  of the State Bank 2***,3[or]] 
4[(iii) an officer or other employee of the State Bank, if he is a director appointed under 
clause( ca) or clause ( cb) 5*** of section 19.]  
(4) If for any reason neither the chairman nor the vice -chairman is able to be present at a meeting of 
the Central Board, any director,  6***authorised by the chairman in writing in this behalf, and in the 
absence of such authorisation,7[any director] elected by the directors present fr om amongst themselves, 
shall preside at the meeting and, in the event of equality of votes, shall have a second or casting vote.  
8[31A. Meetings of Local Boards .—(1) A Local Board shall meet at such time and place and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) All questions at the meeting shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present 
and in the case of equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting sha ll have a second or casting 
vote.  
(3) A member who is directly or indirectly concerned or interested in any contract, loan, arrangement 
or proposal entered into or proposed to be entered into by or on behalf of the State Bank, shall, at the 
earliest possib le opportunity, disclose the nature of his interest to the Local Board and shall not be present 
at any meeting of the Local Board when any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal is discussed 
unless his presence is required by the other members for th e purpose of eliciting information, and no 
member so required to be present shall vote on any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to such member by reason only of his 
being — 
(i) a sh areholder (other than a director) holding not more than two per cent. of the paid -up capital 
in any public company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any corporation 
established by or under any law for the time being in force in India or  any co -operative society, with 
which or to which the State Bank has entered into or made or proposes to enter into or make, a 
contract, loan, arrangement or proposal; or  
(ii) a director ex officio  of the State Bank 9***.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
2. The words “or a director of a subsidiary bank ” omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).  
3. Added by Act 48 o f 1973, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
4. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -6-1976).  
5. The words , brackets and figure  “of sub -section ( 1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 16 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
6. The words “, other than a managing director ” omitted by Act 48 of 1973, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
7. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “any such director ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1964).  
9. The words “or a director of a subsidiary bank ” omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).  20 
 (4) If for any reason neither the  president nor the vice -president is able to be present at a meeting of 
the Local Board, any member,1[other than the Chief General Manager] elected by the members present 
from amongst themselves, shall preside at the meeting.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in this section, the chairman shall preside at any meeting of a 
Local Board at which he is present and in the absence of the chairman,  2[the managing director authorised 
by the chairman], shall, whenever he is present, preside at such meetings.]  
CHAPTER VI  
BUSINESS OF THE STATE  BANK 
32. State Bank to act as agent of the Reserve Bank .—(1) The State Bank shall, if so required, by 
the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all places in India where it has a branch  3*** and 
where there is n o branch of the banking department of the Reserve Bank, for — 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bullion and securities on behalf of any 
Government in India; and  
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which the Reserve Bank may from time to 
time entrust to it.  
(2) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business shall be carried on by the State 
Bank on behalf of the Reserve Bank shall be such as may be agreed upon.  
(3) If no agreement can be reached on any matter re ferred to in sub -section ( 2) or if a dispute arises 
between the State Bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any agreement between them, the 
matter shall be referred to the Central Government and the decision of the Central Government thereo n 
shall be final.  
(4) The State Bank may transact any business or perform any functions entrusted to it under             
sub-section ( 1)  4[by itself 5***] or through an agent approved by the Reserve Bank.  
6[33. Other business which the State Bank may transact. —Subject to the other provisions 
contained in this Act, the State Bank may carry on and transact the business of banking as defined in 
clause ( b) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), and may engage in one or more 
of the o ther forms of business specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act.]  
34. Business which the State Bank may not transact. —7***. 
(6) Save as otherwise provided in8[this Act] the State Bank shall not own or, acquire any  9*** 
immovable property except for the purpose of providing buildings or other accomodation in which to 
carry on the business of the State Bank or for providing residences for its officers and other employees:  
Provided that if any such building or other accommodation is not immed iately required for any of the 
purposes of the State Bank, the State Bank may utilise it to the best advantage by letting it out or in any 
other manner.  
35. State Bank may acquire the business of other Banks. —(1) The State Bank may, with the 
sanction of th e Central Government, and shall, if so directed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank, enter into negotiations for acquiring the business, including the assets and 
liabilities, of any banking institution.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 24, for “the vice -chairman, if he is a member of the Local Board ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. The words “or where there is a branch of a subsidiary bank ” omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 7  (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017) . 
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1954, s. 64 and the Third Schedule, for “either by itself ” (w.e.f. 10 -9-1959).  
5. The words “or through a subsidiary bank ” omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 7   (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017) . 
6. Subs. by Act 48 of 19 73, s. 12, for section 33 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1977). 
7. Sub-section s (1), (2), (3) or (5) omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -3-1977). Earlier sub -section ( 3) was substituted for sub -section s 
(3) or ( 4) by Act 29 of 1959, s. 5 (w.e.f.  1-3-1977).  
8. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s.2, for “section 33 ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
9. The words “interest in ” omitted by s. 2, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
 21 
 1[(2) The terms and condi tions relating to such acquisition, if agreed upon by the Central Board of the 
State Bank and the directorate or management of the banking institution concerned and approved by the 
Reserve Bank, shall be submitted to the Central Government for its sanction  and that Government may by 
order in writing (hereafter in this section referred to as the order of sanction) accord its sanction thereto.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force or any 
instrument reg ulating the constitution of the banking institution concerned, the terms and conditions as 
sanctioned by the Central Government shall come into effect on the date specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf in the order of sanction and be binding up on the State Bank and the banking 
institution concerned as well as upon the shareholders (or, as the case may be, proprietors) and creditors 
of that banking institution.  
(4) If for any reason the terms and conditions cannot come into effect on the date spe cified in the 
order of sanction, the Central Government may fix another suitable date for that purpose.  
(5) On the date on which the terms and conditions as aforesaid come into effect the business and the 
assets and liabilities of the banking institution c oncerned as covered by the acquisition shall, by virtue, 
and in accordance with the provisions, of the order of sanction stand transferred to, and become 
respectively the business and the assets and liabilities of, the State Bank.  
(6) The consideration for  the acquisition of the business and the assets and liabilities of any banking 
institution under this section may, if so agreed upon, be paid either in cash or by allotment of shares in the 
capital of the State Bank or partly in cash and partly by allotmen t of shares, and the State Bank may, for 
the purpose of any such allotment, increase, subject to the other provisions contained in this Act relating 
to the increase of capital, the capital of the State Bank by the issue of such number of shares as may be 
determined by the State Bank.  
(7) Any business acquired under this section shall thereafter be carried on by the State Bank in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, subject to such exemptions or modifications as the Central 
Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, make in this behalf in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank:  
Provided that no such exemption or modification shall be made so as to have effect for a period of 
more than seven years from the date of acquisition.  
(8) Notwithstand ing anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law or in any agreement for the time being in force, on the acquisition of the business and the assets 
and liabilities of any banking institution under this section, no officer or other employee of that banking 
institution shall be entitled to any compensation to which he may be entitled under that Act or that other 
law or that agreement and no claim in respect of such compensation shall be entertained by any Court, 
Tribunal or other authority, if on his having accepted in writing an offer of employment by the State Bank 
on the terms and conditions proposed by it he has been employed in accordance with such terms and 
conditions.  
(9) The Central Government may, if it con siders necessary or expedient in the case of any banking 
institution in relation to which an order of sanction has been made under this section, appoint whether 
before or after the coming into effect of the terms and conditions relating to the acquisition of the business 
and the assets and liabilities of that banking institution, a suitable person to take over the management of 
that banking institut ion for the purposes of winding up its affairs and distributing its assets, and the 
expenditure incurred in co nnection with such management (including the remuneration for the person so 
appointed and his staff, if any) shall be paid out of the assets of the banking institution or by the State 
Bank as the Central Government may direct.  
(10) Simultaneously with the appointment of a suitable person to take over the management of any 
banking institution under sub -section ( 9) or immediately thereafter, the Central Government shall issue 
directions to be followed by that person in the management of that banking instituti on for the purposes 
aforesaid and thereupon — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1959, s. 6, for sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).   22 
 (a) the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or the  1[Banking Regulation Act, 1949  
(10 of 1949),] or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of 
any such Act or law, in so far as they are inconsistent with such directions, shall cease to apply to or 
in relation to that banking institution;  
(b) all persons in charge of the management, including any person holding office as manager or 
director of the banking institution immediately before the issue of such directions, shall be deemed to 
have vacated their offices as such; and  
(c) the persons appointed to take over the management of the banking institution shall in 
accordance with those directions take all such  steps as may be nece ssary to facilitate the winding up 
of its affairs and distribution of its assets.  
(11) The Central Government, when satisfied that nothing further remains to be done in order to wind 
up the affairs of any such banking institution, may by another order in writing direct that as from such 
date as may be specified therein the banking institution shall stand dissolved and thereupon any such 
direction shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law.  
(12) No action under this section shall be questioned on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of any banking institution in relation to which such action has been taken or in the 
constitution of its Board of Directors or in the appointment of an y person entrusted with the management 
of its affairs.  
(13) In this section “banking institution ” includes any individual or any association of individuals 
(whether incorporated or not, or whether a department of Government or a separate institution), carr ying 
on the business of banking.]  
2[35A. Arrangement with the State Bank on appointment of directors to prevail. —(1) Where any 
arrangement entered into by the State Bank with a company provides for the appointment by the State 
Bank of one or more directors  of such company, such provisions and any appointment of directors made 
in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for the time being in f orce or in the memorandum, 
articles of association or any other instrument relating to the company, and any provision regarding share 
qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions 
contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the State 
Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the State Bank and may be removed or substituted by any 
person by order in writing of the State Bank;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a direct or or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement.]  
CHAPTER VII  
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
36. Integration and Development Fund .—(1) The State Bank shall maintain a special fund to be 
known as the Integration and Development Fund into which shall be paid — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act  3 of 1994, s. 17, for “Banking Companies Act, 1949 ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 43 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  23 
 (a) the dividends payable to the  1[Central Government] on such shares of the State Bank held by 
it as do not exceed fifty -five per cent. of the total issued capital; and  
(b) such contributions as the  2*** the Central Government may make from time to time.  
3[Provided that if the balance in the Integration and Development Fund on the date of declaration of 
any dividends by the State Bank is rupees five crores or  more, no amount shall be paid into that Fund 
under clause ( a) and the dividends payable to the  1[Central Government]  shall be  4[paid to that 
Government], and if such balance on such date is less than rupees five crores, only so much of dividends 
then payable as will bring such balance to rupees five crores shall be paid into that Fund and the balance 
of such dividends shall be paid to the  1[Central Government].]  
(2) The amount in the said Fund shall be applied exclusively for meeting — 
(a) losses in excess of such yearly sum as may be agreed upon between the  1[Central 
Government]  and the State Bank and attributable to the branches established in pursuance of            
sub-section ( 5) of section 16;  5*** 
   6*                      *                   *                      *                         *                              *  
(b) such other losses or expenditure as may be approved by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the said Fund shall be the property, of the  1[Central 
Government]  and no sh areholder of the State Bank or any other person shall have any claim to the amount 
held in the said Fund.  
7[(4) No amount applied for any of the purposes specified in sub -section ( 2) shall, for the purposes of 
the 8[Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961)], be t reated as income, profits or gains of the State Bank.]  
 37. Reserve Fund. —The State Bank shall establish a Reserve Fund which shall consist of — 
(a) the amount held in the Reserve Fund of the Imperial Bank transferred to the State Bank on the 
appointed day;  and 
(b) such further sums as may be transferred to it by the State Bank out of its annual net profits 
before declaring a dividend.  
38. Disposal of profits. —(1) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in 
assets,  equalisation of divi dends, contribution to staff and superannuation funds and  for all other matters 
for which provisions is necessary by or under this Act or  which are usually provided for by banking 
companies, the State Bank may, out of  its net profits, declare a dividend.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of paragraph 6 of the First Schedule, the rate of dividend  shall be 
determined by the Central Board.  
9[38A. Transfer of unpaid or unclaimed dividend. —(1) Where, after the commencement of the 
State Bank of India (Amendment) Act,  2010 (27 of 2010), a dividend has been declared by the State Bank 
but which has not been paid to a shareholder or claimed by any shareholder entitled to it, within thirty 
days from the date of declaration, the State Bank shall, within seven days from the date of expiry of the 
said period of thirty days, transfer the total amount of dividend which remains unpaid, or unclaimed, to a 
special account to be named, the “unpaid dividend account ” maintained by it.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2007, s. 9, for “Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
2. The words “the Reserve Bank or ” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
3. The proviso a dded by Act 35 of 1964, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by  Act 32 of 2007, s. 9, for “paid to that Bank ” (w.e.f. 29 -6-2007).  
5. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 10 -9-1959 ). 
6. Clause ( aa) omitted by Act 19 of 2018, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2017).   
7. Ins. by Act 26 of 1959, s. 7  (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
8. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 18 , for “Indian Income -tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922) ” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
9. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 25  (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  24 
 Explanation .—In this sub -section, the expression “dividend which remains unpaid ” means any 
dividend the warrant in respect thereof has not been encashed or which has otherwise not been paid or 
claimed.  
(2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared by the State Bank before the 
commencement of t he State Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2010 (27 of 2010), remains  unpaid at such 
commencement, the State Bank shall, within a period of six months from such commencement, transfer 
such unpaid amount to the account referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any m oney transferred to the unpaid dividend account of the State Bank, in pursuance of this 
section which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of such transfer shall 
be transferred by the State Bank to the Investor Education an d Protection Fund established under sub -
section ( 1) of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) for being utilised for the purpose and 
in the manner specified in that section.]  
39. Books to be balanced each year. —The Central Board shall cause th e books of the State Bank to 
be closed, and balanced  1[as] on the 31st day of  2[March]  3[or such other date in each year as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:]  
4[Provided  that with a view to facilitating the trans ition from one period of accounting  to 
another  period of accounting under this section, the Central Government may, by  order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions  as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and 
balancing of, or  for other  matters relating to, the books in respect of the concerned years.]  
40. Returns. —(1) The State Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and to the Reserve Bank  
5[within three months from the 31st day of  6[March]  7[or the date specified under section 39, as the case 
may be] as on which its books are closed and balanced]; its balance sheet, together with the profit and loss 
account and the8[auditor ’s report and a report by the Central Board on the working and activities of the 
State Bank] during  the period covered by the accounts:  
9[Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank, extend the 
said period of three months by such further period, not exceeding three months, as it may think fit.]  
10[(2) The balance sh eet and the profit and loss account shall be signed by the chairman, managing 
directors and at least three other directors of the Central Board.]  
(3) The State Bank shall also, within two months from the date on which its accounts are closed and 
balanced, transmit to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank a statement showing, as far as may 
be available, the name, address and occupation of, and the number of shares held by, each shareholder of 
the State Bank as on the said date.  
11[(4) The Central Govern ment shall cause the auditors ’ report and the report by the Central Board on 
the working and activities of the State Bank to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before 
each House of Parliament  12***. 
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 14 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 26, for “December ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Subs. by Ac t 66 of 1988, s. 14, for “in each year ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
4. The proviso i ns. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
5. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
6. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 27, for “December ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 15 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 44 , for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
9. The proviso a dded by Act 48 of 1973, s. 15 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
10. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 27, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
11. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 44 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
12. Certain words omitted by Act 81 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  25 
 41. Audit. —(1) The affairs of the State  Bank shall be  1[audited by two or more auditors] duly 
qualified to act as auditors of companies under  2[section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)], 
who shall be appointed by  3[the State Bank with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank].  
(2) The auditors shall receive such remuneration as the Reserve Bank may fix in consultation with the 
Central Government.  
(3) An auditor may be a shareholder but not director or member of a Local Board or of a Local 
Committee or an officer of the State Bank shal l be eligible to be an auditor during his continuance in 
office as such director, member or officer.  
(4) An auditor shall on relinquishing office, be eligible for reappointment.  
(5) The auditors shall severally be, and continue to act as, auditors until th e 4[annual] general meeting 
after their respective appointment, and if any vacancy arises before the expiry of the term of office of an 
auditor, the vacancy may be filled by  3[the State Bank with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank].  
(6) Every auditor shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance sheet and profit and loss 
account, and a list of all books kept by the State Bank, and it shall be the duty of the auditor to examine 
the balance sheet and profit and loss account with the account s and vouchers relating thereto, and in the 
performance of his duties, the auditor — 
(a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, accounts and other documents of the 
State Bank;  
(b) may, at the expense of the State Bank, or if he is appoint ed by the Central Government, at the 
expense of the Central Government, employ accountants or other persons to assist him in 
investigating such accounts; and  
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director or any member of a Local Board or of 
a Local Committee or any officer of the State Bank.  
(7) The auditors shall make a report to the Central Government upon the annual balance sheet and 
accounts, and in every such report they shall state — 
(a) whether, in their opinion, the balance  sheet is a f ull and fair balance sheet containing all the 
necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit  5[a true and fair view] of the affairs of the 
State Bank, and in case they have called for any explanation or information, whether it has been given 
and whether it is satisfactory;  
(b) whether or not the transactions of the State Bank which have come to their notice have been 
within the powers of the State Bank;  
(c) whether or not the returns received from the offices and branches of the State Bank hav e been 
found adequate for the purpose of their audit;  
(d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance of  6[profit or loss] for the period 
covered by such account; and  
(e) any other matter which they consider should be brought to the notice of the shareholders or 
the Central Government, as the case may be.  
7[Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this Act ,— 
(a) the balance  sheet shall not be treated as not disclosing a true and fair view of the affairs of 
the State Bank, and  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 16, for “audited by two auditors ” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1959, s. 8, for  “sub-section ( 1) of section 144 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913) ”                
(w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 28, for “the Reserve Bank in consultation with the Central Government ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Subs. by Act  26 of 1959, s. 8, for “first” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 19 64, s. 13, for “a true and correct view ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 19 59, s. 8, for “profit and loss ” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
7. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  26 
 (b) the profit and loss account shall not be treated as not showing a true balance of profit or 
loss of the period covered by such account,  
merely, by reason of the fact that the balance sheet or, as the case may be, the profit and loss account, 
does not disclose any matters whi ch are, by the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949                
(10 of 1949) read with the relevant provisions of this Act, not required to be disclosed.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this Act, the accounts of the State Bank shall not be deemed 
as having not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do not disclose certain matters 
if— 
(i) those matters are such as the State Bank is, by virtue of any provision contained in the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), read with  the relevant provisions of this Act, or any 
other Act, not required to disclose; and  
(ii) the provisions referred to in clause ( i) are specified in the balance  sheet and profit and loss 
account of the State Bank or in the auditors ’ report].  
(8) The auditors shall also forward a copy of the audit report to the State Bank.  
(9) Without prejudice to anything contained in the foregoing provisions, the Central Government may 
appoint at any time such auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the ac counts of the State Bank.  
1[42. Balance sheet, etc., of State Bank may be discussed at general meeting. —(1) An annual 
general meeting shall be held in each financial year at the Corporate Centre or at such other place in 
Mumbai other than the Corporate Cen tre or at such other place in India and at such time, as shall from 
time to time be specified by the Central Board and a general meeting other than an annual general 
meeting may be convened by the State Bank at any other time and at such place in India as shall from 
time to time be specified by the Central Board:  
Provided that such annual general meeting shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from the date 
on which the balance sheet together with the profit and loss account and auditors' report, under  sub-
section ( 1) of section 40, is forwarded to the Central Government or to the Reserve Bank, whichever date 
is earlier.  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall be entitled to discuss and adopt the 
balance sheet and the profit and loss account of the State Bank made up to the previous 31st day of March 
or the date specified under section 39, as the case may be, the report of the Central Board on the working 
and activities of the State Bank for the period covered by the accounts and the auditors' report on the 
balance sheet and accounts.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. State Bank may appoint officers and other employees. —2[(1)] The State Bank may appoint 
such number of officers, advisers and employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient 
performance of its functions, and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service.  
3[(2) The officers, advisers and employees of the State Bank shall individually or jointly or with other 
officers, advisers a nd employees in a Local Committee exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may by general or special order, be entrusted or delegated to them by the Central Board or its executive 
committee.]  
1[43A. Bonus. —(1) No officer, adviser or other employee [ other than an employee within the 
meaning of clause ( 13) of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965)] of the State Bank 
shall be entitled to be paid any bonus.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 29, for section 42 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
2. Sec tion 43 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 35 of 1964, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 30, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 64 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -9-1984).  27 
 (2) No employee of the State Bank, being an employee within the meaning of clause ( 13) of section 2 
of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965), shall be entitled to be paid any bonus except in 
accordance with the provisions of that Act.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of 
any Court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of 
this Act or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any other law for the time being in force 
or any practice, usage or custom  or any contract, agreement, settlement, award or other instrument.]  
44. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. —(1) The State Bank shall observe, except as otherwise 
required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers, and, in particular, it shall not divulge 
any information relating to or to the affairs of its constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in 
accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the 
State Bank to divulge suc h information.  
(2) Every director, member of a Local Board or of a Local Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or 
other employee of the State Bank shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and 
secrecy as in the form set out in t he Second Schedule.  
1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005  (30 of 2005).]  
45. Bar to liquidation of State Bank. —No provision of law relating to t he windi ng up of companies 
shall apply to the State Bank, and the State Bank shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the 
Central Government and in such manner as it may direct.  
 46. Indemnity of directors and members of Local Boards and Local Committees, etc. —(1) 
Every director and every member of a Local Board or a Local Committee shall be indemnified by the 
State Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in or in relation to the discharge of his duties 
except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.  
(2) Neither a director nor a member of a Local Board or a Local Committee shall be responsible for 
any loss or expense caused to the State Bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of or title to 
any property or se curity acquired or taken on behalf of the State Bank or by the insolvency or wrongful 
act of any customer or debtor or by anything done in or in relation to the execution of the duties of his 
office or otherwise than for his wilful act or default.  
47. Defe cts in appointment or constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings. —(1) No act or 
proceeding of the Central Board or of a Local Board or a Local Committee shall be questioned on the 
ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the const itution of the Board or Committee, as 
the case may be.  
(2) All acts done by any person acting in good faith as a director or as a member of a Local Board or 
of a Local Committee shall, notwithstanding that there was some defect in his appointment or 
qualif ications, be as valid as if he was a director of the Central Board or a member of the Local Board or 
the Local Committee, as the case may be.  
48. [ Power to remove difficulties ] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Amendment ) Act, 1964                
(35 of 1964), s.15 (w.e.f. 1-12-1964).  
49. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government, in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank, may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  2[make rules to provide for all matters 
for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act].  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the procedure for the payment of compensation under t his Act;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -12-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 18, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  28 
 (b) the determination of persons to whom the said compensation shall be payable in all cases, 
including cases where shares in the Imperial Bank have been held by more than one person, or where 
they have been transferred before the appointed day bu t the transfer has not been registered or where 
the shareholder is dead;  
1[(c) the manner of appointment of a director under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) 2*** of section 19, 
and all other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;]  
3[(d) the time and  place of meeting of the Committee and the rules of procedure to be observed by 
it under sub -section ( 6) of section 24A;  
(e) the salary and allowances of the Administrator and the members of the committee under              
sub-section ( 7) of section 24A.]  
4[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the r ule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
50. Power of C entral Board to make regulations. —(1) The Central Board may, after consultation 
with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government  5[by notification in the 
Official Gazette] make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the nature of shares of the State Bank, the manner in which and the conditions subject to 
which shares may be held and transferred and generally all matters relating to the rights and duties of 
shareholders;  
6[(aa) the procedure for increasi ng issued capital by the issue of equity or preference shares under 
sub-section ( 2) and the manner of accepting money for issued capital, forfeiture and re -issue of shares 
under sub -section ( 5) , of section 5;  
(ab) the manner of nominating an individual by  one individual under sub -section ( 1) , the manner 
of nominating an individual by the joint holders under sub -section ( 2), the manner of varying or 
cancellation of nomination under sub -section ( 3), and the manner of nominating a minor under            
sub-section ( 4) , of section 10A;]  
7[(b) the maintenance of register of shareholders, and the particulars to be entered in such register 
in addition to those specified in  section  13, the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of 
register of shareholders on computer  8[floppies or diskettes or any other electronic form], the 
inspection and closure of the register of shareholders and all other matters connected therewith;]  
(c) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act, including the allocation of e lected 
directors to the various areas  1[falling within the jurisdiction of each local head office], and the final 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 18 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. The words, brackets and figure “of sub -section ( 1)” omitted by Act 3 of 1994, s. 19 (w.e.f.  15-10-1993).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 31 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 47 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 17 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
6. Ins. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 3 2 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 20, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
8. Subs. by Act 27 of 2010, s. 32,for “floppies or diskettes ” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
9. Subs. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 20,  for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  29 
 determination of doubts or disputes regarding the qualifications  of candidates for election or 
regarding the validity of elections;  
1[(ca) the determination  of areas falling within the jurisdiction of each local head office;]  
2[(d) the powers, functions and duties of Local Boards and the restrictions, conditions or 
limitations, if any, subject to which they may be exercised or  performed, the for mation and 
constitution of Local Committees (including the number of members of  any such Committee) and of 
Committees of Local Boards, the powers, functions and duties of such Committees, the holding of 
meetings of Local Committees and Committees of Local Boards and the conduct of business thereat;]  
(e) the fees and allowances which may be paid to directors, or members of Local Boards or Local 
Committees for attending any meetings of  the Central Board or of its committees or of the Local 
Boards or Local Com mittees, as the case may be,  or for attending to  any other work of the State 
Bank;  
(f) the  manner  in which the business of the Central Board  3[or of Local Boards] shall be 
transacted and the procedure to be followed at the meetings thereof;  
(g) the formati on of committees of the Central Board and the delegation of powers and functions 
of the Central Board to such  committees  and the conduct of business in such committees;  
4*   *    *    *  * 
(i) the manner in which general meetings shall be convened, the procedure to be followed thereat 
and the manner in which voting  rights  may be exercised;  
(j) the holding  of meetings of shareholders  5*** and the business to be transacted thereat;  
(k) the manner  in which notices may be served on behalf of the State Bank u pon shareholders or 
other persons;  
(l) the provision  of seals for the State Bank and the manner and effect of their use;  
(m) the conduct  and defence of legal proceedings and the manner of signing pleadings;  
(n) the duties  and conduct of officers, other employees, advisers and agents of the  State Bank;  
6[(o) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation pension, provident or other funds for 
the benefit of the employees of  the State Bank or of the dependants of such employees or for the 
purposes of t he State Bank, and the  granting of superannuation allowances, annuities and pensions 
payable out of any such fund;]  
(p) the form  and manner in which contracts binding on the State Bank may be executed;  
7[(q) the terms, conditions, stipulations, restriction s and limitations, if any, in the transaction by 
the State Bank of its businesses in regard to the advancing or lending of money or the discounting or 
purchase of any instrument, negotiable or otherwise, with or without reference to any security, 
purpose, amount, period or otherwise;]  
(r) the conditions subject to which alone, advances may be made to directors, members of Local 
Boards or of Local Committees or officers of the State Bank, or the relatives of such directors, 
members or officers or to companie s, firms or individuals with which or with whom such directors, 
members, officers, or relatives, are connected as partners, directors, managers, servants, shareholders 
or otherwise;  
(s) the statements, returns, and forms that are required for the purposes of this Act;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1994, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 35 of 1964, s. 16, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
4. Omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1964).  
5. The words “on branch registers ” omitted by  Act 3 of 1994, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 5-10-1993).  
6. Subs. b y Act 26 of 1959, s. 10, for clause ( o) (w.e.f. 28 -8-1959).  
7. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 19, for clause ( q) (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  30 
 (t) the payment of dividends, including interim dividends;  
(u) generally  for the conduct of the business of the State Bank.  
1[(2A) All regulations made under this section shall have effect from such earlier or later date as may 
be specified in  the regulations.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the first regulations shall be made by the 
Reserve Bank with the previous sanction of the Central Government, and thereupon shall be deemed to be 
the regulations made by the Central  Board under this section and shall have force accordingly until they 
are amended or repealed.  
2[(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this Act by the Central Board, be 
forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid 
before each House of Parliament, while it is  in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
imme diately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modifie d form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that regulation.]  
3[51. Requirements of foreign law to be complied within certa in cases. —If, according to the laws 
of any country outside India, the provisions of this Act by themselves are not effective to transfer to and 
vest in the State Bank any asset or liability which forms part of the undertaking of the Imperial Bank and 
which  is situate in that country, the Imperial Bank shall take all such steps as may be required by the laws 
of that country for the purpose of effecting or perfecting such transfer and vesting, and in connection 
therewith the Imperial Bank may realise any asse t and discharge any liability and transfer the net proceeds 
thereof to the State Bank.]  
52. [ Amendment of Act 2 of 1934 ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 
and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
53.[Amendment of Act 10 of 1949 ] Rep. by s . 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.(w.e.f. 26-12-1960)  
4[54.[Amendment of Act 47 of 1920 ] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 26-12-1960).]  
55. No proceeding to lie in India against Imperial Bank after appointed day. —On and from  the 
appointed day, no person shall make any claim or demand or take any proceeding in India against the 
Imperial Bank or a director, officer or other employee thereof in his capacity as such director, officer or 
employee except in so far as may be necessa ry for enforcing the provisions of this Act or except in so far 
as it relates to any offence committed by any such director, officer or employee.  
56. References to the Imperial Bank, the Bank of Bengal, etc. , in other laws. —On and from the 
appointed day, a ny reference to the Imperial Bank or to the Bank of Bengal, the Bank of Madras or the 
Bank of Bombay in any law (other than this Act or the Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920 (47 of 1920) or 
in any contract or other instrument shall, except as otherwise prov ided in any general or special order 
made by the Central Government, be deemed to be a reference to the State Bank.  
57. Dissolution of Imperial Bank, etc. —(1) On such day as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf the Imperial Bank shall stand dissolved, and the 
Imperial Bank of India Act, 1920 (47 of 1920), shall stand repealed.  
(2) On the day specified in the notification under sub -section ( 1), the State Bank shall pay to the 
Reserve Bank a sum of ten lakhs of rupees.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 19 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 48 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1955, s. 5, for section 51 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1957).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1957).  31 
 (3) If, on the day specified in the notification under sub -section ( 1), the Imperial Bank has in its 
possession or custody any assets created on or after the appointed day, such assets shall be disposed of in 
accordance with directions iss ued by the Central Government in this behalf.]  32 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 9)  
COMPENSATION FOR THE TRANSFER OF SHARES OF THE IMPERIAL BANK TO THE RESERVE BANK 
1. In this Schedule, “shareholder ” means any person who immediately before  the appointed day is 
registered as the holder of a share in the Imperial Bank.  
2. As compensation for the shares in the capital of the Imperial Bank which, by reason of this Act, are 
transferred to and vested in the Reserve Bank, the Reserve Bank shall pa y to every shareholder, in the 
manner set out hereinafter, an amount calculated at the rate of one thousand seven hundred and sixty -five 
rupees and ten annas per share in the case of a fully paid -up share and four hundred and thirty -one rupees, 
twelve anna s and four pies per share in the case of a partly paid -up share.  
3. Notwithstanding the transfer of the shares in the capital of the Imperial Bank to the Reserve Bank, 
any shareholder who immediately before the appointed day is entitled to payment of divid end on the 
shares of the Imperial Bank held by him shall be entitled to receive from the State Bank — 
(a) all dividends accruing due on his shares in respect of any half year which ended before the 
appointed day and remaining unpaid;  
(b) dividends calculate d at a rate to be specified by the Central Government in respect of any 
period immediately preceding the appointed day for which the Imperial Bank has not declared any 
dividend.  
4. (1) The compensation provided for in this Schedule shall be given in Centra l Government 
securities and the form of such securities and the value thereof, computed with reference to their market 
value, shall be such as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf:  
Provided that where the amount of such compensation is not an exact multiple of the value of the 
Government security as so notified, the amount in excess of the nearest lower multiple of such value shall 
be paid by cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank.  
(2) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in sub -paragraph ( 1), any person who is registered as the 
holder of a share in the Imperial Bank on the 19th day of December, 1954, and continues to be so until the 
appointed day shall, if he applies in writing in this behalf to the Reserve Ban k before the expiry of three 
months from the appointed day, be entitled to be paid, by cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank, any 
compensation payable to him upto the first ten thousand rupees.  
5. (1) Any shareholder to whom compensation is payable under this S chedule may apply to the 
Reserve Bank before the expiry of three months from the appointed day for the transfer to him of shares 
in the State Bank in lieu of such compensation, and for the purposes of such transfer the value of each 
share of the State Bank  shall be such as may be determined by the Reserve Bank in this behalf.  
(2) If on receipt of an application under sub -paragraph ( 1), the Reserve Bank, in its discretion, decides 
to transfer any shares to the applicant, it shall issue to the State Bank a wa rrant in the prescribed form 
directing it to transfer in favour of the person specified in the warrant such number of shares as may be 
specified therein out of the shares standing allotted to it under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, and the State 
Bank shall be bound to comply with such warrant.  
(3) A warrant issued by the Reserve Bank under this paragraph shall not be liable to duty under the 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899).  
6. (1) The Reserve Bank may, if it decides to transfer, in pursuance of paragraph 5, more than two 
lakhs, fifty -three thousand and one hundred and twenty -five shares, require the State Bank to issue to it 
such further shares as may be necessary to secure that it holds not less than fifty -five per cent. of the 
issued capital of the State  Bank, and the State Bank shall, without prejudice to the provisions contained in 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5, comply with such requirement on the Reserve Bank subscribing one hundred 
rupees for each share.  
(2) No share issued to the Reserve Bank at par u nder this paragraph shall carry dividend at a rate 
higher than four per cent. per annum.  33 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 44)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I ...................................................... do hereby declare that I will faithfu lly, truly and to the best of my 
skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of me as director, member of Local Board, 
member of Local Committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the State 
Bank and which pro perly relate to the office or position in the said State Bank held by me.  
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the State Bank or to t he affairs of any person 
having any dealing with the State Bank; nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have access to any 
books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the State Bank and relating to the business of the 
State Bank or to t he business of any person having any dealing with the State Bank.  
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE .—[Amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.]  Rep. by the Repealing 
and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2, and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE .—[Amendments to the Banking Companies Act , 1949.] Rep. by  s. 2 and the 
First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE .—[Amendment to the Imperial Bank of India Act,  1920.] Added by the State 
Bank of India  (Amendment ) Act, 1955 (33  of 1955),  by s. 7 (with retrospective effect ). 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955--------------------------
1 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER  
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OFSERVICE) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955  
________ __ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
WORKING  JOURNALISTS  
3. Act 14 of 1947 to apply to working journalists.  
4. Special provisions in respect of cert ain cases of retrenchment.  
5. Payment of gratuity . 
5A. Nomination by working journalist . 
6. Hours of work . 
7. Leave . 
8. Fixation or revision of rates of wages . 
9. Procedure for fixing and revising rates of wages . 
10. Recommendation by Board . 
11. Powers and procedure of the Board . 
12. Powers of Central Government to enforce recommendations of the Wage Board . 
13. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than those specified in t he order.  
13A. Power of Government to fix interim rates of wages . 
13AA. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of working journalists . 
CHAPTER IIA  
NON-JOURNALIST  NEWSPAPER  EMPLOYEES  
 13B. Fixation or revision of rates of wages of non -journalist newspaper employees . 
13C. Wage Board for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees.  
13D. Application of certain provisions . 
13DD. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wage s in respect of non -journalist 
newspaper employees . 
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN ACTS TO NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES  
14. Act 20 of 1946 to apply to newspaper establishments . 
15. Act 19 of 1952 to apply to newspaper establishments . 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act . 
      16A. Employer not to dismiss, discharge, etc., newspaper employees . 
17. Recovery of money due from an employer.  
17A. Maintenance of registers, records, and muster -rolls.  
17B. Inspectors . 
18. Penalty . 
19. Indemni ty. 
19A. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts . 
19B. Saving . 
20. Power to make rules . 
21. [Repealed. ] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER  
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OFSERVICE) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 45 OF 19551 
[20th December , 1955.]  
An Act to regulate certain conditions of service of working journalists and other persons 
employ ed in newspaper establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the 2[Working Journalists and other 
Newspaper Employees] (Conditions of Service) and Misc ellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
4[(a) “Board ” means— 
(i) in relation to working journalists, the Wage Board c onstituted under section 9; and  
(ii) in relation to non -journalist newspaper employees, the Wage Board constituted under 
section  13C;]  
(b) “newspaper ” means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on 
public news and includes such other class of printed periodical work as may, from time to time, be 
notified in this behalf by the Central Gove rnment in the Offic ial Gazette;  
(c) “newspaper employee ” means any working journalist, and includes any other person 
employed to do any work in, or in relation t o, any newspaper establishment;  
(d) “newspaper establishment ” means an establishment under the control of any person or body or 
persons, whether incorporated or not, for the production or publication of one or more newspapers or 
for conducting any news agency or syndicate ; 
5[and includes newspaper establishments spe cified as one es tablishment under the Schedule.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, — 
(a) different departments, branches and centres of newspaper establishments shall be treated 
as parts th ereof;  
(b) a printing press shall be deemed to be a newsp aper establishment if the principal business 
thereof is to print newspaper;]  
6[dd) “non-journalist newspaper employee ” means a person employed to do any work in, or in 
relation to, any newspaper establishment, but does no t include any such person who — 
(i) is a working journalist, or  
(ii) is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity, or  
                                                           
1. Extended to Goa,  Daman and Diu by Reg.  11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule and to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and  
the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 2, for “Working Journalists ” 
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
4. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 3, for clause ( a). 
5. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 2 (retrospectively).  
6. Ins. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 3.  4 
 (iii) being  employed in a supervisory capacity, performs, either by the nature of the duties 
attached to his office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial 
nature;]  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
1[(ee) “Tribunal ” means, — 
(i) in relation to working journalists, the Tribunal constitute d under section 13AA; and  
(ii) in relation to non -journalist newspaper employees, the Tribunal c onstituted under section 
13DD;]  
2[(eee) “wages ” means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a newspaper 
employee in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and inc ludes — 
(i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the newspaper employee is for the time 
being entit led to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of  food-grains or other articles;  
(iii) any travelling con cession,  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus;  
(b) any  contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund or for 
the benefit of the newspaper employee under any law for the time being in force;  
(c) any gratuity payable on the termination of his service.  
Explanation .—In this clause, the term “wages ” shall also include new allowances, if any, of any 
descri ption fixed from time to time.]  
(f) “working journalist ” means a person whose principal avocatio n is that of a journalist and 
3[who is employed as such, either whole -time or part -time, in, or in relation to, one or more 
newspaper establishments], an d includes an editor, a leader -writer, news -editor, su b-editor, feature -
writer, copy -tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news  photographer and proof -reader, but does 
not include any such person who — 
(i) is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity, or  
(ii) being employed in a supervisory capacity, performs, either by the nature of the duties 
attached to his office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions  mainly of a managerial 
nature;  
(g) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
WORKING  JOURNALISTS  
3. Act 14 of 1947 to  apply to working journalists .—(1) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, as in force for the time being, shall, subject to the  modification specified in sub -section ( 2), 
apply to, or in relation to, working journalists as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen within the 
meaning of that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 2 (retrospectively).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1981, s. 2, for “who is employed as such in, or in relation to, any newspaper es tablishment”  
 (w.e.f. 13 -8-1980).  5 
 (2) Section 25F of the aforesaid Act, in its application to working journalists, shall be construed as if 
in clause ( a) thereof , for the period of notice referred to therein in relation to the retrenchment of a 
workman, the following periods of notice in relation to the retrenchment of a working journalist had been 
substituted, namely: — 
(a) six months , in the case of an editor, and 
(b) three months, in the case o f any other working journalist.  
4. Special provisions in respect of certain cas es of retrenchment .—Where at any time between the 
14th day of July, 1954, and the 12th day of March, 1955, any working journalist had been ret renched, he 
shall be entitled  to receive from the employer — 
(a) wages for one month at the rate to which he was entitled immediately before his retrenchment, 
unless he had been given one month's notice in writin g before such retrenchment; and  
(b) compensat ion which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed year 
of service under that employer or any part t hereof in excess of six months.  
1[5. Payment of gratuity .—(1) Where — 
(a) any  working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, for not less than three years in any  newspaper establishment, and — 
(i) his services are terminated by the employer in relation to that newspaper estab lishment for 
any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action; or  
(ii) he retires from service on reachin g the age of superannuation; or  
(b) any working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, for not less than ten years in any newspaper establishment, and he  
volun tarily resigns on or after the 1st day of July, 1961, from service in th at newspaper establishment 
on any ground whatsoever other than on the ground of conscience; or  
(c) any working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act for not less than three years in any newspaper es tablishment, and he 
voluntarily resigns on or after the 1st day of July, 1961, from service in that establishment on the 
ground of conscience; or  
(d) any working journalist dies while he is in service in any newspaper establishment ; the 
working journalist or, in the case of his death, his nominee or nominees or , if there is no nomination 
in force at the time of the death of the working journalist, his family, as the case may be, shall, 
without prejudice to any benefits or rights accr uing under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 
1947), be paid, on such termination, retirement, resignation or death, by the employer in relation to 
that establishment gratuity which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed  
year of service or any part t hereof in excess of six months:  
Provided that in the case of a working journalist referred to in clause ( b), the total amount of gratuity 
that shall be payable to him shall not exceed twelve and half month ’s average pay:  
Provi ded further that where a working journalist is employed in any newspaper establishment wherein 
not more than six working journalists were employed on any day of the twelve months immediately 
preceding the commencement of this Act, the gratuity payable to a  working journalist employed in any 
such newspaper establishment for any period of service before such commencement shall not be 
equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess 
of six mont hs but sha ll be equivalent to — 
(a) three days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of 
six months, if the period of such past serv ice does not exceed five years;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1952, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  6 
 (b) five days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of six 
months, if the period of such past service exceeds five years but  does not exceed ten years; and  
(c) seven days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of 
six months, if the period  of such past service exceeds ten years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -sectio n and sub -section ( 1) of section 17, “family ” 
means — 
(i) in the case of a male working journalist, his widow, children, whether married or unmarried, 
and his dependent parents and the widow an d children of his deceased son:  
Provided that a widow shall not be deemed to be a member of the family of the working journ alist 
if at the time of his death she was not legally en titled to be maintained by him;  
(ii) in the case of a female working journalist, her husband, children, whether married or 
unmarried, and the dependent parents of the working journalist or of her husb and, and the widow an d 
children of her deceased son:  
Provided that if the working journalist has expressed her desire to exclude her husband from the 
family, the husband and his dependent parents shall not be deemed to be a part of t he working 
journalist’s  family,  
and in either of the above two cases, if the child of a working journalist or of a deceased son of a working 
journalist has been adopted by another person and if under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is 
legally recognised, such a child s hall not be considered as a member of the fa mily of the working 
journalist.  
(2) Any dispute whether a working journalist has voluntarily resigned from service in any newspaper 
establishment on the ground of conscience shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning 
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any corresponding law relating to investigation and 
settlement of industrial disputes in force in any State.  
(3) Where a nominee is a minor and the gratuity under sub -section ( 1) has become payable during his 
minority, it shall be paid to a person appointed under  sub-section ( 3) of section 5A:  
Provided that where there is no such person, payment shall be made to any guardian of the property of 
the minor appointed by a competent court or where no such guardian has been appointed, to either parent 
of the minor, or where neither parent is alive, to a ny other guardian of the minor:  
Provided further that where the gratuity is payable to two or more nominees, and either or any of 
them dies, the gratuity shall be paid to the  surviving nominee or nominees.  
5A. Nom ination by working journalist .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, or in any disposition, testamentary or otherwise in respect of any gratuity payable to a 
working journalist, where a nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person 
the right to receive payment of the gratuity for the time being due to the working journalist, the nominee 
shall, on the death of the working journalist, become entitled to the gratuity and to be paid the sum due in 
respect thereof to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied or canc elled in the 
prescribed manner.  
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall become void if the nominee predeceases, or 
where there are two or more nominees, all the nominees predecease, the working journalist making the 
nomination.  
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the working journalist making the nomination 
to appoint any person in the prescribed manner to receive the  gratuity in the event of his death durin g the 
minority of the nominee.  
6. Hours of work .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, no working journalist 
shall be required or allowed to work in any newspaper establishment for m ore than one hundred and 
forty -four hours during any period of four consecutive weeks, e xclusive of the time for meals.  7 
 (2) Every working journalist shall be allowed during any period of seven consecutive days rest for a 
period of not less than twenty -four consecutive hours, the period between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M. being 
included therein.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “week ” means a period of seven days begi nning at 
mid-night on Saturday.  
7. Leave .—Without  prejudice to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as may be 
prescribed, every working jo urnalist shall be entitled to — 
(a) earned leave on fu ll wages for not less than one -eleven th of the period spent on duty;  
(b) leave on medical certifica te on one -half of the wages for not less than one -eight eenth of the 
period of service.  
1[8.Fixation or revision of rates of wages .—(1) The Central Government may, in the  manner 
hereinafter provided, — 
(a) fix rates of wages in respect of working journalists;  
(b) revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of wages fixed under 
this section or specified in the order made under section 6 of the Working Journalists (Fixation of 
Rates of  Wages) Act, 1958 (29 of 1958).  
(2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Central Government in respect of working 
journalists fo r time work and for piece work.  
9. Procedure for fixin g and revising rates of wages .—For the purpose of fixing or revising rates of 
wages in respect of working journalists under this Act, the Central Government shall, as and when 
necessary, constitute a Wage Board whic h shall consist of — 
(a) 2[three persons ] representing employers in relati on to newspaper establishments;  
(b) 2[three persons ] representing working journalists;  
(c) 3[four independent persons ], one of whom shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a 
High Court or the Supreme Court and who shall be appointed by that Gove rnment as the Chairman 
thereof.  
10. Recommendation by Bo ard.—(1) The Board shall, by notice published in such manner as it 
thinks fit, call upon newspaper establishments and working journalists and other persons interested in the 
fixation or revision of rates of wages of working journalists to make such representation s as they may 
think fit as respects the rates of wages which may be fixed or revised under this Act in respect of working 
journalists.  
(2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall be made within such period as the Board 
may specify in the no tice and shall state the rates of wages which, in the opinion of the person making the 
representation, would be reasonable, having regard to the capacity of the employer to pay the same or to 
any other circumstance, whichever may seem relevant to the perso n making the representation in relation 
to his representation.  
(3) The Board shall take into account the representations aforesaid, if any, and after examining the 
materials placed before it make such recommendations as it thinks fit to the Central Governm ent for the 
fixation or revision of rates of wages in respect of working journalists; and any such recommendation 
may specify, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the date from which the rat es of wages should take 
effect.  
(4) In making any recommenda tions to the Central Government, the Board shall have regard to the 
cost of livin g, the prevalent rates of wages for comparable employment, the circumstances relating to the 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 65 of 1962, s. 4, for sections 8 to 13 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1996, s. 2, for “two persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “three independent persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  8 
 newspaper industry in different regions of the country and to any other circumstan ces which to the Board 
may seem relevant.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in this sub -section shall 
prevent the Board from making recommendations for fixation or revision of rate s of wages on all India 
basis.]  
11. Powe rs and procedure of the Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section 
(2), the Board may exercise all or any of the powers which an Industrial Tribunal constituted under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), exercises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute referred 
to it and shall, subject to the provisions contained in this Act, and the rules, if any, made thereunder, have 
power  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) Any representations made to the Board and any documen ts furnished to it by way of evidence 
shall be open to inspection on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, by any p erson interested in the 
matter.  
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board, 
the Central Government shall fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in accordance with the 
provisions of section 9 and any proceeding may be continued before the Board so reconstituted from the 
stage  at which the vacancy occurred.  
12. Powers of Central Government to enforce reco mmendations of the Wage Board .—(1) As 
soon as may be, after the receipt of the recommendations of the Board, the Central Government shall 
make an order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such modifications, if a ny, as it thinks fit, 
being modifications which, in the opinion of the Central Government, do not effect important alterations 
in the ch aracter of the recommendations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Gove rnment may, if it thinks 
fit,— 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, not being modifications of  the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), as it thinks fit:  
Provided that before making any such modifications, the Central Government shall cause notice 
to be given to all persons likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall 
take into account any representations which they may mak e in this behalf in writing; or  
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to the Board, in which case, the Central 
Government shall consider its further recommendations and make an order either in terms of the 
recommendations or with such modifications of the nature referred to in su b-section ( 1) as it thinks 
fit. 
(3) Every order made by the Cen tral Government under this section shall be published in the Official 
Gazette together with the recommendations of the Board relating to the order and the order shall come 
into operation on the date of publication or on such date, whether prospectively or retrospectively, as  may 
be specified in the order.  
13. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less tha n those specified in the order .—On 
the coming into operation of an order of the Central Government under section 12, every working 
journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rate which shall in no case be less than 
the rate o f wages specified in the order.  
13A. Power of Government to fix interim rates of wages .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, where t he Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, it may, 
after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix interim rates of wages in 
respect of working journalists.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  added by Act 31 of 1989, s. 3.  9 
 (2) Any interim rates of wages so fixed sha ll be binding on all employers in relation to newspaper 
establishments and every working journalist shall be entitled to be paid wages at a rate which shall, in no 
case, be less than the interim ra tes of wages fixed under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any  interim rates of wages fixed under sub -section ( 1) shall remain in force until the order of the 
Central Government under section 12 comes into operation.]  
1[13AA. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in r espect of working 
journa lists.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the Central Government is of 
opinion that the Board constituted under section 9 for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in 
respect of working journalists under this Act has not b een able to function (for any reason whatsoever) 
effectively, and in the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall consist of a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High  
Court or the Supreme Court, for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of work ing 
journalists under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in relation to, the Tribunal constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of this section, the Central Government and working journalists, subj ect to the 
modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board therein, wherever they occur, shall be construed  as references to 
the Tribunal;  
(b) in s ub-section ( 3) of section 11, — 
(i) the reference to the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board shall be 
construed as a reference to the office of the person  constituting the Tribunal; and  
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a reference to sub -section ( 1) of thi s 
section; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be construed as references to 
section 12 read with this section.  
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under this Act, may act on, the evidence recorded by the 
Wage Board or partly recorded by the Wage Board  and partly recorded by itself:  
Provided that if the Tribunal is of opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose 
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, i t may re -summon any such 
witness, and after s uch further examination, cross -examination and re -examination, if any, as it may 
permit, t he witness shall be discharged.  
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), the Board constituted under section 9 and 
functioning immediately before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members constituting that 
Board shall be deemed  to have vacated their offices:  
Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by the Central Government under sectio n 13A in 
respect of working journalists and in force immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal shall 
remain in force until the order of the Central Government under section 12 read with this section comes 
into operation.]  
2[CHAPTER IIA  
NON-JOURN ALIST  NEWSPAPER  EMPLOYEES  
13B. Fixation or revision of rates of wages of non -journalist newspaper employees .—(1) The 
Central Government may, in the  manner hereinafter provided, — 
(a) fix rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees; and  
(b) revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of wages fixed under 
this section.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 3. (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 4.  10 
 (2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Central Government in respect of non -journalist 
newspaper employees fo r time work and fo r piece work.  
13C. Wage Board for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees .—For the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees under this Act, the Central Governme nt shall, as and when necessary, constitute a Wage  Board 
which shall consist of — 
(a) 1[three persons ] representing employers in relati on to newspaper establishments;  
(b) 1[three persons ] representing non -journalist newspaper employees; and 
(c) 2[four independent persons ], one of whom shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a 
High Court or the Supreme Court and who shall be appointed by that Gove rnment as the Chairman 
thereof.  
13D. Appl ication of certain provisions .—The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in 
relation to, the Board constituted under section 13C, the Central Government and non -journalist 
newspaper employees, subje ct to the modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board and working journalists therein, wherever they occur, shall be 
construed respectively as references to the Board constituted under section 13C and to non -journalist 
newspaper employees;  
(b) the references in sub -section ( 3) of section 11 to section 9 shall be construe d as a reference to 
section 13C; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be construed as references to 
section 12 read with this section.]  
3[13DD. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of  non-
journalist newspaper employees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
Central Government is of opinion that the Board constituted under section 13C for the purpose of fixing 
or revising rates of wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper employees under this Act has not been 
able to function (for any reason whatsoever) effectively, and in the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall  consist of a person who 
is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court, for the purpose of fixing or revising rates 
of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees under this Act . 
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall app ly to, and in relation to, the Tribunal constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of this section, the Central Government and non -journalist newspaper employees, 
subject to the modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board and working journalists therein, wh erever they occur, shall be 
construed respectively as referen ces to the Tribunal and to non -journalist newspaper employees;  
(b) in s ub-section ( 3) of section 11, — 
(i) the reference to the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board shall be 
constru ed as a reference to the office of the person  constituting the Tribunal; and  
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a reference to sub -section ( 1) of this 
section; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be c onstrued as references 
to sec tion 12 read with this section.  
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under this Act, may act on the evidence recorded by the 
Wage Board or partly recorded by the Wage Board  and partly recorded by itself:  
Provided that  if the Tribunal is of opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose 
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, it may re -summon any such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1996, s. 3, for “two persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “three independent persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  11 
 witness, and after s uch further examination, cross -examination and re-examination, if any, as it may 
permit, t he witness shall be discharged.  
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), the Board constituted under section 13C 
and functioning immediately before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members constituting 
that Board shall be deemed  to have vacated their offices:  
Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by the Central Government under section 13A read 
with section 13D in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees and in forc e immediately before the 
constitution of the Tribunal shall remain in force until the order of the Central Government under section 
12 read with this  section comes into operation.]  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION OF CERT AIN ACTS TO NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES  
14. Act 20 of 1946 to appl y to newspaper establishments .—The provisions of the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every newspaper 
establishment wherein twenty or more newspaper employees are employed or w ere employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months as if such newspaper establishment were an industrial establishment to 
which the aforesaid Act has been applied by a notification under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and 
as if a newspaper emplo yee were a workman within the meaning of that Act.  
15. Act 19 of 1952 to appl y to newspaper establishments .—The Employees ’ Provident Funds 1[and 
Miscellaneous Provisions] Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every newspaper 
establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed on any day, as if such newspaper 
establishment were a factory to which the aforesaid Act had been applied by a notification of the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and  as if a newspaper employee were an employee 
within the meaning of that Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Effect of laws and agreemen ts inconsistent with this Act .—(1) The  provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that wh ere under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise, a newspaper 
employee is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to 
which he would be entitled under this Act, the newspaper employee sh all continue to be entitled to the 
more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect o f 
other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude any newspaper empl oyee from 
entering into an agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter 
which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.  
2[16A. Employer not to dismiss, discharge, etc.,  newspaper employees .—No employer in relation 
to a newspaper establishment shall, by reason of his liability for payment of wages to newspaper 
employees at the rates specified in an order of the Central Government under section 12, or under section 
12 read  with section 13AA or section 13DD, dismiss, discharge or retrench any newspaper employee.]  
3[17. Recovery of money due from an employer .—(1) Where any amount is due under this Act to a 
newspaper employee from an employer, the newspaper employee himself, or any person authorised by 
him in writing in this behalf, or in the case of the death of the employee, any member of his family may, 
without  prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the State Government for the 
recovery of the amount due to him, and if the State Government, or such authority, as the State 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 17, for “and Family Pension Fund”  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 5, for section 17 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  12 
 Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any amoun t is so due, it shall issue a certificate 
for that amount to the Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the same 
manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a newspape r employee from his 
employer, the State Government may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question 
to any Labour Court constituted by it under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or under any 
corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State and 
the said Act or law shall have effect in relation to the Labour Court as if the question so referred were a 
matter referred to the Labour Court for adju dication under that Act  or law.  
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to the State Government which made 
the reference and any amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the manne r provided in 
sub-section ( 1). 
17A. Maintenance of registers, records, an d muster -rolls .—Every employer in relation to a 
newspaper establishment shall prepare and maintain such registers, records and muster -rolls and in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
17B. Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limits 
within which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) Any Inspector app ointed under sub -section ( 1) may for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of 
the p rovisions of this Act or of the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958 (29 of 
1958) have been complied with in respect of a newspaper establishment — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such informatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time enter any newspaper establishment or any premises connected 
therewith and require any one found in charge thereof to produce before him for examinati on any 
accounts, books, registers and other documents relating to the employment of persons or the payment  
of wages in the establishment;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer, his 
agent or servant or any other person found in charge of the newspaper establishment or any premises 
connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to 
have been an  employee in the establishment;  
(d) make copies of or take extra cts from any book, register or other documents maintained in 
relation to the newspaper establishment;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give information by an Inspector 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be legally bound to do so.]  
18. Penalty .—1[(1) If any employer contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or a ny rule or order 
made thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence under this Act, is again convicted of an offence 
involving the contravention of the same provision , shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
(1B) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct o f the business of 
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1993).  13 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable  to any 
punishment provided in this section if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(1C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1B), where an offence under this section has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to, any gross negligence on the part of 
any di rector, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst 
and punished accordingly.  
(1D) For the purposes of t his section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a fir m means a partner in the firm.]  
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of  the first class shall try any 
offence  punishable under this section.  
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this section, unless the complaint thereof is 
made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been commi tted. 
19. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairman or any 
other member of the Board 1[or the pers on con tributing the Tribunal] 2[or an Inspector appointed under 
this Act] for anything which is in good fai th done or intended to be done.  
3[19A. Defects in appointmen ts not to invalidate acts .—No act or proceeding of the Board shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in  the constitution of the 
Board.  
19B. Saving .—Nothing in this Act or the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 
1958 (29 of 1958) shall apply to 4[any newspaper employee] who is an employee of the Government to 
whom the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification , Control and Appeal) 
Rules, Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, 
Civilians in Defence Servic es (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the Indian Railway 
Establishment Code or any other rules or r egulations that may be notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government i n the Official Gazette, apply.]  
20. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of th is Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) payment of g ratuity to working journalists;  
(b) hours of work of working journalists;  
(c) holidays,  earned leave, leave on medical certificate, casual leave or any other kind of leave 
admissible to working journalists;  
5[(d) the procedur e to be followed by the Board 6[or, as the case may be, the Tribunal,] in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act; 
(e) the form of nominations, and the manner in  which nominations may be made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 5 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 65 of 1962 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 5.  
5. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 9, for clause s (d), (e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
6. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 6 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  14 
 (f) the manner in which any person may be appointed for the purposes of  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 5A;  
(g) the variation or cancellation of nominations;  
(h) the manner of gi ving notice under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(i) the registers, records and muster -rolls to be prepared and maintained by newspaper 
establishments, the forms in which they should be prepared and maintained and the particulars to be 
entered therein;  
(j) the powers that ma y be exercised by an Inspector;  
(k) any other matter which has  to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament w hile it is in session for a total period of thirty days which ma y be comprised in one 
session 2[or in two or more successive sessions], and if before th e expiry of the session 3[immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that rule.]  
21. [Repeal of Act 1 of 1955 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule .  
_____  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65  of 1962, s. 9, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 6, for “or in two successive sessions”.  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” . 15 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( d)] 
1. For the purpose s of clause ( d) of section 2, — 
(1) two or more newspaper establishments under common control shall be deemed to be one 
newspaper establishment;  
(2) two or more newspaper establishments owned by an individual and his or her spouse shall  be 
deemed to be one newspaper establishment unless it is shown that such spouse is a sole proprietor or 
partner or a shareholder of a corporate body on the basis of h is or her own individual funds;  
(3) two or more newspaper establishments publishing newspapers bearing the same or similar 
title and in the same language in any place in India or bearing the same or similar title but in different 
languages in the same State or Union territory shall be deem ed to be one newspaper establishment.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 ( 1), two or more establishments shall be deem ed to be under 
common control — 
(a) (i) where the newspaper establishments are owned by a co mmon individual or individuals;  
(ii) where the newspaper establishments are owned by firms, if such firms have a substan tial number 
of common partners;  
(iii) where the newspaper establishments are owned by bodies corporate, if one body corporate is a 
subsidiary of the other body corporate, or both are subsidiaries of a common holding company or a 
substantial number of their equity shares are owned by the same person or group of person s, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(iv) where one establishment is owned by a body corporate and the other is owned by a fir m, if a 
substantial number of partners of the firm together hold a substantial number of equit y shares of the body 
corporate;  
(v) where one is owned by a body corporate and the other is owned by a firm having bodies corporate 
as its partners if a substanti al number of equity shares of such bodies corporate are owned, directly or 
indirectly, by the same person or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, or  
(b) where there is functional integrality between concerned newspaper establishments.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 4.  
