--------------------------The All-India Institutes of Medical Sciences Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE ALL -INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCE  ACT, 1956 
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment and incorporation of the Institute.  
4. Composition of the Institute.  
5. Declaration of Institutes as institution of national importance.  
6. Term of office of, and vacancies among, members.  
7. President of the Institute.  
8. Allowances of President and members.  
9. Meetings of the Institute.  
10. Governing Body and other Committees of the Institute.  
11. Staff of the Institute.  
12. Location of the Institute.  
13. Objects of the Institute.  
14. Functions of the Institute.  
15. Payment to the Insti tute. 
16. Fund of the Institute.  
17. Budget of the Institute.  
18. Accounts and audit.  
19. Annual Report.  
20. Pension and provident funds.  
21. Authentication of the orders and instruments of the Institute.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc.  
23. Recognition of Medical, dental and nursing qualifications granted by the Institute.  
24. Grant of medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas, etc., by the Institute.  
25. Control by Central Government.  
26. Disputes between the Institute  and the Central Government.  
27. Returns and information . 
27A. Incorporation of Institute registered as society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.  
27B. Effect of incorporation of Institutes.  
27C. Provisions of this Act to apply to societies incorp orated into All -India Institutes of Medical 
Science under section 27A.  
27D. Power to make transitory provisions for Institutes (other th an existing Institute).  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to make regulations.  2 
  
THE ALL -INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1956  
[2nd June, 1956.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of 1[All-India Institute s of Medical Sciences ]. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the 2[All-India Institutes of Medical 
Sciences] Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires ,— 
4[(a) “corresponding Institute ” means the Institutes referred to in column ( 3) of the Table given 
under section 27A;  
(aa) “existing Institute ” means the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences, — 
(i) estab lished under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, before the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012); and  
(ii) located at New Delhi, as required under section 12 as it stood before such 
commencement;  
(ab) “Fund ” means the Fund of the Institute referred to in section 16;]  
(b) „Governing Body ‟ means the Governing Body of the Institute;  
(c) Institute means the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences established under section 3  5[and 
includes the corresponding Instit utes and other Institutes which may be established on and after the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012)] ; 
(d) „member ‟ means a member of the Institute;  
(e) „regulation ‟ means a regulation made by the Institute ; 
(f) „rules‟ means a rule made by the Central Government.  
5[(g) “society ” means the society referred to in column ( 2) of the Table given under section 27A.]  
 3. Establishment and incorporation of the Institute .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act an institution to be called the All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences : 
6[Provided that the Central Government  may, on and after the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), establish by notification in the 
Official Gazette, such other All -India Institutes of Medical Sciences at such places as it may specify in the 
said no tification in addition to the existing Institute and the corresponding Institutes.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 2, for “ an All -India Institute of Medical Sciences” ( w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “All-India Institute of Medical Sciences” (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. 15th November, 1956, vide notification No. S. R. O. 26 88, dated 6th November, 1956, see Gazette of India, E xtraordinary,       
Part II, s . 3. 
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 4, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. The proviso ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  3 
 (2) 1[Every Institute] shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, b oth movable and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
4. Composition of the Institute .—2[Every Institute] shall consist of the following members, 
namely: — 
3[(a) in the case of  existing Institute, the  Vice -Chancellor of the Delhi University, ex officio ; 
(aa) in the case of every other Institute established on and after the commencement of the             
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), the Vice -Chancellor of 
a University situated in a State in which such Institute has been established after such commencement 
and such Vice -Chancellor shall be nominated by the Central Government;]  
(b) the Director General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c) the Director of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(d) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government, one from 
the Ministry of Finance and one from the Ministry of Education;  
(e) five  persons of whom one shall be a non -medical scientist representing the Indian Science 
Congress Association, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(f) four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated by the 
Central G overnment in the manner prescribed by rules; and  
(g) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected from among themselves by the 
members of the House of the People and one from among themselves by the members of the Council 
of States . 
4[5. Declar ation of Institutes as institution of national importance .—(1) It is hereby declared that 
the existing Institute declared as an institution of national importance, before the commencement of the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), under section 5 as it stood 
before such commencement, shall continue to be an institution of national importance.  
(2) It is hereby declared that every corresponding Institute shall be an institution of national 
importance.  
(3) It is hereby declared that every Institute established under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of     
section 3, on and after the commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) 
Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), shall be an institution of national importance.]  
6. Term of office of, an d vacancies among, members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in the 
section, the term of office of a member shall be five years from the date of his nomination or election:  
Provided  that the term of office of a member elected under clause ( g) of section 4 shall come to an 
end as soon as he  5[becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or] ceases to 
be a member of the House from wh ich he was elected.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds the office in virtue of 
which he is such a member.  
(3) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the  
remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated or elected.  
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office 
until another person is nominated or elected as a member in his place.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012 , s. 5, for “ The Institute” (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “The Institute” (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for section 5  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Ins. by Act 33 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -8-2000).  4 
 (5) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(6) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules.  
7. President of the Institute .—(1) There shall be a  1[President for every Institute] who shall be 
nominated by the Central Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute.  
2[Provided  that the President of the existing Institute shall also be the President of every 
corresponding Institute and other Institutes established on and after the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sc iences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), till such date the Central Government 
nominates a separate President for every corresponding Institute and other Institutes established after such 
commencement.]  
(2) The President shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act 
or as may be prescribed by rules or regulations.  
8. Allowances of President and members .—The President and members shall receive such 
allowances, if any,  3[from the Institute of which they are the President and member s] as may be 
prescribed by rules.  
4[Provided that in case a person is a President of two or more Institutes, the allowances shall be borne 
by the Institutes in such proportion as may be prescribed by rules.]  
9. Meetings of the Institute .—5[Every Institute shall] hold its first meeting at such time and place as 
may be appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government;  and 
thereafte r 6[every Institute shall meet] at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed by regulation : 
7[Provided that the provisions relating to holding of the first meeting shall not apply to the existing 
Institute.]  
10. Governing Body and other Committees of the Institute .—(1) There shall be  8[separate 
Governing Body for every Institute which shall be constituted by such Institute] from among its members 
in such mann er as may be prescribed by regulations.  
9[Provided that the Governing Body of the existing Institute, constituted before the commencement of 
the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), shall be deemed to have 
been constituted under t his section.]  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of  10[every Institute] and shall exercise 
such powers and discharge such functions as  10[every Institute] may, by regulations made in this behalf, 
confer or impose upon it.  
(3) The President of  10[every Institute] shall be the Chairman of the Governing Body and as Chairman 
thereof shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(4) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers  and discharge of its functions by the 
Governing Body, and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of  2012, s. 8, for “ President of the Institute” (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “from the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “The Institute shall”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “the Institute shall meet”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Subs. by s. 1 1, ibid.,  for “a Governing Body of the Institute which shall be constituted by the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
9. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
10. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  5 
 (5) Subject to such control and restrictions a s may be prescribed by rules,  1[every Institute may 
constitute] as many standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any 
power or discharging any  2[functions of such Institute] or for inquiring into or reporting or advi sing upon, 
any matter which the Institute may refer to them.  
(6) A standing committee shall consist exclusively of  3[members of  every Institute; but an ad hoc  
committee may include persons who are not members of such Institute] but the number of such perso ns 
shall not exceed one -half of its total membership.  
4[Provided  that the Standing Committee of the existing Institute constituted, before the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), shall 
be deemed to have been c onstituted under this section.]  
(7) The Chairman and members of the Governing Body and the Chairman and members of a standing 
committee or an ad hoc  committee shall receive such allowances, if any, as may be prescribed by 
regulations . 
11. Staff of the Institute .—(1) There shall be a  5[chief executive officer of every Institute] who shall 
be designated as the  6[Director of such Institute] and shall, subject to such rules as may be made by the 
Central Government in this behalf, be appointed by the Institute:  
7[Provided that the first Director of every Institute (other than the existing Institute), established        
on and after the commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment)                      
Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), shall be appointed by the Central Government:  
Provided further that in case a Director of a society has been appointed by the Central Government 
before the  commencement  of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, such 
Director shall be deemed to be the first Direc tor of the concerned corresponding Institute.]  
8[(1A) The Director shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that any person h olding office as a Director immediately before the commencement of the 
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences and the Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research (Amendment) Act, 2007  (42 of 2007), shall in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this sub -section, cease to hold office on such commencement as such Director and shall be 
entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months ‟ pay and allowances for the premature 
termination of his office or of any contract of serv ice.] 
(2) The Director shall act as the Secretary to the Institute as well as the Governing Body.  
(3) The Director shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be prescribed by 
regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Institute or  the President of the Institute or by the 
Governing Body or the Chairman of the Governing Body.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Institute may 
appoint such number of other officers and employees as may  be necessary for the exercise of its powers 
and discharge of its functions and may determine the designations and grades of such other officers and 
employees . 
(5) The Director and other officers and employees of the Institute shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be governed by such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident 
fund and other matters as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012 , s. 11, for “the Institute may constitute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “functions of the Institute” (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for certain words  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 1 2, ibid.,  for “chief executive officer of the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “Director of the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for the proviso  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Ins. by Act 42 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-11-2007).  6 
 1[12. Location of the Institute .—(1) The existing Institute s hall be located at New Delhi.  
(2) All corresponding Institutes shall be located at the places mentioned in column ( 3) of the Table 
given under section 27A.  
(3) All Institutes [other than the existing Institute and corresponding Institutes referred to in            
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2)] shall be located at such places as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify.]  
13. Objects of the Institute .—The objects of  2[every Institute] shall be — 
(a) to develop patterns of teaching in under -graduate and post -graduate medical education in all 
its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education to all medical colleges and 
other allied institutions in India;  
(b) to bring together in one place educational faci lities of the highest order for the training of 
personnel in all important branches of health activity; and  
(c) to attain self -sufficiency in post -graduate medical education  . 
14. Functions of the Institute .—With a view to promotion of the objects specifie d in                 
section 13,  3[every Institute] may — 
(a) provide for under -graduate and post -graduate teaching in the science of modern medicine and 
other allied sciences, including physical and biological sciences;  
(b) provide facilities for research in the various branches of such sciences;  
(c) provide for the teaching of humanities in the under graduate courses;  
(d) conduct experiments in new methods of medical education, both under graduate and                     
post-graduate, in order to arrive a t satisfactory standards of such education;  
(e) prescribe courses and curricula for both under -graduate and post graduate studies;  
(f) notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, establish and 
maintain — 
(i) one or more medical colleges with different departments, including a department of 
preventive and social medicine, sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake not only under 
graduate medical education but also post -graduate medical education in different subjects;  
(ii) one or more well -equipped hospitals;  
(iii) a dental college with such institutional facilities for the practice of dentistry and for the 
practical training of students as may be necessary;  
(iv) a nursing college sufficiently staffed and equipped for t he training of nurses;  
(v) rural and urban health organisations which will form cente rs for the field training of the 
medical, dental and nursing students of the Institute as well as for research into community health 
problems; and  
(vi) other institutions for the training of different types of health workers, such as 
physiotherapists, occupational therapists and medical technicians of various kinds;  
(g) train teachers for the different medical colleges in India;  
(h) hold examinations and grant such degrees,  diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles 
in under -graduate and post -graduate medical education as may be laid down in the regulations;  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 13, for section 12  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  7 
 (i) institute, and appoint persons to, professorships, readerships, lectureships and posts of any 
descriptio n in accordance with regulations;  
(j) receive grants from the Government and gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests and transfers 
of properties, both movable and immovable, from donors, benefactors, testators or transferors, as the 
case may be;  
(k) deal with any property belonging to, or vested in, the Institute in any manner which is 
considered necessary for promoting the objects specified in  section  13; 
(1) demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by regulations;  
1[(m) construct quarters for its staff and allot such quarters to the staff in accordance with such 
regulations as may be made in this behalf;  
(n) borrow money, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the Institute;]  
15. Payment to the Institute .—The Central Government may, under appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to  2[every Institute] in each financial year such sums of money and 
in such manner as may be considered necessary by that Governmen t for the exercise of its powers and 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
16. Fund of the Institute .—(1) 3[Every Institute] shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys provi ded by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges received by the Institute;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other source.  
4[Provided that the Fund maintained by the existing Institute and the society, before the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012), shall 
be deemed to be the Fund maintained under this section.]  
(2) All moneys credi ted to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including expenses 
incurred i n the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 14.  
17. Budget of the Institute .—5[Every Institute shall prepare], in such form and at such time every 
year as may be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the 
estimated receipts and  6[expenditu re of the concerned Institute]  and shall forward to the Central 
Government such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.  
18. Accounts and audit .—(1) 7[Every Institute] shall maintain  proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance -sheet in such form as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 16, for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 1 7, ibid.,  for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for “The Institute shall prepare”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for “expenditure of the  Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  8 
 (2) The ac counts of  1[every Institute] shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by  1[every 
Institute] to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of   1[every Institute] shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller General of India has in connection with the audit of the 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the offices of  1[every Institute] as we ll 
as of the institutions established and maintained by it.  
(4) The accounts of  1[every Institute] as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall  be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament . 
19. Annual Report .—2[Every Institute] shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during 
that year and submit  the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may 
be prescribed by rules and a copy of this report shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament within one 
month of its receipt.  
20. Pension and provident funds .—(1) 3[Eve ry Institute] shall constitute for the benefit of its 
officers, teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by regulations, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
4[Provided that the pension  and provident fund constituted by the existing Institute or society, before 
the commencement of the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , 
shall be deemed to be the pension and provident fund under this section.]  
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted the Central Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
21. Authentication of th e orders and instruments of the Institute .—All orders and  5[decisions of 
every Institute] shall be authenticated by the signature of the President or any other member authorised by 
the Institute in this behalf and all other instruments shall be authenticat ed by the signature of the Director 
or any other  6[officer of every Institute] authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
22. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies, etc .—No act done or proceeding 
taken by  7[every Institute], Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc  committee under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution 
of, 7[every Institute], Governing Body or such standing or ad ho c committee.  
8[23. Recognition of Medical, dental and nursing qualifications granted by the                       
Institute .— Notwithstanding anything contained in the India n Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), 
the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948) and the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947  (48 of 1947), the medical, 
dental or nursing degrees or diplomas, as the case may be, granted by  7[every Institute] under this Act 
shall be recogni sed— 
(a) medical qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) 
and shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to that Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 19, for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for “decisions of the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid.,  for “officer of the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
8. Subs. by Act 24 of 2002, s. 2, for section 23  (w.e.f. 24 -5-2002).  9 
 (b) dental qualifications for the p urpose of the Dentists Act, 1948 (16 of 1948) and shall be 
deemed to be included in the Scheduled to that Act; and  
(c) nursing qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947(48 of 1947) 
and shall be deemed to be included in the Sche dule to that Act.]  
1[24. Grant of medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas, etc., by the                         
Institute .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  2[every 
Institute] shall have power to grant medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions and title under this Act.]  
25. Control by Central Government .—3[Every Institute] shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government  for the efficient administration of this Act.  
26. Disputes between the Institute and the Central Government .—If in, or in connection with, the 
exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Institute under this Act, any dispute arises 
betwee n the Institute and the Central Government, the decision of the Central Government on such 
dispute shall be final.  
27. Returns and information .—3[Every Institute] shall furnish to the Central Government such 
reports, returns and other information as that G overnment may require from time to time.  
4[27A. Incorporation of Institute registered as society under the Societies Registration               
Act, 1860 .—Each of the Institute, registered as society under the Societies Registration                           
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and mentioned in column ( 2) of the Table below shall be a body corporate having 
perpetual succession and common seal and shall by its name mentioned in column ( 3) of that Table, sue 
and be sued:  
 
TABLE  
LIST OF SOCIETIES INCORPORATED AS ALL-INDIA INSTITUTES OF MEDICAL SCIENCES  
 
Serial 
Number  Society  Corresponding Institute and place of its location  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Bhopal  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Bhopal (Madhya 
Pradesh).  
2. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Bhubaneswar  All-India institute of Medical Sciences, Bhubaneswar 
(Odisha).  
3. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Jodhpur  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur 
(Rajasthan).  
4. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Patna  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna (Bihar).  
5. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Raipur  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Raipur 
(Chhattisgarh).  
6. All-India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Rishikesh  All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh 
(Uttarakhand).]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2002, s. 3, for section 24  (w.e.f. 24 -5-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 22, for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  10 
 27B. Effect of incorporation of Institutes .—(1) On and after the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, — 
(a) any  reference to a society in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other 
instrument, shall be deemed as a reference to the corresponding Institute;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to a society shall vest in the 
correspo nding Institute;  
(c) all the rights and liabilities of a society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities 
of, the corresponding Institute;  
(d) subject to the provisions of this Act, every person (including Director, officers and other 
employees) who is employed in the society, immediately before the commencement of the All -India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , shall, on and after such 
commencement, become an employee of the corresponding Institute and shal l hold his office or 
service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other 
matters as he would have held the same  on the date of the commencement of the All -India Institute of 
Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) , as if the said Act had not been promulgated, 
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure,  
remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by regulations:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such person 
shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Gove rnment;  
(e) the Governing Body of every society, shall, from the date of constitution of the Governing 
Body under sub -section ( 1) of section 10, stand dissolved and no chairperson or other person shall be 
entitled to any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his office or of any contract 
of service;  
(f) all committees (including Standing Committee, if any) of the society shall stand dissolved;  
(g) any examination conducted by the existing Institute for admission of candidates for awa rd of 
medical degrees and diplomas by such society shall be valid examination and be deemed to have been 
conducted by the corresponding Institute.  
(2) Notwith standing anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the corresponding Institutes in its 
regular service under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under this Act or 
any other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
27C. Provisions of this Act to apply to societies incorporated into All -India Institutes of Medical 
Science under section 27A .—All provisions of this Act shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the societies, 
referred to in column ( 2) of the Table given under section 27A, incorporated into All -India Institutes of 
Medical Sciences referred to in column ( 3) of the said Table.  
27D. Power to make transitory provisions for Institutes (other th an existing Institute) .—(1) The 
Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that certain measures are required for speedy and effective 
functioning of corresponding Institutes (other than the existing Institute), by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify such measures as it ma y consider necessary for the smooth and effective functioning of 
such Institutes:  
Provided that no such notification shall be issued under this section, after the expiry of a period of 
two years from the date of commencement of the All -India Institute of M edical Sciences (Amendment) 
Act, 2012  (37 of 2012) . 
(2) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.]  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, after consultatio n with  1[all the Institutes], 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 24, for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  11 
 Provided that consultation with the Institute shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making 
of rules under this secti on, but the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions 
which the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of nomination of members under clause ( f) of section 4;  
1[(aa) the proportion of allowances of the President to be borne by the Institutes under the proviso 
to section 8;]  
(b) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and ad hoc  committees 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(c) the conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, members of  2[every Institute];  
(d) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute;  
(e) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the President and members of the Institute;  
(f) the number of officers and employees that may be a ppointed by the Institute and the manner of 
such appointment;  
(g) the form in which and the time at which the budget and reports shall be prepared by the 
Institute and the number of copies thereof to be forwarded to the Central Government;  
(h) the form and  manner in which returns and information are to be furnished by the Institute to 
the Central Government;  
(i) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or t he successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, h owever, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
29. Power to make regulations .—4[Every Institute]  5[, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, may , by notification in the Official Gazette] make regulations consistent with th is Act and 
the rules made there under to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, such regulations may provide for — 
(a) the summon ing and holding of meetings other than the first meeting of the Institute, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the 
number of members necessary to form a quorum;  
(b) the manner of constituting the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc  committees, the term 
of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of, the Governing Body and 
standing and ad hoc  committees;  
(c) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President of the Institute and 
the Chairman of the Governing Body.  
(d) the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and the members of the Governing Body 
and of standing and ad hoc  committees;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 24  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid.,  for “the Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
4. Subs. by  Act 37 of 2012, s. 25, for “The Institute”  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “may, with the previous approval of the Central Government”   
(w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  12 
 (e) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body and standing and ad hoc committees in 
the conduct of their business, exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions;  
(f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of servic e of the Director and 
other officers and employees of the Institute including teachers appointed by the Institute;  
(g) the powers and duties of the Chairman of the Governing Body;  
(h) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and employees o f the Institute;  
(i) the management of the properties of the Institute;  
(j) the degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles which may be granted by the 
Institute;  
(k) the profes sorships, readerships, lecturer ships and other posts which may  be instituted and 
persons who may be appointed to such profe ssorships, readership, lecturer ships and other posts;  
(l) the fees and other charges which may be demanded and received by the Institute;  
(m) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to wh ich, pension and provident funds may 
be constituted for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the Institute;  
(n) any other matter for which under this Act provisions may be made by regulations.  
1[Provided that the regulations made by the existing Institute, before the commencement of the        
All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, shall continue to be the regulations made 
under this section until such regulations are amen ded or rescinded by the existing Institute in accordance 
with the provisions of this section.]  
(2) Until the Institute is established under this Act, any regulation which may be made under         
sub-section ( 1) may be made by the Central Government, and any regulation so made may be altered or 
rescinded by the Institute in exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
1[Provided that every corresponding Institute shall, within three months of the date of the 
commencement of the All -India Institute of Medi cal Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2012, make 
regulations.]  
2[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation. ]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 2012, s. 25  (w.e.f. 16 -7-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Bar Councils (Validation of State Laws) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE BAR COUNCILS (VALIDATION OF STATE LAWS)  ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1956  
[13th March, 1956 .] 
An Act to validate certain State laws amending the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Bar Councils (Validation of State Laws) Act, 1956.  
2. Validation of certain State laws amending the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926 (38 of 1926) .—
The laws specified in the Schedule shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as valid as if the 
provisions contained therein had been enacted by Parliament.  
________  
 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
1 The Indian Bar Councils (Andhra Amendment) Act, 1954 (President ’s Act VII of 1954).  
2. The Indian Bar Counc ils (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1950 (U.P. Act XXIV of 1950).  
3. The Indian Bar Councils (Madras Amendment) Act, 1954 (Madras Act XXXV of 1954).  
 
--------------------------The Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE BIHAR AND WEST BENGAL (TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES) ACT, 1956  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title. 
2. Definitions . 
PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories from Bihar to West Bengal.  
4. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
Council of States  
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Bye -election s to fill vacancies in the Council of States . 
7. Term of office of members of the Council of States.  
House of the people  
8. Provision as to existing House of the People.  
Legislative Assemblies  
9. Allocation of certain sitting members of the Bihar Legislative Assembly.  
10. Duration of Legislative Assemblies of Bihar and West Bengal.  
Legislative Councils  
11. Bihar Legislative Council.  
12. West Bengal Legislative Council.  
Delimitation of Constituencies  
13. Allocation of seats in the House of the People and assignment of seats to State Legislative 
Assemblies . 
14. Modification of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders.  
15. Determination of population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.  
16. Delimitation of co nstituencies.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT S 
17. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Calcutta High Court.  
18. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred to Calcutta High Court.  
19. Interpretation.  2 
 PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
SECTION S 
20. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred Appropriation Acts.  
21. Distribution of revenues.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
22. Land and goods.  
23. Treasury and bank balances.  
24. Arrears of taxes.  
25. Right to rec over loans and advances.  
26. Credits in certain funds.  
27. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.  
28. Public debt.  
29. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
30. Deposits.  
31. Provident Funds.  
32. Pensions.  
33. Contracts.  
34. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
35. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies.  
36. Items in suspense.  
37. Power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
38. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
39. State Financial Corporations.  
40. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
41. Provisions relating to services.  
42. Provisions as to the continuance of officers in the same posts.  
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
43. Territorial extent of laws.  
44. Power to adapt laws.  
45. Power to construe laws.  
46. Power to name authorities, etc. for exercising statutory functions.  
47. Legal proceedings.  
  3 
 SECTION S 
48. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
49. Right of pleaders to practise in certain Courts.  
50. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws.  
51. Power to remove difficulties.  
52. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  4 
 THE BIHAR AND WEST BENGAL (TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1956  
[1st September, 1956.]  
An Act to provide for the transfer of certain territories from Bihar to West Bengal and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Bihar and West B engal (Transfer of Territories)                     
Act, 1956.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of November, 1956;  
(b) “article” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 19 50); 
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in th e whole or in any part of Bihar or West 
Bengal;  
(f) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “population ratio ” means such ratio as the Central Government may, by notified order ,  
specify to be the ratio between the population as ascertained at the last census of the State of Bihar 
excluding the transferred territories and the population as so ascertained of the transferred territories;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by  rules m ade under this Act;  
(i) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State 
means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(j) “transferred territories ” means the territories tr ansferred from the State of Bihar to the State of 
West  Bengal by section 3;  
(k) “treasury” includes a sub -treasury.  
PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories from Bihar to West Bengal .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall 
be added to the State of West Bengal the territories which on the 1st day of March, 1956, were    
comprised in — 
(a) that portion of Kishanganj sub -division of Purnea district which lies to the east of the 
boundary line demarcated in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) by an authority 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government an d that portion of Gopalpur than a of the said 
district which lies to the east or north, as the case may be, of the said boun dary line; and  
(b) Purulia sub -division of Manbhum district, excluding Chas than a, Chandil than a and Patamda 
police station of Barabhum thana;  
and the said territories shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Bihar.  5 
 (2) The boundary line referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be so demarcated as to be generally two 
hundred yards to the west of the highway in Purnea district connecting Dalkola, Kishanganj and Chopra 
with Siliguri in Darjeeling district and two hundered yards to the south or s outh-west of the highway in 
Purnea district connecting Dalkola and Karandighi with Raiganj in West Dinajpur district:  
Provided that the boundary line shall be so demarcated as not to cut across any village or town:  
Provided further that from the point wher e the first -mentioned highway meets the southern boundary 
of Kishanganj municipality to the point where it leaves the northern boundary of that municipality, the 
boundary line shall be the same as the boundary of that municipality on the east.  
(3) The terr itory specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, and form part of, 
Darjeeling district, and the territory specified in clause ( b) of that sub -section shall form a separate district 
to be known as Purulia district within Burdwan divisi on of the State of West Bengal.  
(4) Nothing in sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to affect the power of the State Government to alter 
after the appointed day the name, extent and boundaries of any district or division in the State of West 
Bengal.  
4. Amendmen t of First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, in Part A, in the description of the territories of States, — 
(a) after the paragraph relating to the territory of the State of Assam, the followi ng paragraphs 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
“The territory of the State of Bihar shall comprise the territories which immediately before 
the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Bihar or were 
being administered as if the y formed part of that Province, but shall not include the territories 
specified in sub -section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) 
Act, 1956.  
The territory of the State of West Bengal shall comprise the territories which immediately 
before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West 
Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of 
Chandernagore as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, 
and also the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal 
(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 .”; 
(b) in the 1st paragraph, the words, brackets, letter and figures “and in the case of the State of 
West Bengal, shall also comprise the territory of Chandernagore as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 
of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954, ” shall be omitted.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
Council of States  
5. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution , in the Table of Seats , for the entries in the second column relating, to Bihar 
and West Bengal, the entries “22” and “16” shall , respectively, be substituted . 
6. Bye-election s to fill vacancies in the Council of States .—As soon as may be after the appointed 
day, bye -elections shall be held to fill the vacancies existing on t hat day in the seats allotted to Bihar and 
West Bengal.  
7. Term of office of members of the Council of States .—In order that, as nearly as may be,         
one-third of the members of the Council of States may retire on the 2nd day of April, 1958, and on the 
expiration of every second year thereafter, the President shall, after consultation with the Election 
Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the terms of office of the 
members elected under section 6.  
  6 
 House of the peo ple 
8. Provision as to existing House of the People .—Nothing in section 3 shall be deemed to affect the 
extent of the constituency of any sitting member of the existing House of the People from Bihar.  
Legislative Assemblies  
9. Allocation of certain sitting  members of the Bihar Legislative Assembly .—The sitting members 
of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar representing the T hakurganj, Karandighi, Para -cum-Chas and 
Barabazar -cum-Chandil constituencies shall, notwithstanding the reduction in the extent of those  
constituencies by the transfer of portions thereof to West Bengal, continue to be members of the 
Legislative Assembly of Bihar; and the sitting members of that Assembly representing any other 
constituency lying wholly or partly in the transferred territor ies shall, as from the appointed day, be 
deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of West Bengal and cease to be members of the 
Legislative Assembly of Bihar.  
10. Duration of Legislative Assemblies of Bihar and West Bengal .—The changes in th e 
composition of the Legislative Assemblies of Bihar and West Bengal under section 9 shall not affect their 
duration as provided in clause ( 1) of Article 172.  
Legislative Councils  
11. Bihar Legislative Council .—(1) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Bihar) Order, 1951, to the State of Bihar, B hagalpur division or Chota Nagpur division shall be 
construed as excluding the transferred territories from that State or division, as the case may be.  
(2) Every sitting member of the Legi slative Council of Bihar representing a council constituency the 
extent of which is altered by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have 
been elected to the said Council by that constituency as so altered.  
12. West Benga l Legislative Council .—(1) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951, to the State of West Bengal, Burdwan division or Darjeeling 
district shall be construed as including the transferred territories to that State , division or district, as the 
case may be.  
(2) In the Table appended to the said Order, in the entry in the second column, against West Bengal 
West (Graduates) Constituency, after the word “Bankura”, the word “Purulia” shall be inserted.  
(3) Every sitting  member of the Legislative Council of West Bengal representing a council 
constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, as from the 
appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by tha t constituency as so altered.  
Delimitation of Constituencies  
13. Allocation of seats in the House of the People and assignment of seats to State Legislative 
Assemblies .—The number of seats in the House of the People allotted to Bihar and to West Bengal and  
the number of seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each of those States by order of the 
delimitation Commission under the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952  (1 of 1952) , shall be modified as 
follows:— 
 
 Number of seats in the House of the 
People  Number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly  
Bihar   . .        . .       . .        . .  53 318 
West Bengal    . .      . .        . .  36 252 
 
14. Modification of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders .—As soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, the President may, by notified order, make such modifications in the 7 
 Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, as he 
thinks fit, having regard to the transfer of territories effected by section 3.  
15. Determination of population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .—(1) After the said 
Orders have been so modified, the population as at the last census of the Scheduled Castes and of the 
Scheduled Tribes in Bihar and West Bengal shall be ascertained or estimated by the census authority in 
such manner as may be prescribed and shall be notified ” by that authority in the Gazette of India.  
(2) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the relevant population figures as 
ascertained at the last census and shall supersede any figures previously published.  
16. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the 
Central Government shall, by notified order, appoint an authority — 
(a) to determine on the basis of the population figures notified under section 15 the number of 
seats to be reserved for the Schedule d Castes and the Scheduled Tribes of Bihar and of West Bengal 
in the House of the People and in the legislative Assembly of each of those States having regard to the 
relevant provisions of the Constitution and of this Act; and  
(b) to revise to such extent as may be necessary or expedient having regard to the said provisions, 
the orders of the delimitation Commission made under section 8 of the Delimitation Commission     
Act, 1952  (81 of 1952) , with respect to Bihar and West Bengal.  
(2) The said authority s hall perform its functions in such manner and shall follow such procedure, as 
may be prescribed.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT S 
17. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Calcutta High Court .—(1) 
Except as hereinafter provided, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court at Calcutta shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the 
transferred territories; and  
(b) the High Court at Patna shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the 
transferred territories.  
(2) Such proceedin g spending in the High Court at Patna immediately before the appointed day as are 
certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of 
action and other circumstances to be proceedings which ought to be hea rd and decided by the High Court 
at Calcutta shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court at Calcutta.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Cou rt at Patna shall have, and the High Court at Calcutta shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, 
hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review 
and other proceedings, where any such proceedings s eek any relief in respect of any order passed by the 
High Court at Patna before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Patna, it appears 
to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought  to be transferred to the High Court at Calcutta, he 
shall order that they shall be so transferred and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred 
accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Patna — 
(a) before  the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court at Calcutta by 
virtue of sub -section ( 2) or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue 
of sub -section  (3), shall, for all purposes,  have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Patna, 
but also as an order made by the High Court at Calcutta.  8 
 18. Right to appear in any proceedings transferred to Calcutta High Court .—Any person who 
immediately before the appointed day is an adv ocate entitled to practise in the High Court at Patna and 
was authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court at 
Calcutta under section 17 shall have the right to appear in the High Court at Calcutta in relation t o those 
proceedings.  
19. Interpretation .—For the purposes of sections 17 and 18, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court at Patna until that Court has 
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to  the taxation of the cost 
of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
Court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
20. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred Appropriation Acts .—(1) As from 
the appointed day any Act passed by the Legislature of West Bengal before that day for the appropriation 
of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of the St ate to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of 
the financial year 1956 -57 shall have effect also in relation to the transferred territories, and it shall be 
lawful for the State Government to spend any amount in those territories out of the amount a uthorised by 
such Act to be expended for any service in that State.  
(2) The Governor of West Bengal may, after the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in the tra nsferred 
territories for any period not extending beyond the 31st clay of March, 1957.  
21. Distribution of revenues .—Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution)                   
Act, 1953  (3 of 1953) , and paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of the Constituti on (Distribution of Revenues)            
Order, 1953 shall, in respect of the financial year 1956 -57 have effect subject to such modifications as the 
President may, by notified order, specify, having regard to the transfer of territories effected by sectio n 3 
of this Act.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
22. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods in the transferred territories belonging to the State of Bihar shall, as from the appointed 
day, pass to the State of West Bengal.  
(2) Any unissued stores of any class in Bihar shall be divided between West Bengal and Bihar in 
proportion to the total indents for stores of that class made in the period of three years ending w ith the 
31st day of March, 1956 for the transferred territories and for the rest of Bihar.  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to stores held for specific purposes such as use or 
utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or undert akings or on particular works under construction.  
(3) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property and the expression “goods” does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.  
23. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of Bihar and the 
credit balances of Bihar with the Reserve Bank of India immediately before the appointed day shall be 
divided between that State and West Bengal according to  the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall he effected by adjusting the credit balances of 
Bihar and West Bengal in  the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the appointed day.  9 
 24. Arrears of taxes .—The right of Bihar to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property situate in 
the transferred territories, including land revenue, shall belong to West Bengal and the right of Bihar to 
recover arrears of any other tax or duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in 
the transferred territories shall also belong to West Bengal . 
25. Right to recover loans and advances .—The right to recover any l oans or advances made before 
the appointed day by Bihar to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in the transferred 
territories shall belong to West Bengal.  
26. Credits in certain funds .—The investments in the cash balance investments acco unt, the famine 
relief fund and the general fund of Bihar and the sums at the credit of Bihar in the central road fund shall 
be divided between Bihar and West Bengal according to the population ratio; and the investments in any 
special fund the objects of which are confined to the transferred territories or any part thereof shall pass to 
West Bengal.  
27. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings .—(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of Bihar located in the t ransferred territories shall pass to West 
Bengal.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by Bihar for any such commercial or industrial 
undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall also pass to West 
Beng al. 
28. Public debt .—(1) The public debt of Bihar attributable to loans raised by the issue of 
Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day shall 
continue to be the debt of Bihar : 
Provided that — 
(a) West Bengal  shall be liable to pay to Bihar a share of the sums due from time to time for the 
servicing and repayment of the public debt; and  
(b) for the purpose of determining the said share, the said debt shall be deemed to be divided 
between Bihar and West Bengal as if it were a debt referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The public debt of Bihar attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, the Reserve 
Bank of India or any other bank before the appointed day shall be divided between Bihar and West 
Bengal i n proportion to the total expenditure on a ll capital works and other capital outlays incurred up to 
the appointed day in the territories of Bihar excluding the transferred territories and in the transferred 
territories, respectively:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, only expenditure on assets for which capital accounts 
have been kept shall be taken into account.  
(3) Where a sinking fund or depreciation fund is maintained by Bihar for the repayment for any loan 
raised by it, the securities he ld in respect of investments made from that fund shall be divided between 
Bihar and West Bengal in the same proportion as the public debt referred to in sub -section (2). 
(4) In this section, the expression “Government security means a security created and issued for the 
purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified or prescribed under clause ( 2) of 
section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944  (18 of 19 44). 
29. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of Bihar to refund any tax or duty on property 
situate in the transferred territories, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of 
West Bengal and the liability of Bihar to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess in any case 
where the place of asse ssment of that tax or duty is in the transferred territories shall also be the liability 
of West Bengal.  
30. Deposits .—The liability of Bihar in respect of any civil deposit or local fund deposit made in the 
transferred territories shall, as from the appoi nted day, be the liability of West Bengal.  10 
 31. Provident Funds .—The liability of Bihar in respect of the provident fund account of any 
Government servant who, being in service on the appointed day, is permanently allotted to West Bengal 
shall, as from that  day, be the liability of West Bengal.  
32. Pensions .—The liability of Bihar in respect of pensions shall be apportioned between that State 
and West Bengal in accordance with the provisions contained in the Schedule.  
33. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Bihar has made any contract in the 
exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State that contract shall be deemed to have been 
made in the exercise of the executive power — 
(a) of Bihar, if the purposes of the contra ct are, as from the appointed day, exclusively purposes 
of that State;  
(b) of West Bengal, if the purposes of the contract are , as from that day, exclusively purposes of 
that State; and  
(c) of Bihar, in any other case;  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of Bihar, be rights or liabilities of Bihar or of 
West Bengal, as the case may be:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred t o in clause ( c), the initial allocation of rights and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between the two States, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order d irect.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any Court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and,  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations, and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
34. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, Bihar 
is subject to any liability in respect of actionable wrong other than breach of contract, that liability 
shall,— 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the transferred territories, be a liability of West 
Bengal;  
(b) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories of Bihar excluding the transferred 
territories, be a liability of Bihar; and  
(c) in any other case, be initially a liability of Bihar, but subject to such financial adjustment a s 
may be agreed upon between that State and West Bengal, or in default of such agreement, as the 
Central Government may by order direct.  
35. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies .—Where, immediately before the appointed 
day, Bihar is liable as g uarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society, that 
liability shall — 
(a) if the area of the society's operations is limited to the transferred territories, be a liability of 
West Bengal; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be  a liability of Bihar.  11 
 36. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
37. Power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—
Where either Bihar or West Bengal becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes 
subject to any liability and the Central Government, on a reference  made within a period of three years 
from the appointed day by either of the States, is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property 
or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribution towards 
that liability should be made by the other State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such 
manner between the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability of such 
contribution in respect thereof, as the Cen tral Government may, after consultation with the two State 
Governments, by order determine.  
38. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable by either 
Bihar or West Bengal to the other State by virtue of the provisions of this Part shall be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable.  
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
39. State Financial Corporations .—(1) As from the appointed day, the Financial Corporations 
constituted under the State Fina ncial Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the States of Bihar and 
West Bengal shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States with their areas as altered by the 
provisions of section 3.  
(2) Bihar shall be liable to pay to West Bengal on acco unt of its share of the paid -up capital of the 
Bihar State Financial Corporation such amount as the Central Government may by order determine.  
40. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding an ything contained in section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , a permit 
granted by the State Transport Authority of Bihar or by any Regional Transport Authority in Bihar shall, 
if such permit was immediately before the appointed day valid and effective in any area within the 
transferred territories, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to 
the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be necessary for any 
such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of West Bengal or by any Regional 
Transport Authority in West Bengal for the purpose of validating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with th e State Governments, add to, 
amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted.  
(2) No toll, entrance fee or other charge of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transpor t vehicle for its operations in the transferred territories under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was immediately before that day exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fee or 
other charge for its operations beyond the boundaries of Bihar:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with both the State Governments, 
authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fee or other charge, as the case may be.  
41. Provisions relating to services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is 
serving in connection with the affairs of Bihar shall, as from that day, continue so to serve, unless he is 
required by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in connection with 
the affairs of West Be ngal.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall by general or special 
order determine the State to which every person provisionally allotted to West Bengal shall be finally 
allotted for service and the date from which such  allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken 
effect.  
  12 
 (3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to Bihar or West 
Bengal shall, if he is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in that St ate from such 
date as may be agreed upon between the two State Governments and in default of such agreement, as may 
be determined by the Central Government.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect after the appointed day the operation of the 
provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions 
of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of Bihar or of West Bengal:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediate ly before the appointed day to the case of 
any person provisionally or finally allotted to West Bengal under this section shall not be varied to his 
disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may at  any time before or after the appointed day give such directions to 
either State Government as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the 
foregoing provisions of this section and the State Government shall comply with such dir ections.  
42. Provisions as to the continuance of officers in the same posts .—Every person who, 
immediately before the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in 
connection with the affairs of Bihar in any area within the t ransferred territories shall continue to hold the 
same post or office in West Bengal, and shall be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to 
that post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, West Bengal:  
Provided tha t nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, after the 
appointed day, from passing in relation to any such person any order affecting his continuance in such 
post or office.  
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
43. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of section 3 shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, a nd territorial references in any such law to Bihar or West Bengal shall, until otherwise provided 
by a competent legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories within 
that State immediately before the appointed day.  
44. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facili tating the application of any law in relation to 
Bihar or West Bengal, the appropriate Government may , before the expiration of one year from the 
appointed day, by order make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or 
amendm ent, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to 
the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent authority or 
competent legislature.  
Explanation. —In this section, t he expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government.  
45. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or  insufficient provision has been 
made for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any Court, tribunal or authority, required 
or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to Bihar 
or West B engal, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or 
proper in regard to the matter before the Court, tribunal or authority.  
46. Power to name authorities, etc. for exercising statutory functions .—The Government o f West 
Bengal may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, as from 
the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under any law in force on 
that day in any part of the transferred  territories as may be mentioned in that notification, and such law 
shall have effect accordingly.  
  13 
 47. Legal proceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Bihar is a party 
to any legal proceedings with respect to any property rig hts or liabilities transferred to the State of West 
Bengal under this Act, that State shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of Bihar as a party to 
those proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may continu e 
accordingly.  
48. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a Court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer — 
(a) in any area which on that day remains within Bihar shall, if  it is a proceeding relating 
exclusively to any part of the transferred territories, stand transferred to the correspond ing Court, 
tribunal authority or Officer in West Bengal; and  
(b) in any area which on that day falls within the transferred territories  shall, if it is a proceeding 
relating exclusively to any part of the territories remaining within Bihar, stand transferred to the 
corresponding Court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State.  
(2) if any question arises as to whether any proceeding sh ould stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the Court, tribunal, 
authority or officer before which, or before whom, such proceeding is pending on the appointed day , is 
functioning and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “Corresponding Court, tribunal authority or officer ” in a State means — 
(i) the Court, tribunal, authority  or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such Court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed day 
by the Government of Bihar, to be the corresponding Court, tribunal authority  or officer.  
49. Right of pleaders to practise in certain Courts .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate Courts in the transferred 
territories shall, for a period of six months  from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those 
Courts, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those Courts 
has been transferred to West Bengal.  
50. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other  laws.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
51. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may by order do anything not inconsistent with such provision which appear to him to 
be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
52. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
1[(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule , for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  14 
   
THE SCHEDULE  
(Sec section 32)  
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the States of Bihar and West Bengal 
shall, in respect of pensions granted by Bihar before the appointed day, pay the pensions drawn in its 
treasuries.  
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection 
with the affairs of Bihar who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before th e appointed 
day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of 
Bihar.  
3. There shall be computed in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 
the 31st day of March, 1957 and i n respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in 
respect of pensions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, that total, representing the liability of Bihar in 
respect of pensions shall be apportioned between Bihar and West Bengal in the population ratio, and the 
State paying more than its due share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by the other State.  
4. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed 
day in connection with the affai rs of Bihar, and retiring on or after that day, shall be the liability of the 
State which grants him the pension; but the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such 
officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of Biha r shall be allocated between Bihar 
and West Bengal in the population ratio, and the Government which grants the pension shall be entitled to 
receive from the other Government its share of this liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appoin ted day for some period in connection with the 
affairs of Bihar and for some period in connection with the affairs of West Bengal, the Government other 
than the one granting the pension shall reimburse to the Government by which the pension  is granted an 
amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to his service after the appointed day the 
same ratio as the period of his qualifying service after the appointed day under the reimbursing State 
bears to the total qualifying service after the a ppointed day reckoned for the purposes of pension.  
5. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed as including a reference to the 
commuted value of the pension.  
--------------------------The Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI TENANTS (TEMPORARY PROTECTION) ACT, 1956  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Act not to apply to certain premises . 
4. Temporary protection to certain classes of tenants  from eviction . 
5. Exclusion of time for limitation . 
  2 
 THE DELHI TENANTS (TEMPORARY PROTECTION) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO.  97 OF 1956  
[29th December 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the temporary protection of certain classes of tenants in the Union 
Territory of Delhi from eviction.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and duration .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Tenants 
(Temporary Protection) Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the areas in the Union territory of Delhi to which the Rent Control Act extends for 
the time being:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall be deemed to extend to any area declared to be a slum area 
under any law for the time being in force . 
(3) It shall come into force on such  date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2[(4) It shall cease to have effect, — 
(a) as respects premises other than vacant ground, on  the 11th day of February, 1959;  
(b) as respects premises which are vacant ground, on the 11th day of February, 1960;  
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cess er of operation of this Act and 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , shall apply upon such cesser of operation as if it 
had then been repealed by a Central Act.]  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “premises” means any premises as defined in clause ( g) of section 2 of the Rent Control Act, 
and includes any vacant ground;  
(b) “Rent Control Act ” means the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act, 1952  (38 of 1952) ; 
(c) words used, but not defined in this Act and defined in the Rent Control Act, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act, subject to the modification that the word 
“premises” as used in that Act shall be construed as defined in clau se (a) of this section.  
3. Act not to apply to certain premises .—Nothing in this Act shall apply — 
(a) to any premises the standard rent of which, or, where there is no standard rent, the rent 
payable by the tenant in respect of which, exceeds rupees one hu ndred per month;  
(b) to any premises belonging to the Government;  
(c) to any tenancy or other like relationship created by a grant from the Government in respect of 
any premises taken on lease, or requisitioned, by the Government;  
(d) to any premises exemp ted from the operation of the provisions of the Rent Control Act by 
virtue of section 39 thereof; or  
(e) to any premises belonging to the Delhi Improvement Trust.  
  
                                                           
1. 11th February, 1957, vide notification No. E.V. 15(5)/55 -PF, dated 8th February, 1957,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 1.  
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 1958, s. 53, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 9 -2-1959).  3 
 4. Temporary protection to certain classes of tenants from eviction .—So long as this Act remains 
in force, no decree or order, whether passed before or after the commencement of this Act, for the 
recovery of possession of any premises shall be executed against any person except in the fol lowing 
cases, namely :— 
(i) where the decree or order is on one or more of the grounds specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and 
(e) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 13 of the Rent Control Act;  
(ii) where the decree or order is on the ground that the tenant has, whether before or after the 
commencement of the Rent Control Act, caused or permitted to be caused substantial damage to the 
premises; or  
(iii)where the decree or order relates to any vacant ground and has been passed on any ground 
similar to any of those referred in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii). 
Explanation. —Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing the execution of any 
decree or order passed on any of the grounds specified in this section by reason merely of the fact that 
decree or order is based also on some other ground  not specified in this section.  
5. Exclusion of time for limitation .—In computin g the period of limitation pre scribed for an 
application for the execution of any decree or order which cannot be executed by reason of the provisions 
contained in this Act, th e time during which this Act remains in force shall be excluded.  
 
--------------------------The Faridabad Development Corporation Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE FARIDABAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1956  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CORPORATION  
3. Incorporation.  
4. Constitution of the Corporation.  
5. Term and conditions of service of member . 
6. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as, member of the Corporation.  
7. Temporary absence of any member.  
8. Vacancies amongst members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings of 
the Corporation.  
9. Committees of the Corporation.  
10. Meetings of the Corporation . 
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Corporation . 
12. Appointment of Administrator and other officer of the Corporation . 
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
13. General duty of the Corporation . 
14. Powers of the Corporation . 
15. Capital of the Corporation . 
16. Grants and loans to the Corporation . 
17. Vesting of property in the Corporation . 
18. Repayment of capital and loan with interest . 
19. Corporation to have rights and liabilities of the Central Government in certain case s. 
20. Fund of the Corporation . 
21. Provision for depreciation and reserve and other funds . 
22. Power of the Corporation to spend . 
23. Budget . 
24. Annual report . 
25. Accounts and audit . 
26. Amount due to the Corporation to be first  charge . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Direction . 
28. Returns and reports . 
29. Mode of recovery of moneys due to the Corporation . 2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Delegation of powers . 
31. Members and officers of the Corporation to be public servants . 
32. Removal of disqualification for membership of Parliament . 
33. Bar of legal proceedings.  
34. Validation of certain transactions . 
35. Power to remove difficulties . 
36. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE FARIDABAD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 90 OF 1956  
[28th December , 1956.]  
An Act to provide for  the establishment and regulation of a trading Corporation for the purpose 
of carrying on and promoting trade and industry in the town of Faridabad, assisting in the 
rehabilitation of displaced persons settled therein and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Sh ort title .―This Act may be called the Faridabad Dev elopment Corporation Act, 1956.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires, ― 
(a) “Corporation ” means t he Faridabad Development Corpo ration established under sec tion 3;   
(b) “displaced person” means any person who, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of 
India and Pakistan or on account of civil disturbances or the fear o f such disturbances in any area  now 
forming part of Pakistan, has, after the 1st day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced from, his place 
of residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in India;  
(c) “Faridabad” means the new township at Faridabad in the district of Gurgaon in the State of 
1[Haryana], the area of which is described in the Schedule;  
(d) “member” means a member of the Faridabad Development Corporation and includes its 
Chairman;  
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed b y rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CORPORATION  
3. Incorporation .―(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Corporation by the name of the 
Faridabad Development Corporation.  
(2) The said Corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, 
and shall by the said name sue and to be sued.  
4. Constitution of the Corporation .―The Corp oration shall consist of a Chairman and such other 
members, being not less than four and not more than eight, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
5. Term and co nditions of service of member .―(1) The term of office and conditions of service of 
the Chairman and other members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairman or any other member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to 
the Central Government, but he shall continue in office  until the appointment of his successor is no tified 
in the Official Gazette.  
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of the Chairman or any other member under  
sub-section ( 2) or for any other reason shall be filled by fresh appointment.  
6. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as, member of the Corporat ion.―A 
person shall be disqualified for being appointed or for continuing as a member of the Corporation if he 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Punjab Reorganisation and Delhi High Court (Adaptation of Laws on Uni on Subjects) Order, 1968, for “Punjab” 
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  4 
 has, directly or indirectly, any interest in a subsisting contr act made with, or in any work being done, for, 
the Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a direct or) in an incorporated company:  
Provided that where he is a shareholder, he shall disclose to the Central Government the nature and 
extent of shar es held by him in such company.  
7. Temporary abse nce of any member .―If any member of the Corporation is by infirmity or 
otherwise rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in 
circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, the Central Government may appoint 
another person to act i n his place during his absence.  
8. Vacancies amongst members or defect in the constitution not to invalidate acts or 
proceedings of the Corporation .―No act or proceeding of the Corporation shall be invalid by reason 
only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any defect i n the constitution thereof.  
9. Committees of the Corporation .―The Corporation may constitute such committees for general 
or special purposes as the Corporation deems necessary to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
10. Meetings of the Corporation .―(1) The Corporation shall meet for the transaction of business at 
such times a nd places as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Chairman may , whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon the written requisition of not 
less than two members, call a special meetin g. 
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, any member chosen by the members present from among 
themselves, shall preside a t a meeting of the C orporation.  
(3) All questions which come before any meeting of the Corporation shall be decided by majority of 
votes of the members present, and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his absence, any 
other person presiding, shall  have a second or casting vote.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the  Corporation .―All orders and 
decisions of the Corporation sha ll be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member 
authori sed by the Corporation in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the Corporation shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Administrator or any other office r of the Corporation authori sed in 
like manner in this behalf.  
12. Appointment of Admini strator and ot her officer of the Corporation .―(1) There shall be an 
Administrator of the Corporation who shall be appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(2) The Administrator shall be the chief executive officer of the Corporation and all other officers of 
the Corporati on shall be subordinate to him.  
(3) The Administrator shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Corporation or of any 
of its committees but shall not have the right to vote at the meetings of the Corporati on or of any of its 
committees:  
Provided that when one of the members of the Corporation is appointed under  
sub-section ( 1) as the Administrator, such Administrator shall have all the rig hts and privileges of a 
member.  
(4) The Corporation may appoint such other officers as i t may consider necessary for the efficient 
performance of its func tions under this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
13. General duty of  the Corporation .―It shall be the general duty of the Corporation to carry on 
and promote trade, business and industry in Faridabad, to assist in the rehabilitation of displaced persons 
settled therein and to manage and develop the property of the U nion vested in the Corporation.  
14. Powers of the Corpora tion.―(1) The Corporation may exercise all such  powers as may be 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying ou t its functions under this Act.  5 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such  power shall include the 
power ― 
(a) to acquire and hold such property, both movable and immovable, as the Corporation may 
deem necessary for efficiently performing its functions under this Act and to make improvements in 
such property and to transfer by way of sale, lease or otherwise any such property;  
(b) to carry on or promote any trade, business or industry;  
(c) to give financial or other assistance to persons to enable them to carry on trade, business or 
industry in Faridabad primarily with a view to providing employment to, and rehabilitating, dis placed 
persons settled therei n; 
(d) to construct or cause to be constructed residential or other buildings and to sell or let such 
buildings or cause them to be sold or let, on s uch terms as may be prescribed;  
(e) to advance loans on such terms and for such  purposes as may be prescrib ed; 
(f) to supply or cause to be supplied, in accordance with the law for the time being in force, 
electrical energy for domestic and industria l purposes at reasonable rates;  
(g) to take such other measures as the Corporation may deem necessary for the reh abilitation of 
displace d persons settled in Faridabad;  
(h) to take such steps as may be necessary for improving the economic and social conditions o f 
the inhabitants of Faridabad.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the exercise of any power or the pe rformance of any function 
by any local authority having  jurisdiction in Faridabad.  
15. Capital of the Corporation .―All non -recurring expenditure incurred by the Central Government 
or the body known as the Faridabad Development Board for and in connection with the development of 
Faridabad or for any of the purposes referred to in this Act upto the date of the establishment of the 
Corporation and declared to be capital expenditure by the Central Government shall be treated as the 
capital provided by the Cent ral Government to the Corporation.  
16. Grant s and loans to the Corporation .―The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make such grants and advance such loans to the Corporation as 
the Central Government may deem necessary for the performance of the functions of the Corporation 
under this Act; and all grants made and all loans advanced shall be on such terms and conditions as the 
Central Government may determine.  
17. Vesting of property in the Corporation .―All property, assets and funds owned or acquired by 
the Central Government or purporting to have been owned or acquired by the body known as the 
Faridabad Development Board for the purposes of the development of Faridabad or for any of the 
purposes referr ed to in this Act before the establishment of the Corporation shall, on such establishment, 
vest in the Corporation unless the Central Government otherwise directs in respects of any part of such 
property, assets or funds.  
18. Repayment of capital and loan  with interest .―The Corporation shall repay, at such intervals 
and on such terms as the Central Government may determine, the amount of capital provided under 
section 15 and all loans advanced under section 16 with interest at such rate as may, from time t o time, be 
fixed by that Government and such repayment of capital or loan or payment of interest shall be deemed to 
be part of the expenditure of the Corporation.  
19. Corporation to have rights and liabilities of the Cent ral Government in certain case s.―(1) 
All rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Government which, whether arising out of any 
contract or otherwise, were acquired or incurred by it in connection with any transaction for the 
development of Faridabad or for any of the purposes refe rred to in this Act before the establishment of the 
Corporation, shall be deemed to have been acquired or incurred by the Corporation and shall be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations, respectively, of the Corpo ration.  6 
 (2) All suits or other legal proce edings instituted or which might but for the issue of the notification 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 has  been instituted by or against the Central Government may be 
continued or instituted by or against t he Corporation.  
20. Fund of the Corporation .―(1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all receipts of the 
Corporation shall be carried thereto and all payments by the Corpo ration shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such bank or invested in such man ner as 
may be decided by the Corporation.  
21. Provision for depreciati on and reserve and other funds .―(1) The Corporation shall make such 
provision for depreciation and for reserve and other funds as the Central Governmen t may from time to 
time direct.  
(2) The management of these funds, the sums to be carried from time to time to the credit thereof and 
the application of the moneys comprised therein shall be determined in accordance with such directions as 
the Central Governme nt may from time to time issue.  
22. Pow er of the Corporation to spend .―The Corporation shall have power to spend such sums as 
it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure 
payable out of the Fund of the Corporation.  
23. Budget .―The Corporation shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be 
prescribed, a budget in respect of every financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwa rded to the Central Gover nment.  
24. Annual report .―The Corporation shall prepare in such form and at such time each year as may 
be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year and copies thereof shall be sent to the Central Government and t he Government of the State of 
Punjab.  
25. Accounts and audit .―(1) The Corporation shall cause to be maintained such books of account 
and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited at such times and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
26. Amount due to the Corporation to be first charge .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law, where a loan has been advanced to any person for the construction of a building or where a 
building has been  transferred to any person, the amount due to the Corporation on account of the loan or 
transfer together with interest thereon shall be a first charge on the building  so constructed or transferred.  
(2) The Corporation may also take such further security as it may consider necessary for advancing 
any loan or for transferring any building.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Dire ction .―For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may, from time to time , give to 
the Corporation such general or special directions as the Central Government thinks fit and in the 
performance of the functions, the Corporation shall comply with s uch directions.  
28. Returns and reports .―The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government such returns, 
statistics, accounts and other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central 
Government may from  time to time require.  
29. Mode of recovery of  moneys due to the Corporation .―When any money is due to the 
Corporation from any person, then, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, the Corporation 
may, after giving that person an opportunity of being heard, issue a certificate to the Collector of the 
amount due and the Collector shall proceed to r ecover that amount in the same manne r as an arrear of 
land revenue.  7 
 30. Delegation of powers .―The Corporation may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to 
the Chairman or any other member or any officer of the Corporation, subject to such condi tions and 
limitations (if any) as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may 
deem necessary for the efficient running of the day -to-day adm inistration of the Corporation.  
31. Members and officers of the Corporatio n to be public servants .―All members and officers of 
the Corporation shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860 ). 
32. Removal of disqualificatio n for membership of Parliament .―It is hereby declared that the 
office of the member of the Corporation shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a 
member of either House of Parliament.  
33. Bar of legal proceedings .―No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any member or 
officer of the Corporation in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  done in 
pursuance of this Act.  
34. Vali dation of certain transactions .―On the establishment of t he Corporation under  
section 3, ― 
(a) all action purporting to have been taken, and all transactions purporting to have been made, by 
or with the body known as the Faridabad Development Board (including any action or transaction by  
which any property, asset or right was purported to have been acquired or any liability or obligation, 
whether by contract or otherwise, was purported to have been incurred) shall be deemed to have been 
validly and lawfully taken or made by or with the Co rporation as if this Act were in force and the 
Corporation were in existence on the day on which such action was taken or tra nsaction was made; 
and 
(b) in particular, and without prejudice to the generalit y of the foregoing provision, ― 
(i) all property and assets vesting in the body known as the Faridabad Development Board  
shall vest in the Corporation;  
(ii) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the body known as the Faridabad Development 
Board, whether arising out of any contract or other wise, shall be the rights, liabilities and 
obligations, respec tively, of the Corporation; and  
(iii) all leases granted by, all contracts made with, and all instruments executed on behalf of, 
the body known as the Faridabad Development Board shall be deemed  to have been granted by, 
made with, or executed on behalf of, the Corporation and  shall have effect accordingly.  
35. Power to remove difficulties .―If any doubt or difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, make such provision or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the 
removal of the doubt or difficulty, and the order of the Central Government, in such cases , shall be final.  
36. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying ou t the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the term of office and other co nditions of service of members;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Administrator and other officers of the Corporation;  
(c) meetings  of the Corporation and the procedure f or conducting business thereat;  
(d) the intervals at which, and the terms on which, the capital provided or loan advanced by the 
Central Government to the Corporation may be repaid, and the rate at which interest may be paid on 
the capital provided or loan adva nced by the Central Government;  
(e) the form and manner in which the budget and the  annual report may be prepared;  
(f) the manner in which the accounts of the Corporation  may be maintained and audited;   8 
 (g) the f orm and manner in which returns, statistics, accounts and other information may be 
furni shed to the Central Government;  
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may  be, prescribed under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form  or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
________________  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section  2 (c)] 
Area of Faridabad .―Fari dabad is included within the following boundaries, namely:―  
North    ―   Karkhana garden, Railway Station and Rest House, Faridabad, buildings 
belonging to Shrimati Sushila Devi and Abadi Fetehpur Chandela.  
East   ―      Delhi -Mathura Road.  
South   ―     Abadi village Majasar.  
West    ―      Badkhal Band; Hill of villages Dabwa, Nawadah Koh and Daulatabad; Abadi 
village Saran.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005) . 
--------------------------The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Application of Act . 
3. Definitions . 
4. Over riding effect of Act . 
 
CHAPTER  II 
ADOPTION  
5. Adoptions to be regulated  by this Chapter . 
6. Requi sites of a valid adoption . 
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption . 
8. Capacity of a female Hindu to take in adoption . 
9. Person s capable of giving in adoption . 
10. Persons who may be adopted . 
11. Other conditions for a valid adoption . 
12. Effects of adoption . 
13. Right of adoptive parents to dispose of their properties . 
14. Determination of adoptive mother in certain cases . 
15. Valid adoption not to be cancelled . 
16. Presumption as to registered documents relating to adoptions . 
17. Prohibition of certain payments . 
CHAPTER III  
MAINTENANCE  
18. Maintenance of wife . 
19. Maintenance of widowed daughter -in-law. 
20. Maintenance of children and aged parents . 
21. Dependants defined . 
22. Maintenance of dependant s. 
23. Amount of maintenance . 
24. Claimant to maintenance should be a Hindu . 
25. Amount  of maintenance may be altered on change of circumstances . 
26. Debts to have priority . 
27. Maintenance when to be a charge . 
28. Effect of transfer of property on right to maintenance . 
29. [Repealed .]. 
30. Savings . 2 
 THE HINDU ADOP TIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 78 OF 19561 
[21st December , 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to adoptions  and maintenance among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as foll ows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .―(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Adopt ions and Maintenance  
Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Applic ation of Act .―(1) This Act applies ― 
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the B rahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist,  Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other perso n who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein i f this Act had not been 
passed.  
Explanation .―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by  religion, as the case 
may be: ― 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhist s, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged; 2* * *  
3[(bb) any child, leg itimate or illegitimate, who has been abandoned both by his father and mother 
or whose parentage is not known and who in either case is brought up as a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina o r 
Sikh; and]  
(c) any person who is a convert or re -convert to the Hindu, Bu ddhis t, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the 
Constitution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, otherwise directs.  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule.  
This Act has been amended in U.P. Act 57 of 1976.  
This Act shall, from a date to be notified by the administrator, come into force in Pondicherry, subject to the following 
modification:  
In section 2, after sub -section ( 2), insert:―  
“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the renoncants of 
the Union territory of Pondicherry.”  
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 45 of 1962 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-11-1962).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-11-1962).  3 
  (3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act ap plies by virtue of the 
provis ions contained in this section.  
3. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,― 
(a) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonab le or opposed to public policy: and 
Provided further that, in the case of a rule applicable only to a family, it has not b een discontinued 
by the family;  
(b) “maintenance ” includes ― 
(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and m edical attendance  and 
treatment;  
(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses o f and incident to her 
marriage;  
(c) “minor ” means a person who has not completed hi s or her age of eighteen years.  
4. Over riding effect of Act .―Save as otherwise e xpressly provided in this Act, ― 
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which  provision is made in this Act;  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the pr ovisions contained in this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ADOPTION  
5. Adoptions t o be regulated by this Chapter .―(1) No adoption shall be made after the 
commencement of this Act by or to a Hindu except in accordance with the provisions contained in this 
Chapter, and any adoption made in contravention of the  said provisions shall be void.  
(2) An adoption which is void shall neither create any rights in the adoptive family in favour of any 
person which he or she could not have acquired except by reason of the adoption, nor destroy the rights of 
any person in the family of his or her birth.  
6. Requisites of a valid adoption .―No a doption shall be valid unless — 
(i) the person adopting has the capacity, and also the right, to take in adoption;  
(ii) the person giving in adop tion has the capacity to do so;  
(iii) the person adopted is capable of being  taken in adoption; and  
(iv) the adoption is made in compliance with the other conditions mentioned in this Chapter.  
7. Capacity of a male Hindu to take in adoption .―Any male Hindu who is of sound mind and is 
not a minor has the capacity to take s on or a daughter in adoption:  
Provided that, if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the consent of his wife unless the 
wife has completely and finally renounced the word or has ceased to be a Hindu or has been declared by a 
court of competent juri sdiction to be of unsound mind.  4 
 Explanation .―If a person has more than one wife living at the time of adoption, the consent of all the 
wives is necessary unless the consent of any one of them is unnecessary for any of the reasons spec ified 
in the preceding  proviso.  
1[8. Capacity of a fe male Hindu to take in adoption .―Any female Hindu who is of sound mind 
and is not a minor has the capacity to take a son or daughter in adoption:  
Provided that, if she has a husband living, she shall not adopt a son or daughter except with the 
consent of her husband unless the husband has completely and finally renounced the world or has ceased 
to be a Hindu or has been declared by a court of compet ent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind.]  
9. Persons capable of giving in adoption .―(1) No person except the father or mother or the 
guardian of a child shall have the capacity  to give the child in adoption.  
2[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the father or the mother, if alive, shall have equal 
right to give a son or daughter in adoption:  
Provided that such right shall not be exercised by either of them save with the consent of the other 
unless one of them has completely and finally renounce d the world or has ceased to be a Hindu or has 
been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind .] 
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[(4) Where both the father a nd mother are dead or have com pletely and finally renounced the world 
or have abandoned the child or have been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound 
mind or where the parentage of the child is not known, the guardian of the child may give the child in 
adoption with the previous permission of the court to any  person i ncluding the guardian himself.]  
(5) Before granting permission to a guardian under sub -section ( 4), the court shall be satisfied that the 
adoption will be for the welfare of the child, due consideration being for this purpose given to the wishes 
of the child having regard to the age and understanding of the child and that the applicant f or permission 
has not received o r agreed to receive and that no per son has made or given or agreed to make or give to 
the applicant any payment or reward in conside ration of the adoption except such as the court may 
sanction.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section ― 
(i) the expressions “father ” and “mother ” do not include an adoptive father  and an adoptive 
mother; 5* * *  
6[(ia) “guardian ” means a person having the care of the person of a child or of both his pe rson and 
property and includes ― 
(a) a guardian appointed by the will of th e child's father or mother, and  
(b) a guardian appoint ed or declared by a court; and]  
(ii) “court”  means the city civil court or a district court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the child to  be adopted ordinarily resides.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2010, s. 3, for section 8 (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
3. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
4. Subs.  by Act 45 of 1962, s. 3, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  
5. The word “and” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.(w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  5 
 10. Persons who may be adopted .―No person shall be capable of being taken in adoption unless the 
following con ditions are fulfilled, namely: ― 
(i) he or she is a Hindu;  
(ii) he or sh e has not already been adopted;  
(iii) he or she has not been married, unless there is a custom or usage applicable to the parties 
which permits persons who are m arried being taken in ad option;  
(iv) he or she has not completed the age of fifteen years, unless there is a custom or usage 
applicable to the parties which permits persons who have completed the age of fifteen  years being 
taken in adoption.  
11. Other c onditions for a valid adoption .―In every adoption, the following con ditions must be 
complied with: ― 
(i) if the adoption is of a son, the adoptive father or mother by whom the adoption is made must 
not have a Hindu son  son’s son or son ’s son ’s son (whether by legitimate blood relationship or by 
adoption)  living at the time of adoption;  
(ii) if the adoption is of a daughter, the adoptive father or mother by whom the ad option is made 
must not have a Hindu daughter or son ’s daughter (whether by legitimate blood relationship or by 
adoption) living at the time of adoption;  
(iii) if the adoption is by a male and the person to be adopted is a female, the adop tive father is at 
least twenty -one years olde r than the person to be a dopted;  
(iv) if the adoption is by a female and the person to be adopted is a male, the adoptive mother is at 
least twenty -one years olde r than the person to be adopted;  
(v) the same child may not be adopted simulta neously by two or more persons;  
(vi) the child to be adopted must be actually given and taken in adoption by the parents or 
guardian concerned or under their authority with intent to transfer the child  from the family of its 
birth 1[or in the case of an abandoned child or a child whose parentage is not known, from the place 
or family where it has been brought up]  to the family of its adoption:  
Provided that the performance of datta homam  shall not be essential to  the validity of an 
adoption.  
12. Effects of adoption .―An adopted child shall be deeme d to be the child of his or her adoptive 
father or mother for all purposes with effect from the date of the adoption and from such date all the ties 
of the child in the family of his or her birth shall be deemed to be severed and replaced by those created 
by the a doption in the adoptive family:  
Provided that ― 
(a) the child cannot marry any person whom he or she could not have married if he or she had 
continued in the family of his or her birth;  
(b) any property which vested in the adopted child before the adoption shall continue to vest in 
such person subject to the obligations, if any, attaching to the ownership of such property, including 
the obligation to maintain relatives in  the family of his or her birth;  
(c) the adopted child shall not divest any per son of any estate which vested in him or her before 
the adoption.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -11-1962).  6 
 13. Right of adoptive parents to dispose of their properties .―Subject to any agreement to the 
contrary, an adoption does not deprive the adoptive father or mother of the power to dispose of  his or her 
property by transfer inter vivos  or by will.  
14. Determination of a doptive mother in certain cases .―(1)Where a  Hindu who has a wife living 
adopts a child, she shall be deemed to be  the adopti ve mother.  
(2) Where an adoption has been made with the consent of more than one wife, the seniormost in 
marriage among them shall be deemed to be the adoptive mother and the others to be step -mothers.  
(3) Where a widower or a bachelor adopts a child, any wife whom he subsequently marries shall be 
deemed to be the step -mother of the adopted child.  
(4) Where a window or an unmarried woman adopts a child, any husband whom she marries 
subsequently shall be deemed to be the step -father of the adopted child.  
15.Vali d adoption not to be cancelled .―No adoption which has been validly made can be cancelled 
by the adoptive father or mother or any other person, nor can the adopted child renounce his or her status 
as such and return to the family of his or her birth.  
16. Pres umption as to registered documents relating to adop tion.―Whenever any document 
registered under any law for the time being in force is produced before any court purporting to record an 
adoption made and is signed by the person giving and the person taking the child in adoption, the court 
shall presume that the adoption has been made in compliance with the provisions of this Act unless  and 
until it is disproved.  
17. Prohibition of certain payments .―(1) No person shall receive or agree to receive any payment 
or other reward in consideration of the adoption of any person, and no person shall make or give or agree 
to make or give to any other person any payment or reward the receipt of which  is prohibited by this 
section.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provis ions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six mont hs, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted without the previous sanction of the State 
Government or an officer auth orised by the S tate Government in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
MAINTENANCE  
18. Maintenance of wife .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a Hindu wife, whether 
married before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by  her husband 
during her life time.  
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfei ting her claim to 
maintenance, ― 
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without reasonable cause and 
without  her consent or against her wish , or of wilfully neglecting her;  
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in her mind that it 
will be harmful or inju rious to live with her husband;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
 (d) if he has any other wife living;  
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or habitually  resides with 
a concubine else where;  
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by c onversion to another religion;  
(g) if there is any other cause ju stifying her living separately . 
                                                           
1. Clause (c) omitted by A ct 6 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019).  7 
 (3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance from her husband if she 
is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to anot her religion.  
19. Maintena nce of widowed daughter -in-law.―(1) A Hindu wife, whether married before or after 
the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained after the death of her husband by h er 
father -in-law: 
Provided and to the extent that she is unable to maintain herse lf out of her own earnings or other 
property or, where she has no property of her own, i s unable to obtain maintenance ― 
(a) from the estate of her husb and or her father or mother, or  
(b) from her son or daughter , if any, or his or her estate.  
(2) Any obligation under sub -section ( 1) shall not be enforceable if the father -in-law has not the 
means to do so from any coparcenary property in his possession out of which the daughter -in- law has not 
obtained any share, and any such obligation shall cease on t he rem arriage of the daughter -in-law. 
20. Maintenanc e of children and aged parents .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this section a 
Hindu is  bound, during his or her life -time, to maintain his or her legitimate or illegitimate children and 
his or her aged or infirm parents.  
(2) A legitimate or illegitimate child may claim maintenance from his or her father or mother so long 
as the child i s a minor.  
(3) The obligation of a person to maintain his or her aged or infirm parent or a daughter who is 
unmarried extends in so far as the parent or the unmarried daughter, as the case may be, is unable to 
maintain himself or herself out of his or her own earnings or other property.  
Explanation .―In this section “parent “includes a childless step -mother.  
21. Dependants defined .―For the purposes of this Chapter “dependant s” mean the follow ing 
relatives of the deceased: ― 
(i) his or  her father;  
(ii) his or her mother;  
(iii) his widow, so  long as she does not re -marry;  
(iv) his o r her son or the son of his pre deceased son or the son of a pre deceased son o f his  
pre-deceased son, so long as he is a minor: provided and to the extent that he is unable to obtain 
maintenance, in the case of a grandson from his father ’s or mother ’s estate, and in the case of a  
great -grandson, from the estate of his father or mother or fat her’s father or father ’s mother;  
(v) his or her unmarried daughter, or the unmarried daughter of his p redeceased son or the 
unmarried daughter of a predeceased son of his pre deceased son, so long as s he remains unmarried:  
provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance, in the case of a grand -daughter 
from her father ’s or mother ’s estate and in the case of a great -grand -daughter from the estate of her 
father or mother or fat her's father or father ’s mother;  
(vi) his widowed daughter: provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain mainten ance― 
(a) from the estate of her husband ; or 
(b) from her son or daught er if any, or his or her estate; or  
(c) from  her father -in-law or his father or the estate of either of them;  
(vii) any widow of his son or of a son of his pre deceased son, so long as she does not re -marry: 
provided and to the extent that she is unable to obtain maintenance from her husband ’s estate , or from 
her son or daughte r, if any, or his or her estate ; or in the case of a grandson ’s widow, also from her 
father -in-law’s estate ; 8 
 (viii) his or her minor illegitimate son,  so long as he remains a minor;  
(ix) his or her illegitimate daughter, so  long as she remains unmarried.  
22. Maintenance of dependa nts.―(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the heirs of a 
deceased Hindu are bound to maintain the dependant s of the deceased out of the estate inher ited by them 
from the deceased.  
(2) Where a dependant  has not obtained, by testamentary or intestate succession, any share in the 
estate of a Hindu dying after the commencement of this Act, the dependant  shall be entitled, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to maintenance from those who t ake the estate.  
(3) The liability of each of the persons who takes the estate shall be in proportion to the value of the 
share or part of the estate taken by him or her.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), no person who is 
himself or herself a dependant  shall be liable to contribute to the maintenance of others, if he or she has 
obtained a share or part the value of which is, or would, if the liability to contribute were enforced, 
become less than what wo uld be awarded to him or her by way of maintenance under this Act.  
23. Amount of maintenanc e.―(1) It shall be in the discretion of the court to determine whether any, 
and if so what, maintenance shall be awarded under the provisions of this Act, and in doing so the court 
shall have due regard to the considerations set out in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may 
be, so far as they are applicable.  
(2) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a wife, children or aged  on 
infirm parents under th is Act, regard shall be had to ― 
(a) the position and status of the p arties;  
(b) the re asonable wants of the claimant;  
(c) if the claimant is living separately, whether the cl aimant is justified in doing so;  
(d) the value of the claimant ’s property and any income derived from such property, or from the 
claimant's own earni ngs or from any other source;  
(e) the number of persons entitled  to maintenance under this Act.  
(3) In determining the amount of maintenance, if any, to be awarded to a dependent  under th is Act, 
regard shall be had to ― 
(a) the net value of the estate of the deceased after providi ng for the payment of his debts;  
(b) the provision, if any, made under a w ill of the deceas ed in respect of the dependant ; 
(c) the degree o f relationship between the two;  
(d) the re asonable wants of the dependant ; 
(e) the past relations between the dependant  and the deceased;  
(f) the value of the property of the dependant  and any income derived from such property; or from 
his or her ea rnings or from any other source;  
(g) the number of dependant s entitled to maintenance under this Act.  
24. Claimant to  maintenance should be a Hindu .―No person shall be entitled to claim 
main tenance under this Chapter if he or she has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion.  
25. Amount of maintenance may be alte red on change of circumstances .―The amount of 
maintenance, whether fixed by a decree of court or by agreement, either before or after the 9 
 commencement of this Act, may be altered subsequently if there is a material change in the circumstan ces 
justifying such alteration.  
26. Debts to have  priority .―Subject to the provisions contained in section 27 debts of every 
description contracted or payable by the deceased shall have priority over the claims of his dependant s for 
maintenance under this Act.  
27. Maintenance when to be a charge .―A dependant ’s claim for maintenance under this Act shall 
not be a charge on the estate of the deceased or any portion thereof, unless one has been created by the 
will of the deceased, by a decree of court, by agreement between the dependant  and the owner of the 
estate or portion, or otherwise.  
28. Effect of transfer of pr operty on right to maintenance .―Where a dependant  has a right to receive 
maintenance out of an estate and such estate or a ny part thereof is transferred, the right to receive 
maintenance may be enforced against the transferee if the transferee has notice of the right, or if the 
transfer is gratuitous ; but not against the transferee for consideration and without notice of the right.  
CHAPTER IV  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
29. [Repeals .]―Rep. by the Rep ealing and Amending Act, 1960  (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 26-11-1960 ).  
30. Savings .―Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any adoption made before the 
commencement of this Act, and the validity and effect of any such adoption shall be determined as if this 
Act had not been passed.  
--------------------------The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Act to be supplemental to Act 8 of 1890 . 
3. Application of Act . 
4. Definitions . 
5. Over -riding effect of Act . 
6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor . 
7. Natural guardianship of adopted son . 
8. Powers of natural guardian . 
9. Testamentary guardians and their powers.  
10. Incapacity of minor to act as guardian of property.  
11. De facto  guardian not to deal with minor’s property.  
12. Guardian not to be appointed for minors undivided interest in joint family property.  
13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration . 
  2 
 THE HINDU MINORITY AND GUARDIANSHIP ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1956  
[25th August , 1956 .] 
An Act to amend and codify certain parts of the law relating to minority and guardianship among 
Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 
1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and applies  also to Hindus 
domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who are outside the said territories.  
2. Act to be supplemental to Act 8 of 1890 .—The provisions of  this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in derogation of, the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890                
(8 of 1890) . 
3. Application of Act .—(1) This Act applies, — 
(a)to any person who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or AryaSamaj;  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any  other  person domiciled in the territories to which this Act extends who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion unless it is proved that any such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed.  
Explanation .—The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, or Sikhs by religion, as the case  
may be: — 
(i)any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are  Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(ii) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or 
Sikh by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to 
which such parent belongs or belonged; and  
(iii)any person who is convert or re -convert to the Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 
the members of any scheduled Tribe w ithin the meaning of clause (25) of article 366 of the Constitution 
unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazett e, otherwise directs.   
1[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shal l 
apply to the Renoncants of the Union Territory of Pondicherry. ] 
(3) The expression “Hindu ”, in any provision of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion,  is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions contained in this section.  
 4. Definitions .—In this Act, — 
(a) “minor ” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;  
(b) “guardian ” means a person having the care of the person of a minor or of his property or of 
both his person andproperty, and includes — 
(i) a natural guardian,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3( 1) and the Schedule (w.e.f. 24 -5-1968).  3 
 (ii) a guardian appointed by the will of the minor ’s father or mother,  
(iii) a guardian appointed or declared by a court, and  
(iv) a person empowered to act as such by or under any enactment relating to any Court of 
ward s. 
(c) “natural guardian ” means any of the guardians mentioned in section 6.  
5. Over -riding effect of Act .—Save as otherwise exp ressly provided in this Act, —  
(a) any  text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of that law in 
force immediately before the commencement of this Act Shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for which provision is made  in this Act.  
(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have 
effect in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act.  
6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor .—The nat ural guardians of a Hindu minor;  in respect of the 
minor's person as well as in respect of the minor ’s property (excluding his or her undivided interest in 
joint family property), are — 
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl —the father, and after him, the mother : provided that 
the custody of a  minor who has not completed the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the 
mother;  
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate unmarried girl —the mother, and after her, 
the father;  
(c) in the case of a married girl —the husband:  
Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural guardian of a minor under the provisions 
of this section — 
(a) if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or  
(b) if he has completely and finally renounced the world by becoming a hermit (vanaprastha) or 
an ascetic (yati or sanyasi).  
Explanation .—In this section , the expressions “father ” and “mother ” do not include a step -father and 
a step -mother.  
7. Natural guardianship of adopted son .—The natural guardianship of an adopted son who is a 
minor passes, on adop tion, to the adoptive father and after hi m to the adoptive mother.  
8. Powers of natural guardian .—(1) The natural guardian of a Hindu minor has power, subject to 
the provisions of this section, to do all acts which are necessary or reasonable and proper for the benefit of 
the minor or for the realization, protection or benefit of the minor's estate; but the guardian can in no case 
bind the minor by a personal covenant.  
(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the previous permission of the court, — 
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any part of the 
immovable property of the minor; or  
(b) lease any part of such property for a term exceeding five years or for a term extending more 
than one year beyond the date on whic h the minor will attain majority.  
(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a natural guardian, in contravention of sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), is voidable at the instance of the minor or any person claiming under him.  
(4) No court shall grant perm ission to the natural guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in sub -
section ( 2) except in case of necessity or for an evident advantage to the minor.  
  4 
 (5) The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890  (8 of 1890) , shall apply to and in respect of an application for  
obtaining the permission of the court under sub -section ( 2) in all respects as if it were an application for 
obtaining the permission of the court under section 29 of that Act, and in particular —           
(a) proceedings  in connection with the application shall be deemed to be proceedings under that 
Act within the meaning of section 4A thereof;  
(b) the court shall observe the procedure and have the powers specified in sub -sections ( 2), (3) 
and ( 4) of section 31 of that Ac t; and  
(c)an appeal shall lie from an order of the court refusing permission to the natural guardian to do 
any of the Acts mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of this section to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie 
from the decisions of that court.  
(6) In this section , “Court ” means the city civil court or a district court or a court empowered under 
section 4A of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890  (8 of 1890) , within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the immovable property in respect of which the applic ation is made is situate, and where the 
immovable property is situate within the jurisdiction of more than one such court, means the court within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is situate.  
9. Testamentary guardians and t heir powers .—(1) A Hindu father entitled to act as the natural 
guardian o f his minor legitimate children  may, by will appoint a guardian for any of them in respect of the 
minor ’s person or in respect of the minor ’s property (other than the undivided interest referred to in 
section 12) or in respect of both.  
(2) An appointment made under sub -section ( 1) shall have no effect if the father predeceases the 
mother, but shall revive if the mother dies without appointing, by will, any person as guardian.  
(3) A Hindu widow entitled to act as the natural guardian of her minor legitimate children, and a 
Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural guardian of her minor legitimate children by reason of the fact 
that the father has become disentitled to act as such , may, by will, appoint a guardian for any of them in 
respect of the minor ’s person or in respect of the minor ’s property (other than the undivided interest 
referred to in section 12) or in respect of both.  
(4) A Hindu mother entitled to act as the natural  guardian of her minor illegitimate children may; by 
will, appoint a guardian for any of them in respect of the minor ’s person or in respect of the minor's 
property or in respect of both.  
(5) The guardian so appointed by will has the right to act as the mi nor’s guardian after the death of 
the minor ’s father or mother, as the case may be, and to exercise all the rights of a natural guardian under 
this Act to such extent and subject to such restrictions, if any, as are specified in this Act and in the will.  
(6) The right of the guardian so appointed by will shall, where the minor is a girl, cease on her 
marriage.  
10. Incapacity of minor to act as guardian of property .—A minor shall be incompetent to act as 
guardian of the property of any minor.  
11. De facto  guardian not to deal with minor’s property .—After the commencement of this Act, 
no person shall be entitled to dispose of, or deal with, the property of a Hindu minor merely on the ground 
of his or her being the de facto  guardian of the minor.  
12. Guardian not to be appointed for minors undivided interest in joint family property .—
Where a minor has an undivided interest in joint family property and the property is under the 
management of an adult member of the family, no guardian shall be appointed for the minor in respect of 
such undivided interest:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the jurisdiction of a High Court to 
appoint a guardian in respect of such interest.  
13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration .—(1) In the appointment of declaration of 
any person as guardian of a Hindu minor by a court, the welfare of the minor shall be the paramount 
consideration.  
(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of the provisions of this Act or of any l aw 
relating to guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if the court is of opinion that his or her guardianship 
will not be for the welfare of the minor.  
--------------------------The Hindu Succession Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Application of Act.  
3. Definitions and interpretation.  
4. Overriding effect of Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
General  
5. Act not to apply to certain properties.  
6. Devolution of interest in coparcenary property.  
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tavazhi, kutumba, kavaru or illom.  
8. General rules of succession in the case of males.  
9. Order of succession among heirs in the Schedule.  
10. Distribution of property among heirs in class I of the Schedule.  
11. Distribution of property among heirs in class II of the Schedule.  
12. Order of succession among agnates and congnates.  
13. Computation of degrees.  
14. Property of a female Hindu to  be her absolute property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus.  
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution among heirs of a female Hindu.  
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkattayam  and aliyasantana  laws.  
 
General provisions relating to succession  
18. Full blood preferred to half blood . 
19. Mode of succession of two or more heirs . 
20. Right of child in womb . 
21. Presumption in cases of simultaneous deaths . 
22. Preferential right to acquire property in certain cases . 
23. [Omitted .] 
24. [Omitted .] 
25. Murderer disqualified . 
26. Convert ’s descendants disqualified . 
27. Succession when heir disqualified . 
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify . 
Escheat  
29. Failure of heirs .  2 
 CHAPTER III  
TESTAMENTARY  SUCCESSION  
SECTIONS  
30. Testamentary succession . 
CHAPTER IV  
REPEALS  
31. [Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 30 OF 19561 
[17th June , 1956.]  
An Act to amend and codify the law relating to int estate succession among Hindus.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .―(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Application of Act .―(1) This Act applies ― 
(a) to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a 
Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the B rahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj,  
(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion, and  
(c) to any other pers on who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it is 
proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or 
usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein i f this Act  had not been 
passed.  
Explanation .―The following persons are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion, as the case 
may be: ― 
(a) any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents are Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas or 
Sikhs by religion;  
(b) any c hild, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh 
by religion and who is brought up as a member of the tribe, community, group or family to which 
such parent belongs or belonged;  
(c) any person who is a convert or r econvert to the Hindu, Bu ddhist, Jaina or Sikh religion.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the meaning of clause ( 25) of article 366 of the 
Cons titution unless the Central Government, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, otherwise directs.  
(3) The expression “Hindu ” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a person 
who, though not a Hindu by religion,  is, nevertheless, a person to whom this Act applies by virtue of the 
provisions  contained in this section.  
3. De finitions and interpretation .―(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “agnate ”―one person is said to be an “agnate ” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoption wholly through males;  
(b) “aliyasantana law ” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not 
been passed, would have been governed by the Madras Aliyasantana A ct, 1949, (Madras Act 9 of 
1949 ) or by the customary aliyasantana law with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in 
this Act;  
(c) “cognate ”―one person is said to be a “cognate” of another if the two are related by blood or 
adoptio n but not wholly through males;  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 
of 1963, s. 3 and First Schedule.  4 
 (d) the expressions “custom ” and “usage ” signify any rule which, having been continuously and 
uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus in any local area, 
tribe, community, group or family:  
Provided that the rule is ce rtain and not unreasonable or opposed to public policy: and  
Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not b een discontinued 
by the family;  
(e) full blood “half blood ” and “uterine blood ”― 
(i) two persons are said to be related to each other by full blood when they are descended 
from a common ancestor by the same wife, and by half blood when they are descended from a 
common ances tor but by different wives;  
(ii) two persons are said to be related to each other by uterine blood when they are descended 
from a common ancest ress but by different husbands;  
Explanation .―In this clause “ancestor ” includes the father and “ancestress ” the mother ; 
(f) “heir” means any person, male or female, who is entitled to succeed to the property  of an 
intestate under this Act;  
(g) “intestate ”―a person is deemed to die intestate in respect of property of which he or she has 
not made a testa mentary dispo sition capable of taking effect;  
(h) “marumakkattayam law” means the system of law appli cable to persons ― 
(a) who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act 22 of 1933 ); the Travancore Nayar Act (2 of 1100K ); 
the Travancore Ezhava Act (3 of 1100K ); the Travancore Nanjinad Vellala Act (6 of 1101K ); the 
Travancore Kshatriya Act (7 of 1108K ); the Travancore Krishnanvaka Marumakkathayee (Act 7 
of 1115K ); the Cochin Marumakkathayam Act (33 of 1113K ); or the Cochin Nayar Act (29 of  
1113K ); with respect to the matters for whic h provision is made in this Act; or  
(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely domiciled in the State of 
Travancore Cochin or Madras 1[as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 19 56], and 
who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed with respect to the matters for 
which provision is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in which descent is  traced 
through the female line;  
but does no t include the aliyasanta na law; 
(i) “nambudri law ” means the system of law applicable to persons who, if this Act had not been 
passed, would have been governed by the Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 Madras Act (21 of 1933 ); the 
Cochin Nambudri Act (17 of 111K ); or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act (3 of 1106K ); with 
respect to the matters for which  provision is made in this Act;  
(j) “related ” means  related by legitimate kinship:  
Provided that illegitimate children shall be deemed to be related to their mother and to one 
another,  and their legitimate descendants shall be deemed to be rel ated to them and to one another ; 
and any word expressing relationship or denoting a relative shall be const rued accordingly.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, words importing the masculine gender shall n ot 
be taken to include females.  
4. Over riding effect of Act .―(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this  Act,― 
(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any 
matter for whic h provision is made in this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956.  5 
 (b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply 
to Hindus in so f ar as it is inconsistent with any of the pr ovisions contained in this Act.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
INTESTATE  SUCCESSION  
General  
5. Act not to apply to certain properties .―This Act shall not apply to ― 
(i) any  property succession to which is regulated by t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 ( 39 of 
1925 ), by reason of the provisions contained in section 21 of the Special M arriage Act, 1954 (43 of 
1954);  
(ii) any estate which descends to a single heir by the terms of any covenant or agreement entered 
into by the Ruler of any Indian State with the Government of India or by the terms of any enactment 
passed befo re the commencement of this Act;  
(iii) the Valiamm a Thampuran Kovilagam Estate and the Palace Fund administered by the Palace 
Administration Board by reason of the powers conferred by Proclamation (IX of 1124) dated 29th 
June, 1949, promulg ated by the Maharaja of Cochin.  
2[6. Devolut ion of interest in cop arcenary property .―(1) On and from the commencement of the 
Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , in a Joint Hindu family governed by the 
Mitakshara law, the daughter of a coparcener shall, ― 
(a) by birth become a coparcener in her own r ight the same manner as the son ; 
(b) have the same rights in the coparcener y property as she would have had if she had been a son;  
(c) be subject to the same liabilities in respect of the said coparcener y property as that of a son,  
and any reference to a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener shall be deemed to include a reference to a daughter 
of a coparcener:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect or invalidate any disposition or 
alienation including any partition or testamentary disposition of property which had taken place before the 
20th day of December, 2004.  
(2) Any property to which a female Hindu becomes entitled by virtue of sub -section ( 1) shall be held 
by her  with the incidents of coparcenary ownership and shall be regarded, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any other la w for the time being in force , as property capable of being disposed of 
by her by testamentary disposition.  
(3) Where a Hindu dies after the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act,  2005  
(39 of 2005) , his interest in the property of a Joint Hindu family governed by the Mitakshara law, shall 
devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not by 
survivorship, and the coparcener y property shall b e deemed to have been divided as if a partition had 
taken place and, ― 
(a) the daughter is allotted the same share as is allotted to a son;  
(b) the share of the pre -deceased son or a pre -deceased daughter, as they would have got had they 
been alive at the time of partition, shall be allotted to the surviving child of such pre -deceased son or 
of such pre -deceased daughter; and  
(c) the share of the pre -deceased child of a pre -deceased son or of a pre -deceased daughter, as 
such child would have got had he or she been alive at the time of the partition, shall be allotted to the 
child of such pre -deceased child of the pre -deceased so n or a pre -deceased da ughter, as the case may 
be. 
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 39 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for section 6 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  6 
 Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu Mitakshara coparcener 
shall be deemed to be the share in the property that would have been allotted to him if a partition of the 
property had taken place  immediately before his death, irrespective of whether he was entitled to claim 
partition or not.  
(4) After the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , no court 
shall recogni se any right to proceed against a son, grandson or great -grandson for the recovery of any debt 
due from h is father, grandfather or great -grandfather solely on the ground of the pious obligation under 
the Hindu law, of such son, grandson or great -grandson to discharge any such debt:  
Provided that in the case of any debt contracted before the commencement of the Hindu Succession 
(Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) , nothing contained in  this sub -section shall affect ― 
(a) the right of any creditor to proceed again st the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case 
may be; or  
(b) any alienation made in respect of or in satisfaction of, any such debt, and any such right or 
alienation shall be enforceable under the rule of pious obligation in the same manner and to the same 
extent as it would have been enforceable as if the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005   
(39 of 2005)  had not been enacted.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of clause ( a), the expression “son”, “grandson ” or “great -grandson ” 
shall be deemed to refer to the son, grandson or great -grandson, as the case may be, who was born or 
adopted prior to the commencement of the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005  (39 of 2005) . 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a partition, which has been effected before the 
20th day of December,  2004  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section “partition ” means any partition made by execution of 
a deed of partition duly registered under the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908)  or partition effected by a 
decree of a court.]  
7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwad, tav azhi, kutumba, kavaru  or 
illom .―(1)When a Hindu to whom the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law would have applied if this 
Act had not been passed dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death 
an interest in the property of a tarwad , tavazhi  or illom , as the case may be, his or her interest in the 
property shall  devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not 
according to the marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
tarwad, tavazhi  or illom  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi  or illom , as 
the case may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been 
made immediately before his or her death among all t he m embers of the tarwad, tavazhi  or illom , as the 
case may be, then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the 
marumakkattayam  or nambudri  law applicable to him or her, and such share shall be deemed to have been 
allotted to him or her absolutely.  
(2) When a Hindu to whom the aliyasantana  law would have applied if this Act had not been passed 
dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an undivided interest in 
the property of a kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve 
by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not acc ording to the 
aliyasantana  law. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the interest of a Hindu in the property of a 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall be deemed to be the share in the property of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case 
may be, that would have fallen to him or her if a partition of that property per capita  had been made 
immediate ly before his or her death among all the members of the kutumba  or kavaru , as the case may be, 
then living, whether he or she was entitled to claim such partition or not under the aliyasantana  law, and 
such share shall be deemed to have been all otted to hi m or her absolutely.  7 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), when a sthanamdar  dies after the 
commencement of this Act, the sthanam  property held by him shall devolve upon the members of the 
family to which the sthanamdar belonged and the heirs of the sthanamdar as if the sthanam  property had 
been divided per capita immediately before the death of the sthanamdar  among himself and all the 
members of his family then living,, and the shares falling to the members of his family  and the heirs of the 
sthanamdar  shall be held by t hem as their separate property.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the family of a sthanamdar  shall include every 
branch of that family, whether divided or undivided, the male members of wh ich would have been 
entitled by any custom or usage to succeed to the position of sthanamdar  if this Ac t had not been passed.  
8. General rules of s uccession in the case of males .―The property of a male Hindu dying intestate 
shall devolve according to  the provisions of this Chapter: ― 
(a) firstly, upon the heirs, being the relatives speci fied in class I of the Schedule;  
(b) secondly, if there is no heir of class I, then upon the heirs, being the relatives specif ied in class 
II of the Schedule;  
(c) third ly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then u pon the agnates of the deceased ; and  
(d) lastly, if there is no agnate, then upo n the cognates of the deceased.  
9. Order of successi on among heirs in the Schedule .―Among the heirs specified in the Sc hedule, 
those in class I shall take simultaneously and to t he exclusion of all other heirs ; those in the first entry in 
class II shall be preferr ed to those in the second entry ; those in the second entry shall be prefer red to those 
in the third entry ; and so on in succession.  
10. Distribution of property among he irs in class I of the Schedule .―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided among the heirs in class I of the Schedule in accord ance with the following rules: ― 
Rule 1.―The intestate ’s widow, or if there are more widows than one, all the widows together, 
shall take one share.  
Rule 2.―The surviving sons and daughters and the mother of the intestate shall each take one 
share.  
Rule 3.―The heirs in the branch of each pre -deceased son or each pre -deceased daughter of the 
intestate sha ll take between them one share.  
Rule 4 .―The distribution of th e share referred to in Rule 3 — 
(i) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -decease d son shall be so made that his widow (or 
widows together ) and t he surviving sons a nd daughters get equal portions ; and the branch of his 
pre-decea sed sons gets the same portion;  
(ii) among the heirs in the branch of the pre -deceased daughter shall be so made that the 
surviving sons an d daughters get equal portions.  
11. Distribution of property among hei rs in class II of the Schedule .―The property of an intestate 
shall be divided between the heirs specified in any one entry in class II of the Schedule so that th ey, share 
equally.  
12. Order of succes sion among agna tes and cognates .―The order of succession among agnates or 
cognates, as the case may be, shall be determined in accordance with the rules of preferenc e laid down 
hereunder: ― 
Rule 1.―Of two heirs, the one who has fewer or no degrees of ascent is preferred.  
Rule 2.―Where the number of degrees of ascent is the same or none, that heir is preferred who 
has fewer or no degrees of descent.  
Rule 3.―Where neither heir is entitled to be preferred to the other under Rule 1  or Rule 2  they 
take simultaneously.  8 
 13. Computation of degrees .―(1) For the purposes of determining the order of succession among 
agnates or cognates, relationship shall be reckoned from the intestate to the heir in terms of degrees of 
ascent or degrees of desce nt or both, as the case may be.  
(2) Degrees of ascent and degrees of descent shall be compu ted inclusive of the intestate.  
(3) Every generation constitutes a degree either ascending or descending.  
14. Property of a female Hin du to be her absolute property .―(1) Any property possessed by a 
female Hindu, whether acquired before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full 
owner ther eof and not as a limited owner.  
Explanation .―In this sub -section, “property ” includes both mov able and immovable property 
acquired by a fema le Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or arrears 
of maintenance, or by gift from any person, whether a relative or not, before, at or after her marriage, or 
by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase or by prescr iption, or in any other manner whatsoever, and 
also any such property held by her as stridhana  immediately befor e the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any pro perty acquired by way of gift or under 
a will or any other instrument or under a decree or order of a civil court or under an award where the 
terms of the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or award prescribe a restrict ed estate in such 
property.  
15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindus .―(1) The property of a female Hindu 
dying intestate shall devolve  according to the rules set out in section 16, ― 
(a) firstl y, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the husband;  
(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;  
(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in sub -section ( 1),― 
(a) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her father or mother shall devolve, in the 
absence of any son or daughter of the deceased  (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) not upon the other heirs referred in sub -section ( 1) in t he order specified therein, but upon 
the heirs of the father; and  
(b) any property inherited by a female Hindu from her husband or fro m her father -in-law shall 
devolve, in the absence of any son or daughter of the deceased (including the children of any  
pre-deceased son or daughter) not upon the other heirs referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the order 
specified therein , but upon the heirs of the husband.  
16. Order of succession and manner of distribution  among heirs of a female Hindu .―The order 
of successi on among the heirs referred to in section 15 shall be, and the distribution of the intestate ’s 
property among those heirs shall take place according t o the following rules, namely: ― 
Rule 1.―Among the heirs specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 15, those in one entry shall be 
preferred to those in any succeeding entry, and those included in the same e ntry shall take simultaneously.  
Rule 2.―If any son or daughter of the intestate had pre -deceased the intestate leaving his or her own 
children alive at the ti me of the intestate ’s death, the children of such son or daughter shall take between 
them the share which such son or daughter would have taken if l iving at the intestate ’s death.  
Rule 3.―The devolution of the property of the intestate on the heirs referre d to in clauses ( b), (d) and 
(e) of sub -section (1) and in sub-section ( 2) of section 15 shall be in the same order and according to the 
same rules as would have applied if the property had been the father ’s or the mother ’s or the husband ’s as 9 
 the case may  be, and such person had died intestate in respect thereof immediate ly after the intestate ’s 
death.  
17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumak kattayam  and atiyasantana  
laws .―The provisions of sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would 
have been governed by the marumakkattayam  law or aliyasantana  law if this  Act had not been passed as 
if― 
(i) for sub -clauses ( c) and ( d) of section 8, the followi ng had been substituted, namely: ― 
“(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of any of the two classes, then upon his relatives, whether 
agnates or cognates. ”; 
(ii) for clauses ( a) to ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15, the followi ng had been substituted, 
namely :― 
“(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughter s (including the children of any pre -deceased son or 
daughter) and the mother;  
(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;  
(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mot her; 
(d) fourthl y, upon the heirs of the fa ther; and  
(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband. ”; 
(iii) clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15 had been omitted;  
(iv) section 23 had been omitted.  
General pr ovisions relating to succession  
18. Full blood preferred to half blood .―Heirs related to an intestate by full blood shall be preferred 
to heirs related by half blood, if the nature of the relationship is t he same in every other respect.  
19. Mode of s uccession of two or more heirs .―If two or more heirs succeed together to the property 
of an intestate,  they shall take the property, ― 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, per capita  and not per stirpes ; and 
(b) as tenants -in-commo n and not as joint tenants.  
20. Right of child in womb .―A child who was in the womb at the time of the death of an intestate 
and who is subsequently born alive shall have the same right to inherit to the intestate as if he or she had 
been born before the death of the intestate, and the inheritance shall be deem ed to vest in such a case with 
effect from the date  of the death of the intestate.  
21. Presumption i n cases of simultaneous deaths .―Where two persons have died in circumstances 
rendering it uncertain whether either of them, and if so which, survived the other, then, for all purposes 
affecting succession to property, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the younger 
survived the elder.  
22. Preferential right to acq uire property in certain cases .―(1) Where, after the commencement 
of this Act, an interest in any immovable property of an intestate, or in any business carried on by him or 
her, whether solely or in conjunct ion with others, devolves upon two or more heirs specified in class I of 
the Schedule, and any one of such heirs proposes to transfer his or her interest in the property or business, 
the other heirs shall have a preferential right to acquire the inter est proposed to be transferred.  
(2) The consideration for which any interest in the property of the deceased may be transferred under 
this section shall, in the absence of any agreement between the parties, be determined by the court on 
application being made to it in this behalf, and if any  person proposing to acquire the interest is not 
willing to acquire it for the consideration so determined, such person shall be liable to pay all costs of or 
incident to the application.  10 
 (3) If there are two or more heirs specified in class I of the Sched ule proposing to acquire any interest 
under this section, that heir who offers the highest consideration for the transfer shall be preferred.  
Explanation .―In this section, “court ” means the court within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
immovable proper ty is situate or the business is carried on, and includes any other court which the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this behalf.  
23. [Special  provision respecting dwelling -houses. ]―Omitted by  the Hindu Succession (Amendment) 
Act, 2005  (39 of 2005 ), s. 4 (w.e.f. 9-9-2005 ). 
24. [Certain windows re -marry ing may not inherit as windows .]―Omitted by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-9-
2005 ). 
25. Murderer disqualified .―A person who commits murder or abets the commission of murder 
shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person murdered, or any other property in 
furtherance of the succession to which he or she committed or abette d the commission of the murder.  
26. Convert’s descendants disqualif ied.―Where, before or after the commencement of this Act, a 
Hindu has ceased or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion, children born to him or her 
after such conversion and their descendants shall be disqualified from inheriting the proper ty of any of 
their Hindu relatives, unless such children or descendants are Hindus at the time when the succession 
opens.  
27. Succession when heir disqualified .―If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property 
under this Act, it shall devolve as if such person  had died before the intestate.  
28. Disease, defect, etc., not to disqualify .―No person shall be disqualified from succeeding to any 
property on the ground of any disease, defect or deformity, or save as provided in this Act, on any other 
ground whatsoever.  
Escheat  
29. Failure of heirs .―If an intestate has left no heir qualified to succeed to his or her property in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, such property shall devolve on the Government; and the 
Government shall take the property subject to all the obligations and liabilities to which a n heir would 
have been subject.  
CHAPTER III 
TESTAMENTARY SUCCESSION  
30. Testamentary succession .―1*** Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary 
disposition any property, which is capable of being so 2[disposed of by him  or by her] , in accordance with 
the provisions of t he Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925 ), or any other law for the time being in 
force and applicable to Hindus.  
Explanation .―The interest of a ma le Hindu in a Mitakshara copar cenary property or the interest of a 
member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba  or kavaru  in the property of the tarwad, tavazhi, illom , 
kutumba  or kavaru  shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him or by her within the 
meaning of this 3[section.]  
4*    *    *    *    *   
  
                                                           
1. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 58 of 196 0, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 2005, s. 6, for “disposed of by him” (w.e.f. 9-9-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule  for “sub -section” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974 ). 
4. Omitted b y Act 78 of 1956, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21 -12-1956 ). 11 
 CHAPTER  IV 
REPEALS  
31. [Repeals .]―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and the First  
Schedule  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960 ). 
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 8)  
HEIRS IN CLASS I AND CLASS  II 
Class I  
Son; daughter; widow ; mother; son of a pre -deceased son; daughter of a pre -deceased son ; son of a 
pre-deceased daughter ; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; widow of a pre -deceased son; son of a  
pre-deceased son of a pre -deceased son; daughter of a pre -deceased son of a pre -deceased son; widow of 
a pre -deceased son of a pre -deceased son 1[son of a predeceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; 
daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased daughter; daughter of a pre -deceased son of a  
pre-deceased daughter; daughter of a pre -deceased daughter of a pre -deceased son].  
Class II  
I. Father.  
II. (1) Son ’s daughter ’s son, (2)  son’s daughter ’s dau ghter, (3) brother, (4) sister.  
III. (1) Daughter ’s son ’s son, (2) daughter ’s son ’s daughter, (3) daughter ’s daughter’s  son, (4) 
daughter ’s daughte r’s daughter.  
IV. (1) Brother ’s son, (2) sister ’s son, (3) brother ’s daughter , (4) sister ’s daughter.  
V. Father ’s father ; father ’s mother.  
VI. F ather ’s widow; brother ’s widow.  
VII. Fath er’s brother ; father ’s sister.  
VIII. Mother ’s father; mother ’s mother.  
IX. Moth er’s brother ; mother ’s sister.  
Explanation .―In this Schedule , references to a brother or sister do not include references to a brother 
or sister by uterine blood.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 39 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2005).  
--------------------------The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
2A. Rule of construction regarding enactment not extending to Jammu and Kashmir.  
3. Punishment for keeping a brothel or allowing premises to be used as a brothel . 
4. Punishment for living on the earnings of prostitution.  
5. Procuring, inducing or taking person  for the sake of prostitution.  
6. Detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on.  
7. Prostitution in  or in the vicinity of public places.  
8. Seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostitution.  
9. Seduction of a person in custody.  
10. [Omitted .] 
10A. Detention  in a corrective institution . 
11. Notification of address of previously convicted offenders.  
12. [Omitted .] 
13. Special  police officer and advisory body.  
14. Offences to be cognizable.  
15. Search without warrant.  
16. Rescue of person.  
17. Intermediate custody of persons removed under section 15 or rescued under section 16.  
17A. Conditions to be observed before placing persons rescued under section 16 to parents or 
guardians.  
18. Closure of brothel and eviction of offenders from the premises.  
19. Application for being kept in a protective home or provided care and protection by court.  
20. Removal of prostitute from any place.  
21. Protective homes.  
21A. Production of records.  
22. Trials.  
22A. Power to establish special courts.  
22AA. Power of Central Government to establish special courts.  
22B.  Power of Court to try cases summarily.  
23. Power to make rules.  
24. Act not to be in derogation of certain other Acts.  
25. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  2 
 THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 104 OF 19561 
[30th December , 1956.]  
An Act  to provide in pursuance of the International Convention signed at New York on the 9th 
day of May, 1950, for  2[the Prevention of Immoral Traffic].  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  3[the Immoral Traffic 
(Prevention)] Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) This section shall come into force at once; and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come 
into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “brothel ” includes any house, room 5[, conveyance] or place or any portion of any house, 
room  5[, conveyance] or place, which is used for purposes  6[of sexual exploitation or abuse] for the 
gain of another person or for the  mutual gain of two or more prostitutes;  
7[(aa) “child ” means a person who has not completed the age of sixteen years;]  
5[ 8[(b)] “corrective institution ” means an institution, by whatever name called (being an 
institution established or licensed as such under section 21), in which  9[persons], who are in need of 
correction, may be detained under this Act, and includes a shelter where   10[undertrials] may be kept 
in pursuance of this Act;]  
11*   *   *   *  * 
12[(c) “magistrate ” means a magistrate specified in the second column of the Schedule as being 
competent to exercise the powers conferred by the section in which the expression occours and which 
is specified  in the first column of the Schedule;]  
7[(ca) “major ” means a person who has completed the age of eighteen years;  
(cb) “minor ” means a person who has completed the age of sixteen years but has not completed 
the age of eighteen years;]  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
13*   *   *  *   * 
  
                                                           
1.This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule, to Goa, 
Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 19 63, s. 3 and Schedule and to the Union Territory of Pondicherry  by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and 
Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 2 for “ the suppression of immoral traffic in women and girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Subs. s. 3, ibid., for “the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. 1st May, 1958, vide notification No. G.S.R. 269, dated 16 th April, 1958, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i).  
5. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 5, for “prostitution” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
7. Ins. by s . 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
8. Clause ( aa) relettered as Clause ( b) by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
9. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “women and girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
10. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “female undertrials” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
11. Omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
12. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 2, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
13. Omitted s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  3 
  1[ 2[(f) “prostitution ” means the sexual exploitation or abuse of persons for commercial purpose, 
and the expression “prostitute ” shall be construed accordingly;]  
(g) “protective home ” means an institution , by whatever name called (being an institution 
established or licensed as  such under section 21), in which  3[persons], who are in need of care and 
protection, may be kept under this Act 4[and where appropriate technically qualified persons, 
equipment and other facilities have been provided ,] but does not include — 
(i) a shelter where  5[under trials] may be kept in pursuance of this Act, or  
(ii) a corrective institution;]  
(h) “public place ” means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public and includes 
any public conveyance;  
(i) “special police officer ” means a police officer appointed by or on behalf of the State 
Government to be in charge of police duties within a specified area for the purpose of this Act;  
6[(j) “trafficking police officer ” means a police officer appointed by the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 4), of section 13.]  
7[2A. Rule of construction regarding enactment s not extending to Jammu and Kashmir .—Any 
reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to 
that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.]  
3. Punishment for keeping a brothel or allowing premises to be used as a brothel .—(1) Any 
person who keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or management of, a brothel shall be 
punishable on first conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not 
more than three years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand  rupees and in the event of a 
second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than two years and 
not more than five years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.  
(2) Any person who — 
(a) being the tenan t, lessee, occupier or person in charge of any premises, uses, or knowingly 
allows any other person to use, such premises or any part thereof as a brothel, or  
(b) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises or the agent of such owner, lessor or 
landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge that the same or any part thereof is 
intended to be used as a brothel, or is wilfully a party to the use of such premises or any part thereof 
as a brothel,  
shall  be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and 
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and in the event of a second or subsequent 
conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may exten d to five years and also with fine.  
8[(2A) For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), it shall be presumed , until the contrary is proved, that any 
person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of that sub -section, is knowingly allowing the premises or 
any part thereof to be used as a brothel or, as the case may be, has knowledge that the premises or any 
part thereof a re beig used as a brothel, if, — 
(a) a report is published in a newspaper having circulation in the area in which such person 
resides to the effect that the premises or any part thereof have been found to be used for prostitution 
as a result of a search made under this Act; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 2, for clauses (f) and ( g) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979). 
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 5, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for “women and girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “female undertrials” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979 ). 
8. Ins. by Act 44 of 198 6, s. 6 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  4 
 (b) a copy of the list of all things found during the search referred to in clause ( a) is given to such 
person.]  
(3) Notwithst anding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, on conviction of 
any person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of any offence under that sub -section 
in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any lease o r agreement under which such premises have 
been leased out or are held or occupied at the time of the commission of the offence, shall become void 
and inoperative with effect from the date of the said conviction.  
4. Punishment for living on the earnings of  prostitution .—(1) Any person over the age of eighteen 
years  who knowingly lives, wholly or in  part, on the earnings of the prostitution of  1[any other person] 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both  2[and where such earnings relate to the prostitution of a child 
or a minor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and not more 
than ten years].  
3[(2) Where any person over the a ge of eighteen years is proved — 
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, a prostitute; or  
(b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the movements of a prostitute in such a 
manner as to show that such p erson is aiding, abetting or compelling h er prostitution; or  
(c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute,   
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that such person is knowingly living on the earnings of 
prostitution of another person within the meaning of sub -section ( 1).] 
5. Procuring, inducing or taking 4[person] for the sake of prostitution .—(1) any person who — 
(a) procures or attempts to procure a  4[person], whether with or without  his consent, for the 
purpose of prostitution; or  
(b) induces a  4[person] to go from any place, with the intent that  he may for the purpose of 
prostitution become the inmate of, or frequent, a brothel; or  
(c) takes or att empts to take a  4[person], or causes a  4[person] to be  taken, from one place to 
another with a view to  his carrying on, or being brought up to carry on prostitution; or  
(d) causes or induces a  4[person] to car ry on prostitution;  
5[shall be punishable on conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than three years and 
not more than seven years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and if any offence 
under this sub -section is  committed against the will of any person, the punishment of  imprisonment for a 
term of seven years shall extend to imprisonme nt for a term of fourteen years : 
Provided that if the person in respect of whom an offence com mitted under this sub -section, — 
(i) is a child, the punishment provided under this sub -section shall extend to rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years but may extend to life; and  
(ii) is a minor, the punishment provided under this sub -section shall extend to rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and not more than fourteen years;]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s.  7, for “a woman or girl ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-1-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 4, for section 4 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “women o r girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
6. Omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  5 
 (3) An offence under  this section shall be triable — 
(a) in the place from which a  1[person] is procured, induced to go, taken or caused to be taken or 
from which an attempt to procure or take such  1[person] is made; or  
(b) in the place to which he may have gone as a result of the inducement or to which he is taken 
or caused to be taken or an attempt to take him is made.  
6. Detaining a 1[person ] in premises where prostitution is carried on .—(1) Any person who 
detains  2[any othe r person, whether  with or without his consent], — 
(a) in any brothel, or  
(b) in or upon any premises with intent  3[that such person may have sexual intercourse with a 
person who is not the spouse of such person],  
shall be punishable  4[on conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be 
less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years a nd shall also 
be liable to fine : 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years].  
5[(2) Where any person is found with a child in a brothel, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is 
proved, that he has committed an offence under sub -section ( 1). 
(2A) Where a child or minor found in a brothel, is , on medical examination, detected to have been 
sexually abused, it shall be presumed,  unless the contrary is proved, that the child or minor has been 
detained for purposes of prostitution or, as the case may be, has been sexually exploited  for commercial 
purposes. ] 
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a woman or girl in a brothel or in or upon any premises for 
the purpose of sexual intercourse with a man other than her lawful husband, if such person, with intent to 
compel or induce her to remain there, — 
(a) withholds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other property belonging to her, 
or 
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away with her any jewellery, wearing 
apparel, money or other property lent or supplied to her by or by the direction of such person.  
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against such woman or girl at the instance of the person by whom she has been detained, for the recovery 
of any jewellery , wearing apparel or other property alleged to have been lent or supplied to or for such 
woman or girl or to have been pledged by such woman or girl or for the recovery of any money alleged to 
be payable by such woman or girl.  
7. Prostitution in or in the vicinity of public places .—6[(1) Any  7[person], who carries on prostitution 
and the person with whom such prostitution i s carried on, in any premises, — 
(a) which are within the area or areas, notified under sub -section ( 3), or 
(b) which are within a distance of two hundred metres of any place of public religious worship, 
educational institution, hostel, hospital, nursing home or such other public place of any kind as may 
be notified in this behalf by the Commissioner of Police or magi strate in the manner prescribed,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “any woman or girl , whether with or without his consent” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “that she may have sexual intercourse with any man other than her lawful husband” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of  1978, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
7. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
 6 
 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months.]  
1[(1A) Where an offence committed under sub -section ( 1) is in respect of a child or minor, the person 
committing the offence shall be p unishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall 
not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten years and 
shall also be liable to fine : 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.]  
(2) Any person who — 
(a) being the keeper of any public place knowingly permits prostitutes for purposes of their trade 
to resort to or remain in such place; or  
(b) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in charge of any premises referred to in                   
sub-section ( 1) knowingly permits the same or any part thereof to be used for prostitution; or  
(c) being the owner, lessor or landlord, of any premises referred to in sub -section ( 1), or the agent 
of such owner, lessor or landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge that the same 
or any part thereof may be used for prostitution, or is wilfully a party to such  use, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a second or 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a te rm which may extend to six months and also with 
fine 2[which may extend to two hundred rupees, and if the public place or premises happen to be a hotel, 
the licence for carrying on the business of such hotel under any law for the time being in force shall also 
be liable to be suspended for a period of not less than three months but which may extend to one year:  
Provided that if an offence committed under this sub -section is in respect of a child or minor in a 
hotel, such licence shall also be liable to be c ancelled.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “hotel ” shall have the meaning an in clause ( 6) of 
section 2 of the Hotel -Receipts Tax Act, 1980 (54 of 1980).]  
3[(3) The State Government may, having regard to the kinds of persons frequenting any area or areas 
in the State, the nature and the density of population therein and other relevant considerations, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that prostitution shall not be carried on in such area or areas as 
may be specified in the n otification.  
(4) Where a notification is issued under sub -section ( 3) in respect of any area or areas, the State 
Government shall define the limits of such area or areas in the notification with reasonable certainty.  
(5) No such notification shall be issue d so as to have effect from a date earlier than the expiry of a 
period of ninety days after the date on which it is issued.]  
8. Seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostitution .—Whoever, in any public place or within sight 
of, and in such manner as to be  seen or heard from any public place, whether from within any building or 
house or not — 
(a) by words, gestures, wilful exposure of her person (whether by sitting by a window or on the 
balcony of a building or house or in any other way), or otherwise tempts  or endeavours to tempt, or 
attracts or endeavours to attract the attention of, any person for the purpose of prostitution; or  
(b) solicits  or molests any person, or loiters or acts in such manner as to cause obstruction or 
annoyance to persons residing nearby or passing by such public place or to offend against public 
decency, for the purpose of prostitution,  
shall be punishable on first con viction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, and in the event of a second or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “which may extend to two hundred rupees” ( w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  7 
 subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, and a lso with fine 
which ma y extend to five hundred rupees : 
1[Provided that where an offence under this section is committed by a man, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a period of not less than seven days but which may extend to three months.]  
 9. Seduction of a 2[person ] in custody .— 3*** Any person who  4[having the custody, charge or care 
of, or a position of authority over, any   2[person], causes or aids or abets the seduction for prostitution of 
that 2[person] ,  5[shall be punishable on conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which shall not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine : 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years].  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7[10. [Release on probation of good conduct or after due admonition .] Omitted  by the Suppression  of 
Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls  (Amendment ) Act, 1986 (44 of 1986), s. 13 ( w.e.f . 26-1-1987).  
10A. Detention in a corrective institution .—(1) Where — 
(a) a female offender is found guilty of an offence under section 7 or section 8,  8***; and  
(b) the character, state of health and mental condition of the offender and the other circumstances 
of the case are such that it is expedient that she should be subject to detention for such term and such 
instruction and discipline as are conducive to her correction,  
it shall be lawful for the court to pass, in lieu of a sentence of imprisonment, an order for detention in a 
corrective institution for such term, not being less than two years and not being more than five years, as 
the court thinks fit:  
Provided tha t before passing such an order — 
(i) the court shall give an opportunity to the offender to be heard and shall also consider any 
representation  which the offender may make to the court as to the suitability of the case for treatment 
in such an institution, as also the report of the probation officer appointed under the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958); and  
(ii) the court shall record  that it is satisfied that the character, state of health and mental condition 
of the offender and the other circumstances of the case are such that the offender is likely to benefit 
by such instruction and discipline as aforesaid.  
(2) Subject to the provi sions of sub -section ( 3), the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974), relating to appeal, reference and revision and of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), 
as to the period within which an appeal shall be filed, shall apply in re lation to an order of detention under 
sub-section ( 1) as if the order had been a sentence of imprisonment for the same period as the period for 
which the detention was ordered.  
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the State Government o r authority, authorised 
in this behalf may, at any time after the expiration of six months from the date of an order for detention in 
a corrective institution, if it is satisfied that there is a reasonable probability that the offender will lead a 
useful a nd industrious life, discharge her from such an institution, without condition or with such 
conditions as may be considered fit, and grant her a written licence in such form as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Proviso added by Act 44 of 198 6, s. 11 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 198 6, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
6. Omitted by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 7, for section 10 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
8. The words, brackets and figures “and is not released under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 10” omitted by  Act 44 
of 198 6, s. 14, (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  8 
 (4) The conditions on which an offender is discharged under sub-section ( 3), may include 
requirements relating to residence of the offender and supervision over the offen der's activities and 
movements. ] 
11. Notification of address of previously convicted offenders .—(1) When any person having been 
convicte d— 
(a) by a court in India of an offence punishable under this Act or punishable under section 363, 
section 365, section 366, section 366 A, section 366 B, section 367, section 368, section 370, section 
371, section 372 or section 373 of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860), with imprisonment for a term 
of two years or upwards; or  
(b) by a court or tribunal in any other country of an offence which would, if committed in India, 
have been punishable under this Act or under any of the aforesaid sections with imprisonme nt for a 
like term,   
is within a period of five years after release from prison, again convicted of any offence punishable under 
this Act or under any of those sections with imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards by a court, 
such court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing the sentence of imprisonment on such person, also 
order that his residence, and any change of, or absence from such residence after release be notified 
according to rules made under section 23 for a period not exceeding five years from the date of expiration 
of that sentence.  
(2) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void.  
(3) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court when 
exercising i ts powers of revision.  
(4) Any person charged with a breach of any rule referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be tried by a 
Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the district in which the place last notified, as his residence is 
situated.  
12. [Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders .] Omitted by the Suppression of Immoral 
Traffic in Women and Girls  (Amendment ) Act, 1986 (44 of 1986) s.13 (w.e.f . 26-1-1987).]  
13. Special police officer and advisory body .—(1) There shall be for each area to be specified by 
the State Government in this behalf  a special police officer appointed by or on behalf of that Government, 
for dealing with offences under this Act in that area.  
1[(2) The special police officer shall not be below the rank of an Inspector of Police.  
(2A) The District Magistrate may, if he considers it necessary or expedient so to do, confer upon any 
retired police or military officer all or any of the powers conferred by or under this Act on a special polic e 
officer, with respect to particular cases or classes of cases or to cases generally:  
Provided that no suc h power shall be conferred on, — 
(a) a retired police officer unless such officer, at the time of his retirement, was holding a post not 
below the ran k of an inspector;  
(b) a retired military officer unless such officer, at the time of his retirement, was holding a post 
not below the rank of a commissioned officer.]  
(3) For the efficient discharge of his functions in relati on to offences under this Act, — 
(a) the special police officer of an area shall be assisted by such number of subordinate police 
officers (including women police officers wherever practicable) as the State Government may think 
fit; and  
(b) the State Government may associate with the sp ecial police officer a non -official advisory 
body consisting of not more than five leading social welfare workers of that area (including women 
social welfare workers wherever practicable) to advise him on questions of general importance 
regarding the work ing of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of  1978, s. 9, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  9 
 1[(4) The Central Government may, for the purpose of investigating any offence under this Act or 
under any other law for the time being in force dealing with sexual exploitation of persons and committed 
in more than one State, a point such  number of police officers as trafficking police officers and they shall 
exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions as are exercisable by special police officers under 
this Act with the modification that they shall exercise such powers and dis charge such functions in 
relation to the whole of India.]  
14. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  2[the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], any offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable 
offence within the meaning of that Code:  
Provided that, notwithstanding an ything contained in that Code, — 
(i) arrest without warrant may be made only by the special police officer or under his direction or 
guidance, or subject to his prior approval;  
(ii) when  the special police officer requires any officer subordinate to him to arrest without 
warrant otherwise than in his presence any person for an offence under this Act, he shall give that 
subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the person to be a rrested and the offence for which 
the arrest is being made; and the latter officer, before arresting the person, shall inform him of the 
substance of the order and, on being required by such person, show him the order;  
(iii) any police officer not below th e rank of  3[sub-inspector] specially authorised  by the special 
police officer may, if he has reason to believe that on account of delay involved in  obtaining the order 
of the special police officer, any valuable evidence relating to any offence under this Act is likely to 
be destroyed or concealed, or the person who has committed or is suspected to have committed the 
offence is likely to escape, or if the name and address of such a person is unknown or there is reason 
to suspect that a false name or address has been given, arrest the person concerned wi thout such 
order, but in such a case he shall report, as soon as may be, to the special police officer the arrest and 
the circumstances in which the arrest was made.  
15. Search without warrant .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for th e time 
being in force, whenever the special police officer  4[or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be,] 
has reasonable grounds for believing that an offence punishable under this Act has been or is being 
committed in respect of a  5[person] liv ing in any premises, and that search of the premises with warrant 
cannot be made without undue delay, such officer may, after recording the grounds of his belief, enter and 
search such premises without a warrant.  
(2) Before making a search under sub-section ( 1), the special police officer  4[or the trafficking police 
officer, as the case may be ,] shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants (at least one of whom 
shall be a woman) of the locality in which the place to be searched is situate, to attend and witness the 
search, and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do:  
6[Provided that the requirement as to the respectable  inhabitants being from the locality in which the 
place to be searched is situate shall not apply to a woman required to attend and witness the search.]  
(3) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects, to attend and witness a search 
under  this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to him, shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
7[(4) The special police officer or the trafficking police o fficer, as the case may be, entering any 
premises under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to remove therefrom all the persons found therein.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 15 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “inspector” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 16 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “women or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
7. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 16, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  10 
 (5) The special police officer  1[or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be ,] after 
removing  2[the 3[person]] under sub -section ( 4) shall forthwith produce  him before the appropriate 
magistrate.  
1[(5A) Any person who is produced before a magistrate under sub -section ( 5), shall be examined by a 
registered medical practitioner for the  purposes of determina tion of the age of such person, or for the 
detection of any injuries as a result of sexual abuse or for the presence of any sexually transmitted 
diseases.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, “registered medical practitioner ” has the same meaning as in the 
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956).]  
(6) The special police officer  1[or the trafficking police officer, as th e case may be,] and other persons 
taking part in, or attending, and witnessing a search shall not be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings 
against them in respect of anything lawfully done in connection with, or for the purpose of, the search.  
 1[(6A) The special police officer or the trafficking police officer, as the case may be, making a search 
under this section shall be accompanied by at least two women police officers, and where any woman or 
girl removed under sub -section ( 4) is required to be i nterrogated, it shall be done by a woman police 
officer and if no woman police officer is available, the interrogation shall be done only in the presence of 
a lady member of a recognised welfare institution or organisation.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section and section 17 A, “recognised welfare institution or 
organisation ” means such institution or organisation as may be recognised in this behalf by the State 
Government.]  
4[(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1973 (2 of 1974) , shall, so far as may be, 
apply to any search under this section as they apply to any search made under the authority of a warrant 
issued under section 94 of the said Code.]  
5[16. Rescue of 3[person ].—(1) Where a magistrate has reason to believe from information received 
from the police or from any other person authorised by the State Government in this behalf or otherwise, 
that 6[any person is living, or is carrying on, or is being made to carry on, pros titution in a brothel,] he 
may direct a police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector, to enter such brothel, and to remove 
therefrom such   3[person] and produce him before him.  
(2) The police officer, after removing the  3[person], shall forthwith produce  him before the magistrate 
issuing the order.]  
17. Intermediate custody of 7[persons ] removed under section 15 or rescued under section 16 .—
(1) When the special police officer removing a  3[person] under sub -section ( 4) of section 15 or a police 
officer rescuing a  3[person] under sub -section ( 1) of section 16, is for any reason unable to produce  him 
before the appropriate magistrate as required by sub -section ( 5) of section 15, or before the magistrate 
issuing the order under sub -section ( 2) of section 16, he shall forthwith produce  him before the nearest 
magistrate of any class, who shall pass suc h orders as he deems proper for his  safe custody until  he is 
produced before the appropriate magistrate, or, as the case may be, t he magistrate is suing the order : 
Provided that no  3[person] shall be — 
(i) detained in custody under this sub -section for a period exceeding ten days from the date of the 
order under this sub -section; or  
(ii) restored to or placed in the custody of a person who may exercise a harmful influence over 
him. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 16 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 11, for “the girl” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 12, for sections 16 and 17 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
6. Subs. by 44 of 1986, s. 17, for clause ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
7. Subs. s. 4,  ibid.,  for “women and girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  11 
 (2) When the  1[person] is produced before the appropriate magistrate under sub -section ( 5) of            
section 15 or the  magistrate under sub -section ( 2) of section 16, he shall, after giving  him an opportunity 
of being heard, cause an inquiry to be made as to the correctness of the information received under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 16, the age, character  and antecedents of the  1[person] and the suitability of  his 
parents, guardian or husband for taking charge of  him and the nature of the influence which t he conditions 
in his home are likely to have on  him if he is sent home, and, for this purpose, he may direct a probation 
officer appointed under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), to inquire into the above 
circumstances and into the persona lity of the  1[person] and the prospects of his rehabilitation.  
(3) The magistrate may, while an inquiry is made into a case under sub -section ( 2), pass such orders 
as he deems proper for the safe custody of the  1[person]:  
2[Provided that where a person rescued under section 16 is a child or minor, it shal l be open to the 
magistrate to place such child or minor in any institution established or recognised under any Children 
Act, for the time being in force in any State for the safe custody of children:  
Provided further that,] no  1[person] shall be kept in custody for this purpose for a period exceeding 
three weeks from the date of such an order, and no  1[person] shall be kept in the custody of a person likely 
to have a hurmful influence over  him. 
(4) Where the magistrate is satisfied, after making an inqui ry as r equired under sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) that the information received is correct; and  
(b) that he is in need of care and protection,  
he may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), make an order that such  1[person] be detained for 
such period, being not less than one year and not more than three years, as may be specified in the order, 
in a protective home, or in such other custody as he shall, for  reasons to be recorded in writing, consider 
suitable:  
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a person or body of persons of a religious persuasion 
different from that of the  1[person] and that those entrusted with the custody of the  1[person] including the 
persons in charge of a protective home, may be required to enter into a bond which may, were necessary 
and feasible, contain undertaking s based on directions relating to the proper care, guardianship, education, 
training and me dical and psychiatric treatment of the  1[person] as well as supervision by a person 
appointed by the court, which will be in force for a period, not excee ding three years.  
(5) In discharging his functions under sub -section ( 2), a magistrate may summon a penal of five 
respectable persons, three of whom shall, wherever practicable, be women, to assist him; and may, for 
this purpose, keep a list of experienced  social welfare workers, particularly women social welfare 
workers, in the field of suppression of immoral traffic in  3[persons].  
(6) An appeal against an order made under sub -section ( 4) shall lie to the Court of Session whose 
decision on such appeal shal l be final.]  
4[17A. Conditions to be observed before placing persons rescued under section 16 to parents or 
guardians .—Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 17, the magistrate making 
an inquiry under section 17 may, before passing an order for handing over any person rescued under 
section 16 to the parents, guardian or husband, satisfy himself about the capacity or genuineness of the 
parents, guardian or husband to keep such person by causing an investi gation to be made by a recognised 
welfare institution or organisation.]  
18. Closure of brothel and eviction of offenders from the premises .—(1) A magistrate may, on 
receipt of information from the police or otherwise, that any house, room, place or any por tion thereof 
within a distance of  5[two hundred metres] of any public place referred to in sub -section ( 1) of               
section 7,  is being run or used as a brothel by any person or is being used by prostitutes for carrying on 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., “Provide that” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “women and girls” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 13, for “two hundred yards”  (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  12 
 their trade, issue notice on the owner, lessor or landlord of such house, room, place or portion or the agent 
of the owner, lessor or landlord or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or any other person incharge of such 
house, room, place, or portion, to sh ow cause within seven days of the receipt of the notice why the same 
should not be attached for improper user thereof; and if, after hearing the person concerned, the 
magistrate is satisfied that the house, room, place or portion is being used as a brothel  or for carrying on 
prostitution, then the magistrate may pass orders — 
(a) directing eviction of the occupier within seven days of the passing of the order from the 
house, room, place or portion;  
(b) directing that before letting it out during the period o f one year  1[or in a case where a child or 
minor has been found in such house, room, place or portion during a search under section 15, during 
the period of three years] , immediately after the passing of the order, the owner, lessor or landlord or 
the agen t of the owner, lessor or landlord shall obtain the previous approval of the magistrate:  
Provided that, if the magistrate finds that the owner, lessor or landlord as well as the agent of the 
owner, lessor or landlord, was innocent of the improper user of t he house, room, place or portion, he may 
cause the same to be restored to the owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of the owner, lessor or 
landlord, with a direction that the house, room, place or portion shall not be leased out, or otherwise given 
possession of, to or for the benefit of the person who was allowing the improper user therein.  
(2) A court convicting a person of any offence under section 3 or section 7 may pass order under          
sub-section ( 1) without further notice to such person to show cause as required in that sub -section.  
(3) Orders passed by the magistrate or court under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be 
subject to appeal and shall not be stayed or set aside by the order of any court, civil or criminal and the 
said orders shall cease to have validity after the  2[expiry of one year or three years, as the case may be]:  
Provided that where a conviction under section 3 or section 7 is set aside on appeal on the ground that 
such house, room, place or any portion thereof i s not being run or used as a brothel or is not being used by 
prostitutes for carrying on their trade, any order passed by the trial court under sub -section ( 1) shall also 
be set aside.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time be ing in force, when a 
magistrate passes an order under sub -section ( 1), or a  court passes an order under sub -section ( 2), any 
lease or agreement under which the house, room, place or portion is occupied at the time, shall become 
void and inoperative.  
(5) Wh en an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent of such owner, lessor or landlord fails to comply 
with a direction given under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or when he fails to comply with a direction under the proviso to that            
sub-section, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3 or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 7, as the case may be, and punished accordingly.  
3[19. Application for being kept in a protective home or provided care and protection by 
court .—(1) A 4[person] who is carrying on, or is being made to carry on, prostitution, may make an 
application, to the magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction  he is carrying on, or is being 
made to carry on prostitutio n, for an order that he may be — 
(a) kept in a protective home, or  
(b) provided care and protection by the court in the manner specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The magistrate may, pending inquiry under sub -section ( 3), direct that the  4[person] be kept in 
such custody as he may consider proper, having regard to the circumstances of the case.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 20 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for “expiry of one year” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 14, for section 19 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987 ). 13 
 (3) If the magistrate, after hearing the applicant and making such inquiry as he may consider 
necessary, including an inquiry by a probation officer appointed under the Probation of Offenders Act, 
1958 (20 of 1958), into the personality, conditio ns of home and prospects of rehabilitation of the 
applicant, is satisfied that an order should be made under this section, he shall, for reasons to be recorded, 
make an ord er that the applicant be kept, — 
(i) in a protective home, or  
(ii) in a corrective in stitution, or  
(iii) under the supervision of a person appointed by the magistrate,  
for such period as may be specified in the order.]  
20. Removal of prostitute from any place .—(1) A magistrate on receiving information that 
any 1[person] residing in or frequenting any place within the local limits of his jurisdiction, is a prostitute, 
may record the substance of the information received and issue a notice to such  1[person] requiring  him to 
appear before the magistr ate and show cause why he  should not be required to remove  himself  from the 
place and be prohibited from re -entering it.  
(2) Every notice issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a copy of the record aforesaid, 
and the copy shall be served along with the notice on the  1[person] against whom the notice is issued.]  
(3) The magistrate s hall, after the service of the notice referred to in sub -section ( 2), proceed to 
inquire into the truth of the information received, and after giving the  1[person] an opportunity of 
adducing evidence, take such further evidence as he thinks fit, and if upon such inquiry it appears to him 
that such  1[person]  is a prostitute and that it is necessary in the interests of the general public that 
such 1[person] should be required to remove  himself  therefrom and be  prohibited form re -entering the 
same, the magistrate shall, by order in writing communicated to the  1[person] in the manner specified 
therein, require   him after a date (to be specified in the order) which shall not be less than seven days from 
the date of the order, to remove  himself  from the place to such place whether within or without the local 
limits of his jurisdiction, by such route or routes and wi thin such time as may be specified in the order and 
also prohibit  him from re -entering the place without the permission in writing of the magistrate having 
jurisdiction over such place.  
(4) Whoever, — 
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this section, within the period specified therein, o r 
whilst an order prohibiting him  from re -entering a place without permission is in force, re -enters the 
place without such permission, or  
(b) knowing that any  1[person] has, under this section, been required to remove  himself  from the 
place and has not obtained the requisite permission to re -enter it, harbours or conceals such  1[person] 
in the place,  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees not in the case of a continuing 
offence with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rup ees for every day after the first during 
which  he has persisted in the offence.  
21. Protective homes .—(1) The State Government may, in its discretion establish  2[as many 
protective homes and corrective institutions under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes and 
institutions], when established, shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) No person or no authority other than the State Government shall, after the commencement of this 
Act, establish or maintain any  3[protective home or corr ective institution] except under and in accordance 
with the conditions of a licence issued under this section by the State Government.  
(3) The State Government may, on application made to it in this behalf by a person or authority issue 
to such person or a uthority, a licence in the prescribed form for establishing and maintaining or as the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by 46 of 1978, s. 15, for “as many protective homes under this Act as it thinks it and such homes” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
3. Subs. by s. 15 , ibid., for “protective home” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  14 
 case may be, for maintaining a  1[protective home or corrective institution] and a licence  so issued may 
contain such conditions as the State Government may think fit to impose in accordance with the rules 
made under this Act:  
Provided that any such condition may require that the management of the  1[protective home or 
corrective  institution] shall, wherever practicable, be entrusted to women:  
Provided further that a person or authority maintaining any protective home at the commencement of 
this Act shall be allowed a period of six months from such commencement to make an application for 
such li cence : 
2[Provided also that a person or authority maintaining any corrective institution at the commencement 
of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women  and Girls (Amendment) Act, 1978 (46 of 1978), shall be 
allowed a period of six months from such commencement to make an application for such licence.]  
(4) Before issuing a licence the State Government may require such officer or authority as it may 
appoin t for this purpose, to make a full and complete investigation in respect of the application received 
in this behalf and report to it the result of such investigation and in making any such investigation the 
officer or authority shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(5) A licence, unless sooner revoked, shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the 
licence and may, on application made in this behalf at least thirty days before the date of its expiration, be 
renewed for a like p eriod.  
(6) No licence issued or renewed under this Act shall be transferable.  
(7) Where any person or authority to whom a licence has been granted under this Act or any agent or 
servant of such person or authority commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof or any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any of the rules made under this Act, or where the State Government is not 
satisfied with the condition, management or superintendence of any  1[protective home or corrective 
institution], the State Government may, without prejudice to any other penalty which may have been 
incurred under this Act, for reasons to be recorded, revoke the licence by order in wr iting:  
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the licence to 
show cause why the licence shall not be revoked.  
(8) Were a licence in respect of a  1[protective home or corrective institution] has been revoked under 
the foregoing sub -section such 1[protective home  or corrective institution ] shall cease to function from the 
date of such revocation.  
(9) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the State Government may also vary or 
amend any licence issued or renewed under this Act.  
2[(9A) The State Government or an authority authorised  by it in this behalf may, subject to any rules 
that may be made in this behalf, transfer an inmate of a protective home to another protective home or to 
a corrective institution or an inmate of a corrective institution to another corrective institution or  to a 
protective home, where such transfer is considered desirable having regard to the conduct of the person to 
be transferred, the kind of training to be imparted and other circumstances of the case:  
Provided that, — 
(a) no 3[person] who is transferred under this sub -section shall be required to stay in the home or 
institution to which  he is transferred for a period longer than  he was required to stay in the home or 
institution from which  he was transferred;  
(b) reasons shall be recorded for every order of transfer under this sub -section.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 1 5, for “protective home” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1978).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
 15 
 (10) Whoever establishes or maintains a  1[protective home or corrective institution] except in 
accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be punishable in the case of a first offence with fine 
which may exten d to one thousand rupees and in the case of second or subsequent offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year , or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
1[21A. Production of records .—Every person or authority who is licensed under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 21 to establish or maintain, or as the case may be, for maintaining, a protective home or corrective 
institution shall, whenever required by a court, produce the records and other documents maintained by 
such home or institution before such court.]  
22. Trials .—No court, inferior to that of  2[a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class] shall try any offence under section 3, section 4, section 5, section 6, section 7 or section 8.  
3[22A. Power to establish Special Courts .—(1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary for the purpose of providing for speedy trial of offences under this Act in any district or 
metropolitan area, it may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette and after consultation with the High 
Court, establish one or more courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class, or , as the case may be, 
Metropolitan Magistrates, in such district or metropolitan area.  
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Cou rt, a court established under sub -section ( 1) shall 
exercise jurisdiction only in respect of cases under this Act.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the jurisdiction and powers of the presiding officer of 
a court established under sub-section ( 1) in any district or metropolitan area shall extend throughout the 
district or the metropolitan area, as the case may be.  
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section a court established under sub -section ( 1) in any 
district or met ropolitan area shall be deemed to be a court established under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, 
or as the case may be, sub -section ( 1) of section 16, of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
and the provisions of th at Code shall apply accordingly  in relation to such courts.  
Explanation. —In this section, “High Court ” has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
4[22AA. Power of Central Government to establish special courts .—(1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the purpose of providing for speedy trial of offences under 
this Act and committed in more than one State, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and after 
consultation with the High Court c oncerned, establish one or more courts of Judicial Magistrates of the 
first class or Metropolitan Magistrates for the trial of such offences.  
(2) The provisions of section 22 A, shall , so far as may be, apply to the courts established under            
sub-section ( 1) as they apply to courts established under that section.]  
22B.  Power of Court to try cases summarily .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the State Government may, if it considers it necessary so to do, 
direct that offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a magistrate [including the 
presiding officer of a court established under sub -section ( 1) of section 22 A] and the provisions of Section 
262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the sai d Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial:  
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section it shall be lawful for 
the magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment fo r a term not exceeding one year : 
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this 
section, it appears to the magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the 
case summarily, the magistrate shall, after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter 
recall any witness, who may have been exa mined and proceed to hear or re hear the case in the manner 
provided by the said Code.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 44 of 1986, s. 21 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 16, for “a magistrate as defined in clause ( c) of section 2” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
3. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 22 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  16 
 23. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe rs, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the notification of any place as a public place;  
1[(b) the placing in custody of persons for whose safe custody orders have been passed under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 and their maintenance;]  
2[(bb) the discharge of an offender under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 A from a corrective 
institution and the form of licence to be granted to such offender;]  
3[(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes or, as the case may be, in corrective 
institutions of 4[persons] under this Act and their maintenance;]  
(d) the carrying out of the provisions of section 11 regarding notification of residence or change 
of or absence from residence by released convicts;  
(e) the delegation of authority to appoint the specia l police officer under sub -section ( 1) of section 
13; 
(f) the carrying into effect of the provisions of section 18;  
5[(g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and superintendence of protective homes 
and corrective institutions under section 21 an d the appointment, powers and duties of persons 
employed in such homes or institutions;  
(ii) the form in which an application for a licence may be made and the particulars to be 
contained in such application;  
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of  a licence, the time within which such licence 
shall be issued or renewed and the procedure to be followed in making a full and complete 
investigation in respect of an application for a licence;  
(iv) the form of a licence and the conditions to be specified  therein;  
(v) the manner in which the accounts of a protective home and a corrective institution shall be 
maintained and audited;  
(vi) the maintenance of registers and statements by a licensee and the form of such registers 
and statements;  
(vii) the  care, treatment, maintenance, training, instruction, control and discipline of the 
inmates of protective homes and corrective institutions;  
(viii) the visits to and communication with such inmates;  
(ix) the temporary detention of  4[persons] sentenced to detention in protective homes or in 
corrective institutions until arrangements are made for sending them to such homes or 
institutions;  
(x) the transfer of  an inmate from, — 
(a) one protective home to another, or to a corrective institution,  
(b) one corrective institution to another or to a protective home,  
under sub -section ( 9A) of section 21;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 23, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 18 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “women and girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
5. Subs. by 46 of 1978, s. 18, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979).  17 
 (xi) the transfer in pursuance of an order of the court from a protective home or a corrective 
institution to a prison of a  1[person] found to be incorrigible or exercising bad influence upon 
other inmates of that protective home or the corrective institution and the period of  his detention 
in such prison;  
(xii) the t ransfer to a protective home or corrective institution of  2[persons] sentenced under 
section 7 or section 8 and the period of their detention in such home or institution;  
(xiii) the discharge of inmates from a protective home or corrective institution eith er 
absolutely or subject to conditions, and their arrest in the event of breach of such conditions;  
(xiv) the grant of permission to inmates to absent themselves for short periods;  
(xv) the inspection of protective homes and corrective institutions and oth er institutions in 
which  2[persons] may be kept, detained and maintained;]  
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) In making any rule under clause ( d) or clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) the State Government may 
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty 
rupees.  
(4) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be, after they are made, be laid before the 
State Legislature.  
 24. Act not to be in derogation of certain other Acts .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to be 
in derogation of the provisions of the Refermatory  Schools Act, 1897 (8 of 1897), or any State Act 
enacted in modification of the said Act or otherwise, relating to juvenile offenders.  
 25. Repeal and savings .—(1) As from the date of the coming into force in any State of the 
provisions other than section 1 of this Act, all State Acts relating to suppression of immoral traffic 
in 2[persons] or to the prevention of prostitution, in force in that State immedi ately before such date shall 
stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of any State Act referred to in sub -section ( 1), anything 
done or any action taken (including any direction given, any register, rule or order made, any restriction 
imposed) under the provisions of such State Act shall in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act, as 
if the said provisions were in force when suc h thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue 
in force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
Explanation. —In this section the expression “State Act ” includes a “Provincial Act ”.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1986, s. 4, for “wom an or girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “women and girl” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  18 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( c)] 
 
Section  Magistrate competent to exercise the powers  
7 (1) District Magistrate.  
11(4) Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class.  
2***   
15(5) Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District 
Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate.  
16 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District 
Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate.  
18 District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate.  
19 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judi cial Magistrate of the first class, District 
Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate.  
20 District Magistrate, Sub -Divisional Magistrate or any Executive 
Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government.  
22B Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1978, s. 19 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1979 ). 
2. The Figures, brackets and words “12 ( 4) Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first Class” omitted by Act 44 of 
1986, s. 24 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1987).  
--------------------------The Indian Medical Council Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Constitution and composition of the Council.  
3A. Power of Central Government to supersede the Council and to constitute a Board of Governors  
3B. Certain modifications of the Act  
3C. Power of Central Government to give directions  
4. Mode of election.  
5. Restrictions on nomination and membership.  
6. Incorporation of the Council.  
7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members . 
8. Meetings of the Council.  
9. Officers, committees and servants of the Council.  
10. The Executive Committee . 
11. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities of medical institutions of India.  
12. Recognition of medical qualifications granted b y medical institutions in countries with which 
there is a scheme of reciprocity.  
13. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by certain medical institutions whose qualifications 
are not included in the First of Second Schedule.  
14. Special provision in certa in cases for recognition of medical qualifications granted medical 
institutions countries with which there is no scheme of reciprocity.  
15. Right of persons possessing qualifications in the Schedules to be enrolled.  
16. Power to require information as to courses o f study and examinations.  
17. Inspection of examinations.  
18. Visitors at examinations.  
19. Withdrawn of recognition.  
20. Post-graduate Medical Education Committee for assisting council in matters relating to post -
graduate medical education.  
21. The Indian Medical Register.  
22. Supply of copies of the State Medical Registers.  
23. Registration in the Indian Medical Register.  
24. Removal of names from the Indian Medical Register.  
25. Provisional registration for clinical practice.  
26. Registration of additional qualifications.  
27. Privileges of person s who are enrolled on the Indian Medical Regis . 
28. Person enrolled on the Indian Medical Register to notify change of place of residence or practice  
29. Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof.  
30. Commissions of inquiry.  
31. Protection of acti on taken in good faith . 
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations . 
34. Repeal of Act XXVII of 1933.  2 
 THE INDIAN MEDICAL COUNCIL ACT, 1956 * 
ACT NO.102 OF 1956  
[30th December , 1956 .] 
 An Act to provide for the reconstitution of the Medical Council of India, and the maintenance of a 
Medical Register for India and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament, in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council 
Act, 1956.  
(2)It extends  to the whole of India  1***. 
(3)It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “approved institution ” means a hospital, health center or other such institution recognised by a 
University as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if any, required by his course 
of study before the award of any medical  qualification to him;  
(b) “Council ” means the Medical Council of India constituted under this Act;  
3*   *  *  *   *; 
(d) “Indian Medical Register ” means the medical register maintained by the Council;  
(e) “medical institution ” means any institution, within or without India, which grants degrees, 
diplomas or licences in medicine;  
(f) “medicine ” means modern scientific medicine in all its branches and includes surgery and 
obstetrics, but does not include veterinary medicine and s urgery;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations;  
(h) “recognised medical qualification ” means any of the medical qualifications included in the 
Schedules;  
(i) “regulation ” means a regulation made under section 33;  
(j) “State Medical Council ” means  a medical council constituted under any law for the time being 
in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of medicine;  
(k) “State Medical Register ” means a register maintained under any law for the time being in 
force in any state regulating the registration of practitioners of medicine;  
(l) “University ” means any  University in India established by l aw and having a medical faculty.  
3. Constitution and composition of the Council .—(1) The Central Government shall cause to be 
constituted a Council consisting of the following members namely: — 
(a) one member from each State other than a Union Territory, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in consultation with the State Government concerned;  
(b) one member from each Universi ty, to be elected from amongst the members of the medical 
faculty of the University by members of the Senate of the University or in case the University has no 
senate, by members of the Court;  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 24 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
2. 1st November, 1958, vide notification No. S.O. 2254, dated 28th October, 1958,  see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 24 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
*Subject to verification a nd confirmation by the administrative ministry.  3 
 (c) one member from each State in which a State Medical Registe r is maintained, to be elected 
from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on such Register who possess the medical 
qualifications included in the First or the Second Schedule or in Part II of the Third Schedule;  
(d) seven members to be elected from amongs t themselves by persons enrolled on any of the State 
Medical Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of the Third Schedule;  
(e) eight members to be nominated by the Central Government.  
(2) The President and Vice -President of the  Council shall be elected by the members of the Council 
from amongst themselves.  
(3) No act done by the Council shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council.  
 3A. Power of Central Government to supersede the Council and to constitute a Board of 
Governors .—(1) On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) 
Act, 2010, the Council shall stand superseded and the President, Vice -President and other  members of the 
Council shall vacate their offices and shall have no claim for any compensation, whatsoever.  
(2) The Council shall be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of section 3 within a period 
of 2[three years] from the date of supersession of the Council under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Upon the supersession of the Council under sub -section ( 1) and until a new Council is constituted 
in accordance with section 3, the Board of Governors constituted under sub -section ( 4) shall exercise the 
powers and perform the functions of the Council under this Act.  
(4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute the Board of 
Governors which shall consist of not more than seven persons as its members, who shall be persons of 
eminence and of unimpeachable integrity in the fields of medicine and medical education, and who may 
be either nominated members or members, ex officio, to be appointed by the Central Government, one of 
whom shall be named by the Central Government as the Chairperson of the Board of Governors.  
(5) The Chairperson and the other members, other than the members, ex officio, shall be entitled to 
such sitting fee and travelling and other allowances as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(6) The Board of Governors shall meet at such time and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as is appli cable to the Council.  
(7) Two -third of the members of the Board of Governors shall constitute the quorum for its meetings.  
(8) No act or proceedings of the Board of Governors shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any  vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board of Governors; or  
(b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board of Governors not affecting the merits of the 
case.  
(9) A member having any financial or other interest in any matter coming bef ore the Board of 
Governors for decision shall disclose his interest in the matter before he may, if allowed by the Board of 
Governors, participate in such proceedings.  
(10) The Chairperson and the other members of the Board of Governors shall hold office d uring the 
pleasure of the Central Government.]  
 3B. Certain modifications of the Act .—1[During the period when the Council stands superseded, — 
(a) the provisions of this Act shall be construed as if for the word “Council ”, the words “Board of 
Governors ” were substituted;  
(b) the Board of Governors shall — 
(i) exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the Council under this Act and for this 
purpo se, the provisions of this Act shall have effect subject to the modification that references 
therein to the Council shall be construed as references to the Board of Governors;  4 
 (ii) grant independently permission for establishment of new medical colleges or  opening a 
new or higher course of study or training or increase in admission capacity in any course of study 
or training referred to in section 10A or giving the person or college concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard as provided under section  10A without prior permission of the Central 
Government under that section, including exercise of the power to finally approve or disapprove 
the same; and  
(iii) dispose of the matters pending with the Central Government under section 10A upon 
receipt of th e same from it.]  
3C. Power of Central Government to give directions .—1[(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Act, the Board of Governors or the Council after its reconstitution shall, in exercise of its powers and 
in the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, 
other than those relating to technical and administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is a matter of policy or not shall be 
final.]  
4. Mode of election .—(1) An election under clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by 
it in this behalf, and any rules so made may provide that pending the preparation of the Indian Medical 
Register in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the members referred to in clause ( d) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central Government instead of being elected as 
provided ther ein. 
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Council, it shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision shall be final.  
5. Restrictions on nomination and membership .—(1) No person shall be eligible for nomination 
under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications 
included in the First and Second Schedules, resides in the State concerned, and, where a State Medical 
Register is maintained in that State, is enrolled on that regi ster. 
(2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.  
6. Incorporation of the Council .—The Council so constituted shall be a body corporate by the name 
of the Medical Council of India, having perpetual succession and a commo n seal, with power to acquire 
and hold property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be 
sued.  
7. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members .—(1) The President or Vice -President 
of the Council shall hold office for a term not exceeding beyond the expiry of his term as member of the 
Council.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall hold office for a term of five years from 
the date of his nomination or election or until his success or shall have been duly nominated or elected, 
whichever is longer.  
(3) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without 
excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Council 
or, in the case of a member elected unde r clause (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, if he ceases to be a 
member of the medical faculty of the University concerned, or in the case of a member elected under 
clause ( c) or clause ( d) of that sub -section, if he ceases to be a person enrolled on the State Medical 
Register concerned.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by nomination or election, as the case may be, and 
the person nominated or elected to fill the vacancy sh all hold office only for the remainder of the term for 
which the member whose place he takes was nominated or elected.  
(5) Members of the Council shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  5 
 (6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire i n respect of any member, a successor may be 
nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume 
office until the said term has expired.  
8. Meetings of the Council .—(1) The Council shall meet at least on ce in each year at such time and 
place as may be appointed by the Council.  
(2) Unless otherwise provided by regulations, fifteen members of the Council shall form a quorum, 
and all the acts of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the members prese nt and voting.  
9. Officers, committees and servants of the Council .—(1) constitute from amongst its members an 
Executive Committee and such other Committees for general or special purposes as the Council deems 
necessary to carry out the purposes of this Ac t; 
(2) appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as 
Treasurer;  
(3) employ such other persons as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act;  
(4) require and take from the Registrar, or f rom any other employee, such security for the due 
performance of his duties as the Council deems necessary; and  
(5) with  the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the remuneration and allowances to be 
paid to the President, Vice -President and members of the Council and determine the conditions of service 
of the employees of the Council.  
10. The Executive Committe e.—(1) The Executive Committee, hereinafter referred to as the 
Committee, shall consist of the President and Vice -President, who shall be members ex office, and not 
less than seven and not more than ten other members who shall be elected by the Council fro m amongst 
its members.  
(2) The President and Vice -President shall be the President and Vice -President respectively of the 
Committee.  
(3) In addition to the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, the Committee 
shall exercise and discha rge such powers and duties as the Council may confer or impose upon it by any 
regulations which may be made in this behalf.  
11. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities of medical institutions of 
India .—(1) The medical qualifications g ranted by any University or medical institution in India which 
are included in the First Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in 
the First Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised, and the 
Central Government, after consulting the Council, ma y, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the 
First Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an 
entry shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such medical qualificat ion declaring 
that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
12. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in countries with 
which there is a scheme of reciprocity. —(1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions 
outside India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualification s for 
the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the Authority in any State or c ountry outside India  
which by the law of such State ,or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of medical 
practitioners, for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications, and 
in pursuance of any such  scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette  
amend the Second Schedule so as to include therein the medical qualification which the Council has 
decided should be recognised, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the 
last column of the Second Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a 
recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.  6 
 (3) The Central Government, after consultation with the  Council, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein in respect of any medical 
qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted before a 
specified date.  
(4) Where the Council has refused to recommend any medical qualification which has been proposed 
for recognition by any Authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) and that Authority applies to the Central 
Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after obtaining 
from the Council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification therei n and the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply to such notification.  
13. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by certain medical institutions whose 
qualifications are not included in the First of Second Schedule .—(1) The medical qualifications 
granted by medical institutions in India which are not included in the First Schedule and which are 
included in Part I of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualification s for the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India — 
(a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical insti tutions in the territories no w forming part of 
Pakistan, and  
(b) before the 1st day of April, 1937, by medical institutions in the territories no w forming part of 
Burma, which are included in Part I of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualification s 
for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India which are included in Par t 
II of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act, but 
no person possessing any such qualification shall be entitled to enrolment on any State Medical Register 
unless he is a citizen of India and has un dergone such practical training after obtaining that qualification 
as may be  required by the rules or regu lations in force in the country or State granting the qualification, or 
if he has not undergone any practical training in that country or State, he ha s undergone such practical 
training as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Central Government, after consulting the Council, may  by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend Part II of the Third Schedule so as to include therein any qualification granted by a medical 
institution outside India which is not i ncluded in the second Schedule.  
(5) Any medical institution in India which  is desirous of getting a medical qualification granted by it 
included in Part I of the Third Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification 
recognised and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend Part I of the Third Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such 
notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of Part I of the Third Schedule 
against such medical qualifica tion declaring that it shall be a recognised medical only when granted after 
a specified date.  
14. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of medical qualif ications granted medical 
institutions countries with which there is no scheme of reciproc ity.—(1) The Central Government 
after consultation with the Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that medical 
qualifications granted by medical institutions in any State or country outside India in respect of which a 
scheme of recip rocity for the recognition of medical qualifications is not in force, shall be 
recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a 
specified date:  
Provided that medical practice by the doctors possessing such qualifications shall be limited to the 
institution to which they are attached for the time being for purposes of teaching, research or charitable 
work and shall be limited to the period specified in this behalf by the Central Governme nt by general or 
special order.  7 
 (2) In respect of any such medical qualification, the Central Government, after consultation with the 
Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that it shall be a recognised medical 
qualification only when granted before a specified date.  
15. Right of persons possessing qualifications in the Schedules to be enrolled .—Subject to, the 
other provisions contained in this Act, the medical qualifications included in the Schedules shall be 
sufficient qualification for enrolment o n any State Medical Register.  
16. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations .—Every University or 
medical institution in India which grants a recognised  medical qualification shall furnish such information 
as the Council may, from time to, time, require as to the courses of study and examinations to be 
undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and 
exami nations are required to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the 
requisites for obtaining such qualification.  
17. Inspection of examinations. —(1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical 
inspectors as it may deem r equisite to attend at any or all of the examinations held by Universities or 
medical institutions in India for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recogni tion of 
medical qualifications.  
(2) Inspectors appointed under this section shall no t interfere with the conduct of any examination but 
they shall report to the Committee on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend and on any 
other matters in regard to which the Commit tee may require them to report.  
(3) The Committee shall f orward a copy of any such report to the University or medical institution  
concerned, and shall also for ward a copy with the remarks of the University or institution thereon, to the 
Central Government.  
18. Visitors at examinations. —(1) The Council may appoi nt such number of visitors as it may deem 
requisite to attend at any or all of the examinations held by Universities or medical institutions in India for 
the purpose of granting rec ognised medical qualifications.  
(2) Any person, whether he is a member of t he Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor under 
this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 17 for any examination shall not 
be appointed as a vi sitor for the same examination.  
(3) Visitors appointed, under this section shall not interfere with the conduct of any examination but 
they shall report to the President of the Council on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend 
and on any other matters in regard to which the Council may r equire them to report.  
(4) The report of 'a visitor stall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of  
the Council otherwise directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Council shall 
furnish the same.  
19. Withdrawn of recognition .—(1) When 'upon' report by the Committee or by a visitor appointed 
under section 18, it appears to the Council that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in 
any University or medical institution in India in order  to obtain a recognised medical qualification or that 
the standards 'of proficiency required from candidates at any examination held for the purpose of granting 
such qualification are not such as to secure to persons holding such qualification the knowledg e and skill 
requisite for the efficient practice of medicine, the Council shall make a representation to that ef fect to the 
Central Government.  
(2) After considering such repr esentation, the Central Govern ment may send it to the State 
Government of the Sta te in which the University or medical institution is situated and the State 
Government shall forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the University or 
medical institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University or medical institution 
may submit its expla nation to the State Government.  8 
 (3) On the receipt of the explanation or, where no, explanation is submitted within the period fixed, 
then on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommen dations to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against 
the said medi cal qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when 
grant ed before a specified date.  
20. Post -graduate Medical Education Committee for assisting council in matters relating to 
post-graduate medical education .—(1) The Council may prescribe standards of. post -graduate, medical 
education for the guidance of Universities, and may advise Universities in the matter of securing uniform 
standards for post - graduate medical education throughout India, and for this purpose the C entral 
Government may constitute from among the members of the Council a Post -graduate Medical Education 
Committee (hereinafter referred to a s the Post -graduate Committee).  
(2) The Post -graduate Committee shall consist of nine members all of whom shall be persons 
possessi ng post -graduate medical quali fications and experience of teaching or examining post -graduate 
students of medicine.  
(3) Six of the members of the Post -graduate Committee shall be nominated by the Central 
Government and the remaining three m embers shall be elected by the Council from amongst its members.  
(4) For the purpose of considering post -graduate studies in a subject, the Post -graduate Committee  
may co -opt, as and when neces sary, one or more members qualifie d to assist it in that subje ct. 
(5) The views and recommendations of the Post -graduate Committee on all matters shall be placed 
before the Council; and if the Council does not agree with the views expressed or the recommendations 
made by the Post -graduate Committee on any matter, the  Council shall forward them together with its 
observation's to the Central Government for decision.  
21. The Indian Medical Register .—(1) The Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed 
manner a register of medical practitioners to be known as th e Indian Medical Register, which shall 
contain the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Medical Register and 
who possess any of the rec ognised medical qualifications.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Council to keep the Indian Medical Register in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time 
to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of In dia and in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning o f the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ), and may be proved by a copy published, in the Gazette of India.  
22. Supply of cop ies of the State Medical Registers. —Each State Medical Council shall supply to 
the Council three printed copies of the State Medical Register as soon as may be after e commencement 
of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and  each Registrar of a State 
Medical Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the 
State Medical Regis ter made from time to time.  
23. Registration in the Indian Medical Register .—The Registrar of the Council m ay, on receipt of 
the report of registration of a person in a State Medical Register or on application made In the prescribed 
manner by any such person, enter his name in the Indian Medical Register:  
Provided that the. Registrar is satisfied that the perso n concerned possesses a recognised medical 
qualification.  
24. Removal of na mes fr om the Indian Medical Register. —(1) If the name of any person enrolled 
on a State Medical Register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power conferred by or under any 
law relating to registration of medi cal practitioners for the time being in force in any State, the Council 
shall direct the removal of the name of such person fr om the Indian Medical Register.  9 
 (2) Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Me dical Register on any ground 
other than that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application made 
by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Medical Register has been rejected, he may 
appeal in the pres cribed manner and subject to such conditions including conditions as to the payment of 
a fee as may -be laid down in rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, to the Central 
Government, whose decision, which shall be given after consulting the Co uncil, shall be binding on the 
State Government and on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Medical Register.  
25. Provisional registration for clinical practice .—If the courses of study to be undergone for 
obtaining a recognised medi cal qualification include a period of training after a person has passed the 
qualifying examination and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on 
application made by him in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a State Medical Register by 
the State Medical Council concerned in order to enable him to practise medicine in an approved 
institution for the period aforesaid.  
26. Registration of additional qualifications. —(1) If any person whose name is entered in the 
Indian Medical Register obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary 
science, public health or medicine, which is a recognised medical, qualification, he shall on application 
made in this behalf in the prescribed manner, be entitled to have an entry, stating such other title, diploma, 
or other qualification made against his name in the Indian Medical Register either in substitution for or in 
additio n to any entry previously made.  
(2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State Medical Register shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in t he Indian Medical Register.  
27. Privileges of persons who are enrolled on the Indian Medical Register .—Subject to the 
conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act  regarding medical practice by persons possessing certain 
recognised medical qualifications, every person whose name Is for the time being borne on the Indian 
Medical Register shall be entitled according to his qualifications to practise as a medical pract ioner in any 
part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in 
respect of medicaments or other appliances, or any fees to which he may be entitled.  
28. Person enrolled on the Indian Medical Register to n otify change of place of residence or 
practice.—Every person registered in the Indian Medical Register shall notify any transfer of the place of 
his residence or practice to the Council and to the State Medical Council concerned, within thirty days of 
such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the Council or a State 
Medical Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either permanently, or 
for such period as may be specified therein.  
29. Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof. —(1) The Council shall 
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the Central 
Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Cent ral Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract 
or other information furnished to it under this section or under sections 17 and, 18.  
30. Commissions of inquiry. —(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Go vernment that the 
Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the 
particulars of the complaint to a Commission of Inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be 
appointed by the Central Gover nment, one being a Judge of a High Court, and one by the Council, and 
such Commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government 
as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of  default or of improper 
action being found by the Commission to have been established, the Commission shall recommend the 
remedies, if any, whic h are in its opinion necessary.  
(2) The Central Government may require the Council to adopt the remedies so reco mmended within 
such time as, having regard to the report of the Commission, it may think fit, and if the Council fails to 
comply with any such requirement, the Central Government' may amend the regulations of the Council, 10 
 or make such provision or order or  take such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the 
recommendations of the Commission.  
(3) A Commission of enquiry  shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance 'of 
witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the 
purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under the Code o f Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ). 
31. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government, the Council or a State Medical Council or any Committee thereof, or any 
officer or servant o f the Government or Councils aforesaid for anything which is in good faith .dope or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1)The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules    to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2)All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less than thirty days before both Houses of 
Parliament as soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following.  
33. Power to make regulations .—The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to 
the generality of this power, s uch regulations may provide for — 
(a) the management of the property of the Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts;  
(b) the  summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the times and places where such 
meetings are to be held, the conduct of business there at and the number of members necessary to 
constitute a quorum;  
(c) the resignation of members of the Council;  
(d) the powers and duties of the President and Vice -President;  
(e) the mode of appointment of the Executive Committee and other Committees, the summoning 
and holding of meetings, and the conduct of business of such Committees;  
(f) the tenure of office, and the po wers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants 
of the Council;  
1[(fa) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given  in such scheme, the manner in which the 
scheme is to be preferred and the fee payable with the scheme under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 10A;  
(fb) any other factors under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 7) of section 10A;  
(fc) the criteria for identifying a student who has been granted a medical qualification referred to 
in the Explanation to sub -section ( 3) of section 10B.]  
(g) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for 
regis tration under this Act;  
(h) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act;  
(i) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of medical inspectors and visitors;  2*** 
3[(j) the courses and peri od of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of 
examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in Universities or medical 
institutions for grant of rec ognised medical qualifications;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e .f. 27 -8-1992).  
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 24 of 1964, s. 16 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e..f 16 -6-1964).  11 
 (k) the standards of staff,  equipment, accommodation, training and other fa cilities for medical 
education;  
(1) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions of 
admission to such examinations;  
(m) the standards of professional conduct and et iquette and code of ethics to be observe d by 
medical practitioners; and]  
1[(ma) the modalities for conducting screening tests under sub -section ( 4A), and under the proviso 
to sub -section ( 4B), and for issuing eligibility certificate under sub -section ( 4B), of section 13; ] 
2[(mb) the designated authority, other languages and the manner of conducting of uniform 
entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and            
post-graduate level;]  
3[(n)] the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of 
examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in Universities or medical 
institutions for grant of recognised medical qualifications;  
34. Repeal of Act XXVII of 1933 .—As soon as the new Act [that is, the Indian Medical Council Act, 
1956 is brought into force, the existing Council will cease to function as there is no provision for 
continuing the existing Council, and some time will necessary  have to elapse before a new Council can be 
constituted under the 1956 Act. As it is desirable that there should be continuity in the existence of the 
Medical Council, it is proposed to provide for the continuance of the existing Council after the 
commence ment of the new Act until the new Council is constituted. ” This section gives effect to this 
object.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -5-2016).  
3. Clause ( j) re-lettered as Clause ( n) by Act 24 of 1964,  s. 16 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1964).  
--------------------------The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE INTER -STATE  RIVER  WATER DISPUTES ACT, 1956  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Complaints by State Governments as to water disputes . 
4. Constitution of Tribunal . 
5. Adjudication of water disputes . 
5A. Filling of vacancies . 
6. Publication of decision of Tribunal . 
6A. Power to make schemes to implement decision of Tribunal . 
7. Prohibition of levy of seigniorage, etc.  
8. Bar of reference of certain disputes to Tribunal . 
9. Powers of Tribunal . 
9A. maintenance of date bank and information . 
10. Allowances or fees for presiding officer of Tribunal and assessors.  
11. Bar of jurisdiction of Supreme Court and other courts . 
12. Dissolution of Tribunal . 
13. Power to make rules.  
14. Constitution of Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal . 
 
   2 
  THE INTE R-STATE  RIVER  WATER DISPUTES ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 33 OF 19561 
[28th August , 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter -State rivers and river 
valleys . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the2[Inter-State River] Water Disputes Act, 
1956.  
(2) It extends  to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(b) “Tribunal ” means a Water Disputes Tribunal constituted under section 4;  
(c) “water dispute ” means any dispute or difference between two or more Sta te Governments with 
respect to — 
(i) the use, distribution or control of the water s of, or in , any inter -State river or river valley; 
or 
(ii) the interpretation of the terms of any agreement relating to the use, distribution or control 
of such waters or the implementation of such agreement; or  
(iii) the levy of any water rate in contravention of the prohibition contained in section 7.   
3. Complaints by State Governments as to water disputes .—If it appears to the Government of  
any State that a water dispute  with the Government of another State has arisen or is likely to arise by 
reason of the fact that the interests of the State, or of any of the inhabitants thereof, in the waters of an 
inter-State river or river valley have been, or are likely to  be, affect ed prejudicially by — 
(a) any executive action or legislation taken or passed, or proposed to be taken or passed, by the 
other State; or  
(b) the failure of the other State or any authority therein to exercise any of their powers with 
respect to the use, dis tribution or control of such waters; or  
(c) the failure of the other State to implement the terms of any agreement relating to the use, 
distribution or control of such waters , 
the State Government may, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, request the Central 
Government to refer the water dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication.  
4. Constitution of Tribunal .—3[(1) When any request under section 3 is received from any State 
Government in respect of any water dispute and the Central Government is of opinion that the water 
dispute cannot be settled by negotiations, the Central Government shall, within a period not exceeding 
one year from the date of receipt of such request, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Water Disputes Tribunal for the adjudication of the water dispute:  
Provided that any dispute settled by a Tribunal before the commencement of the Inter -State Water 
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2002  (14 of 200 0) shall not be re -opened .] 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and First Schedule and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7  
of 1973, s. 3 and First Schedule.  
 The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and First Schedule.   
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 2002, s. 2, for “Inter -State” (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  3 
 1[(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and two other members nominated in this behalf by the 
Chief Justice of India from among persons who at the time of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court .] 
2[(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Tribunal, appoint two or more persons as 
assessors to advise the Tribual in the proceedings before it.]  
5. Adjudication of water disputes —(1) When a Tribunal has been constituted under section 4, the 
Central Government shall, subject to the prohibition contained in section 8, refer the water disputes and 
any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the water dispute to the Tribunal for 
adjudication.  
3[(2) The Tribunal shall investigate the matters referred to it and forward to the Central Government a 
report setting out the facts as found by it and giving its decision on the mattes referred to it  within a 
period of three years:  
Provided that if the decision cannot be given for unavoidable reasons, within a period of three years, 
the Central Government may extend the period for a further period not exceeding two years.  
(3) If,upon consideration of the decision of the Tribunal, the Central Government or any State 
Government is  of opinion that anything therein contained requires explanation or that guidance is needed 
upon any point not originally referred to the Tribunal, the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, within three months from the date of the  decision, again refer the matter to the 
Tribunal for further consideration, and on such reference, the Tribunal may forward to the Central 
Government a further report within one year from the date of such reference giving such explanation or 
guidance as i t deems fit and in such a case, the decision of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be modified 
accordingly:  
Provided that the period of one year within which the Tribunal may forward its report to the Central 
Government may be extended by the Central Governme nt, for such further period as it considers 
necessary.]  
4[(4) If the members of the Tribu nal differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority.]  
5[5A. Filling of vacancies. —If, for any reason  a vacancy (other than a temporary absence ) occurs in 
the office of the Chairman or any other member of a Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled by a person to 
be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India in accordance with the provisions of sub -section 
(2) of section 4, and the investigation of the matter referred to the Tribunal may be continued by the 
Tribunal after the vacancy is filed and from the stage at which the vacancy occurred.]  
6. Publication of decision of Tribunal .—6[(1)] The Central Governmen t shall publish the decision 
of the Tribunal in the Official Gazette and the decision shall be  final and binding on the parties to the 
dispute and shall be given effect to by them.  
7[(2) The decision of the Tribunal, after its publication in the Official Gazette by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 1), shall have the same force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court.]  
8[6A. Power to make schemes to i mplement decision of Tribunal. —(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 6, the Central  Gover nment may, be notification in t he Official Gazette, frame a 
scheme or scheme s whereby provision may be made for all matters necessary to give effect to the 
decision of a Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 5 of 1968, s. 2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 2002, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1968, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968).  
6. Section 6 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 14 of 2002, s. 5 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
7. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -8-1980).  4 
 (2) A scheme framed under s ub-section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the est ablishment of any authority (whether described as such or as a committee or other 
body) for the implementation of the decision or directions of the Tribunal;  
(b) the composition, jurisdiction, powers and functions of the authority, the term of office and 
other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed by, and the manner of filling vacancies 
among, the members of the authority;  
1[(ba) requisitioning of any data, as may be required by it.]  
(c) the holding of a minimum under of meetings of the aut hority ever y year, the quorum for such 
meetings and the procedure thereat;  
(d) the appointment of any standing ad hoc  or other committees by the authority;  
(e) the employment of a Secretary a nd other staff by the authority,  the pay and allowances and 
other conditions of service of such staff;  
(f) the constitution of a fund by the  authority, the amount s that may be credited to such fund and 
the expenses t o which the fund may be applied;  
(g) the form and the manner in which ac counts shall be kept by the authority;  
(h) the submission of an annual report by the authority of its activities;  
(i) the decisions of the authority which shall be subject to review;  
(j) the constitution of a committee for making such review and the proced ure to be followed by 
such committee; and  
(k) any other matter which may be necessary or proper for the effective implementation of the 
decision or directions of the Tribunal.  
(3) In making provision in any scheme framed under  sub-section ( 1) for the establishment of an 
authority for giving effect to the decision of a Tribunal, the Central Government may, having regard to 
the nature of the jurisdiction, powers and functions required to be vested in such authority i n accordance 
with such decision  and al l other relevant circumstances, declare in the said scheme that such authority 
shall, under the name specified in the said scheme s have capacity to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
enter into contracts, sue and be sued and do all such acts as may be necessary for the proper exercise and 
discharge of its jurisdiction, powers and functions.  
(4) A scheme may empower the authority to make, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, regulation s for giving effect to the purposes of the scheme.  
(5) The Central Government may, by noti fication in the Official Gazette , add to , amend, or vary, any 
scheme framed under sub -section ( 1). 
(6) Every Scheme framed under thi s section shall have effect not withstand  anything contained in any 
law for the time be ing in force (other than this Act) or any instrument having effect by virtue of any law 
other than this Act.  
(7) Every scheme and every regulation made under a scheme shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session o r the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses a gree in 
making any modification in the scheme or the regulation or both houses agree that the scheme or the 
regulation should not be made, the scheme or the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that scheme or 
regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  5 
 7. Prohibition of levy of seigniorage, etc .—(1) No State Government shall, by reason only of the 
fact that any works for the conservation, regulation or utilisation of water resources of an inter -State river 
have been constructed within the limits of the State, impose , or authori se the imposition of, any 
seigniorage or additional rate or fee (by whatever name called) in respect of the use of such water by any 
other State or the inhabitants thereof.  
(2) Any dispute or difference between two or more State Governments with r espect to the levy of any 
water  rate in contravention of the prohibition contained in sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a water 
dispute.  
8. Bar of reference of certain disputes to Tribunal .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 3 or section 5, no reference shall be made to a  Tribunal of any dispute that may arise regarding 
any matter which may be referred to arbitration under the River Boards Act,1[1956].  
9. Powers of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and produ ction of documents and material  objects;  
2[(ba) requisitioning of any data, as may be required by it;]  
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witness es or for local investigation;  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The Tribunal may require any State Government to carry out, or per mit to be carried out, such 
surveys and investigation as may be considered necessary for the adjudication of any water dispute 
pending before it.  
(3) A decision of the Tribunal may contain directions as to the Government by which the expenses of 
the Tribun al and any costs incurred by any State Government in appearing before the Tribunal are to be 
paid, and may fix the amount of any expenses or costs  to be so paid, and so far as it relates to expense or 
costs, may be enforced as if it were an order made by t he Supreme Court.  
(4) 3[Subject to the provisions of this act and any rules that may be made there under], the Tribunal 
may, by order, regulate its practice and procedure.  
4[9A. maintenance  of date bank and information. —(1) The Central Government shall maintain a 
data bank and information system at the national level for each river basin which shall include data 
regarding water resources, land, agriculture, and matters relation thereto, as the C entral Government may 
prescribe  form time to time. The State  Government shall supply the date to the Central Government or to 
an agency appointed by the Central Government for the purpose s, as and when required.  
(2) The Central Government shall have powers to verify the data supplied by the State Government , 
and ap point any person or person s for the purpose and take such measures as it may consider necessary. 
The person or persons so appointed shall have the powers to summon such records and information from 
the concerned State Government as are considered necessary  to discharge their functions under this 
section.]  
10. Allowances or fees for presiding officer of Tribunal and assessors .—5[The Chairman and 
other members of a Tribunal] and the assessors shall be entitled to receive such remuneration, allowances 
or fees as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 2 and the  Second Schedule , for “1955”  (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  
2. Ins.by Act 14 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1968, s. 5, for “Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act” (w.e.f. 22-8-1968).  
4. Ins. by Act 14 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 1968, s. 6, for “The presiding officer of a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968).  6 
 11. Bar of jurisdiction of Supreme Court and other courts .—Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law, neither the Supreme Court nor any other Court shall have or exercise jurisdiction in 
respect of any water dispute which ma y be referred to a Tribunal under this Act.  
12. Dissolution of Tribunal .—The Central Government shall dissolve the Tribunal after it has 
forwarded its report and as soon as the Central Government is satisfied that no further reference to the 
Tribunal in th e matter would be necessary.  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, after consult ation with the State 
Government s, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form and manner in which complaint as to any water dispute may be made by any State 
Government;  
(b) the matters in respect of which a Tribunal may be vested with the powers of a Civil Court;  
(c) the procedure to be followed by a Tribunal under this Act;  
(d) the remuneration, allowances or fees payable to1[the Chairman and other members] of a 
Tribunal and as sessors;  
2[(e) the terms and conditions of service of officer s and assessors of the Tribunal; ] 
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before e ach 
House of Parliament while it is in session fo r a total period of thirty days ,4[which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule of both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in the modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that an y such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
5[14. Constitution of Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
in the foregoing provisions of this Act, t he Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, a constitute a Tribunal under this Act, to be known as the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal for the 
verification and adjudication of the matters referred to in paragraphs 9.1 and 9.2, respect ively , of the 
Punjab Settlement.  
(2) When a Tribunal has been constituted under sub -section ( 1), the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and 
(3) of section 4, sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 5 and section s 5A to 13 (both inclusive ) of this 
Act relating to the constitution, jurisdiction, powers, authority and bar or jurisdiction shall, so far as may 
be, but subject to sub -section ( 3) hereof, apply to the constitution, jurisdiction , powers, authority and bar  
of jurisdiction in relation to the Tribunal constituted under sub-section ( 1). 
(3) When a Tribunal has been constituted under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government alone may 
suo motu  or at the request of the concerned State Government refer the mattes s pecified in paragraphs 9.1 
and 9.2 of the Punjab Settlement to such Tribunal.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “Punjab Settlement ” means the Memorandum of 
Settlement signed at New Delhi on the 24th day of July, 1985.]  
_____  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1968, s. 7, for “the presiding officer” (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968). 
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 2002, s. 8, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 28 -3-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1968, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 22 -8-1968).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 1980, s.  3, for certain words  (w.e.f. 27 -9-1980).  
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 1986, s. 2 ( w.e.f. 2 -4-1986).  
--------------------------The Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR (EXTENSION OF LAWS) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1956  
[25th September, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain laws to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir (Extension 
of Laws) Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Extension and amendment of certain laws .—(1) The Acts and Ordinance mentioned in the 
Schedule and all rules, orders and regulations made there under are hereby extended to, and shall be i n 
force , in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(2) With effect fr om the commencement of this Acts  the Act and Ordinance mentioned in the 
Schedule shall be amended as specified therein.  
3. Construction of references to laws not in force in Jammu and Kashmir .—Any reference in any 
Act or in the Ordinance mentioned in the Schedule to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in 
force in that State.  
4. Construction of references to authorities where new authorities have been constituted .—Any 
reference by whatever form of words in any law for the time being in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir to any authority competent at the date of the passing of that law to exercise any powers or 
discharge any functions in that State shall, where a corresponding new authority has been constituted by 
or under any law now extended to that State, have effect as if it were a reference to the new authority.  
5. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the commencement of this Act there is in force in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir any law corresponding to any Act or Ordinance now extended to that 
State, that law shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in th is Act, stand repealed on such 
commencement:  
Provided  that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered hereunder,  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or in curred under any law so 
repealed,  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege 
obligation, l iability, penalty, forfeit ure or punishment as aforesaid ; 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided  further  that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken (including 
any appointment or delegation made, notification, instruc tion or direction issued, form, bye-law or 
scheme framed, certificate obtained, permit or licence  granted or registration effected) under any such law 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act or Ordinance 
now extended to that State, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until supersede d by 
anything done or any action taken under the said Act or Ordinance.  
                                                           
1. 1st November , 195 6, vide notification No. S. R. O. 2327, dated 10th October , 195 6, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,      
Part II, sec. 3.  2 
 6. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of any 
Act or Ordinance now extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Central Gov ernment may, by 
order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it 
necessary for the removal of the difficulty.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such no tified 
order may, — 
(a) specify the corresponding authorities within the meaning of section 4 , 
(b) provide for the transfer of any matter pending immediately before the commencement of this 
Act before any court, tribunal or other authority, to any correspon ding court, tribunal or authority for 
disposal , 
(c) specify the areas or circumstances in which, or the extent to which, or the conditions subject 
to which, anything done or any action taken (including any of the matters specified in the second 
proviso to section 5) under any law repealed by that section shall be recognised or given effect to 
under the corresponding provision of the Act or Ordinance now extended.  
 
  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
ACTS 
The Opium Act,  1857  
 (13 of 1857)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Government Savings Banks Act, 1873  
(5 of 1873)  
Section 1 .—Omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”.  
The Negotiable Instruments Act,  1881  
 (26 of 1881)  
Section 1. —Omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3 .—Omit  the definition of “India ”. 
Section 137 .—Omit “or the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
 The Police Act,  1888  
(3 of 1888)  
Section 1 .—For sub -section ( 2), substitute —  
“(2) It extends to the whole of India. ”  
The Indian Merchandise Marks Act,  1889  
(4 of 1889)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( 6). 
The Live -stock Importation Act,  1898  
(9 of 1898)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—In clause ( c), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
Section 3 .—In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Coinage Act,  1906  
(3 of 1906)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 23 .—For “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Patents and Designs Act,  1911  
(2 of 1911)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—(a) To clause ( 1), add “and in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the     
Advocate -General for that State ”. 
(b) Omit clause ( 7A). 4 
 Section 80 .—(a) In the opening paragraph of sub -section ( 1), for the portion beginning with the words 
“If immediately ” and ending with the words “to which this Act extends ”, substitute — 
“If immediately before — 
(i) the 18th day of April, 1950, in relation to any Part B State other than the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, and  
(ii) the date of commencement of the Jammu and Kash mir (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956, in 
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir,  
there was in force in the Part B State concerned ”. 
(b) In sub -section ( 2), after “Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, ”, (3 of 1951), insert “or section 5 of the 
Jammu and Kashmir  (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956, ”. 
The Destructive Insects and Pests Act,  1914  
(2 of 1914)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( d). 
Omit section 4C.  
Section 5A .—Omit “or exports or attempts to  export from India to the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
any article or insect in respect of which a notification under section 4C has been issued ”. 
The Indian Copyright Act,  1914  
(3 of 1914)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( 1A). 
The Indian Cotton Cess Act,  1923  
(14 of 1923)  
Section 1 .—For sub -section ( 2), substitute — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which 
the provisions of this Act relate to the levy and collection of the cess specified therein. ”. 
Section 3 .—(a) In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, and “the said 
territories ”, substitute “India ”. 
(b) In sub -section ( 2), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Soldiers (Litigation) Act,  1925  
(4 of 1925)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Dangerous Drugs Act,  1930  
(2 of 1930)  
Throughout the Act, for “the States ”, substitute “India ”. 
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( II). 
  5 
 The Indian Lac Cess Act,  1930  
(24 of 1930)  
Section 1 .—For sub -section ( 2), substitute — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which 
the provisions of this Act relate to the levy and collection of the cess specified therein. ”. 
The Reserve Bank of India Act,  1934  
(2 of 1934)  
Section 1 .—In su b-section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( g). 
After section 26, insert — 
“26A. Certain bank notes to cease to be legal tender .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 26, no bank note of the denominational va lue of five hundred rupees, one thous and rupees or 
ten thousand rupees issued before the 13th day of January, 1946, shall be legal tender in payment or 
on account for the amount expressed therein. ”. 
The Petroleum Act,  1934  
(30 of 1934)  
Section 1 .—In sub-section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—For clause ( d), substitute — 
 “(d) „to transport petroleum ‟ means to move petroleum from one place to another in India; ”. 
In clause ( e), for “the territories to which this Act extend s”, substitute “India ”. 
The Insurance Act, 1938  
(4 of 1938)  
Throughout the Act, for “the States ” and “the States of India ”, substitute “India ”. 
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( 14A).  
Section 114 .—In clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), omit “in India or ” and “as the case may be ”. 
The Trade Marks Act,  1940  
(5 of 1940)  
 Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
 Section 2 .—In sub -section ( 1), omit clause ( dd). 
The Agricultural Produce Cess Act,  1940  
(27 of 1940)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”.  
Section 3 .—In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Coconut Committee Act,  1944  
(10 of 1944)  
Section 1 .—For sub -section ( 2), substitute — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India:  6 
 Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which 
the provisions of this Act relate to the le vy and collection of the duty of excise specified therein. ”.  
Section 3 .—In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends ” and “the said territories ”, 
substitute “India ”. 
The Indian Oilseeds Committee Act,  1946  
(9 of 1946)  
 Section 1 .—For sub-section ( 2), substitute — 
“(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which 
the provisions of this Act relate to the levy and collection of the duty of excise and the  duty of 
customs specified therein. ”. 
Section 3 .—In sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”; 
(b) for “the said territories ” occurring in two places, substitute “India ”; 
The Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,  1946  
(25 of 1946)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,  1947  
(7 of 1947)  
Throughout the Act, for “the States ”, substitute “India ”. 
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( m) and re -letter clause ( n) as clause ( m). 
The Antiquities (Export Control ) Act, 1947  
(31 of 1947)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—In clause ( b), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Atomic Energy Act, 1948  
(29 of 1948)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 15 .—In sub -section ( 3), for “Advocate -Genera l of India ”, substitute “Attorney -General for 
India ”. 
The Banking Companies Act, 1949  
(10 of 1949)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 5 .—In sub -section ( 1), omit clause ( gg). 
Section 11 .—In the Explanation  to sub -section ( 3), for “in India ”, substitute “in a State ”. 
The Banking Companies (Legal Practitioners ’ Clients’ Accounts ) Act, 1949  
(46 of 1949)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 7 
 The Emblems and Names (Preventi on of Improper Use) Act,  1950  
(12 of 1950)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Public Premises (Eviction) Act,  1950  
(27 of 1950)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—For clause ( b), substitute — 
“(b) 1„[public premises] ‟ means, — 
(i) in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, any premises 2*** belonging to, or taken on 
lease by or on behalf of the Central Government, or acquired or requisitioned on behalf of the Central 
Government by the State Government; and  
(ii) in relation to the rest of India, any premises 2*** belonging to, or taken on lease or 
requisitioned by, the Central Government or requistioned by the competent authority under the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 (30 of 1952), and, in relation to the 
State of Delhi, includes also any premises 2*** 3[vested in the Delhi Improvement Trust or a local 
authority in that territory, whether such premises are in the possession of, or have been leased out by, 
the Trust or local authority, as the case may be]; ”. 
The State Financial Corporations Act,  1951  
(63 of 1951)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The State Armed Police Forc es (Extension of Laws) Act, 1952  
(63 of 1952)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Khadi and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act,  1953  
(12 of 1953)  
Section 1 .—In sub-section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—For clause ( a), substitute — 
“(a) „appointed day‟  means. — 
(i) in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the date on which the Jammu and Kashmir 
(Extension of Laws) Act, 1956, come s into force in that State; and  
(ii) in relation to the rest of India, the 15th day of February, 1953; ”. 
Section 3 .—In sub -section ( 1), for “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
The Salt Cess Act,  1953  
(49 of 1953)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 3 .—For “the territories to which this Act extends ”, substitute “India ”. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Government premises” (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  
2. The words “ or land” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  
3. Sub s. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  8 
 The Companies Act,  1956  
(1 of 1956)  
Section 1 .—For sub -section ( 3), substitute — 
“(3) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extent to which 
the provisions of this Act relate to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of banking, insurance 
and financial corp orations .” 
Section 2 .—Omit clause ( 20). 
Section 3. —In sub -section ( 1), for sub -clause ( f) of clause ( ii), substitute — 
“(f) Any law corresponding to any of the Acts or the Ordinance aforesaid and in force — 
(1) in the merged territories or in a Part B State (other than the State of Jammu                     
and Kashmir), or any part thereof, before the extension thereto of the Indian Comp anies           
Act, 1913 (7 of 1913); or 
(2) in the State of Jammu and Kashmi r, or any part thereof, before the commencement of the 
Jammu and Kashmir (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956; ”. 
In sub -section ( 2), omit clause ( b). 
Section 226 .—In clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), before “entitling him to act ”, insert “or of the Jammu 
and Kashmir  (Extension of Laws) Act, 1956, as the case may be, ”. 
Section 558 .—In sub -section ( 1), om it the Explanation.  
Section 565 .—In sub -section ( 3), omit “or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 582 .—In sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( a), omit “or in the State  of Jammu and Kashmir 
immediately before the 26th January 1950 ”. 
ORDINANCE  
The Currency Ordinance,  1940  
(4 of 1940)  
Section 1 .—In sub -section ( 2), omit “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2 .—For “the territories to which this Ordinance extends ”, and “the said territories ”, substitute 
“India ”. 
--------------------------The Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION ACT, 1956  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to add to the Schedule.  
CHAPTER II  
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Commission.  
5. Powers and functions of the Chief Executive Officer.  
5A. Powers and functions of the Fin ancial Adviser.  
6. Disqualifications for membership of the Commission.  
6A. Removal of Chairman, Member, etc., from the Commission .  
7. Resignation of office by member.  
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Commission.  
9. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for particular purposes.  
10. Constitution of the Board.  
11. Commission to consult the Board.  
12. Meetings of the Commission.  
12A. Zonal Committee.  
13. Term of office and conditions of service of the chairman and other members.  
14. Officers and servants of the Commission.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
15. Functions of the Commission.  
16. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
17. Paymen t to the Commission.  
17A. Commission to receive gifts, grants, etc.  
18. Funds of the Commission.  2 
 SECTION S 
19. Power of the Commission to spend.  
19A. Standing Finance Committees.  
19B. Recovery of monies due to the Commission as arrears of land -revenue.  
20. Budget.  
21. Borrowing of money.  
22. Transfer of liabilities and obligations to the Commission.  
23. Accounts and audit.  
24. Returns and reports.  
24A. Exemption from liability to pay income -tax. 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Dissolution of the Commission.  
26. Power to make rules.  
27. Power to make regulations.  
28. Rules and Regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION ACT, 1956 * 
ACT NO. 61 OF 1956  
[25th September, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Commission for the development of Khadi and 
Village Industries and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called The Khadi and Village Industries Commission 
Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “the Board ” means the Board constituted under  1[section 10];  
(b) “chairman ” means the chairman of the Commission;  
(c) “Commission ” means the Khadi and Village Industries Commission established under     
section 4;  
2[(cc) “fixed capital investment ” includes investment in plant and machinery and land and 
building of an industry;]  
(d) “khadi ” means any cloth woven on handlooms in India from cotton, silk or woolen yarn 
handspun in India or from a mixture of any two or all of such yarns;  
(e) “member ” means a member of the Commission  3[and includes the chairman  4***];  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
5[(ff) “rural area ” means the area comprised in any village, and includes the area comprised in any 
town, the population of which does not exceed  6[twenty thousand] or such other figure as the Central 
Government may specify from time to time;]  
7*                                          *                                        *                                         *                                    *  
8*                                          *                                        *                                         *                                    *  
9[(h) “village industry ” means,— 
(i) any industry located in a rural area which produces any goods or renders any service with 
or without the use of power and in which the fixed capital investment per head of an  artisan or a 
worker does not exceed  10[one lakh rupees] or such other sum as may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, be specified from time to  time by the Central Government:  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “section 9” (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1961, s. 2, for “and includes the chairman” (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
4. The words “and the vice -chairman” omitted by Act 12 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
5. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 2, for “ten thousand” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
7. Omitted by Act 12 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
8. Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
9. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987). 
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 2, for “fifteen thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the administrative ministry.  4 
 Provided that any industry specified in the schedule and located in an ar ea other than a rural 
area and recognised as a village industry at any time before the commencement of the Khadi and 
Village Industr ies Commission (Amendment) Act, 1987  (12 of 1987),  shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this sub -clause, continue to  be a village industry under this Act : 
1[Provided further that in the case of any industry located in a hilly area, the provisions of this 
this s ub-clause shall have effect as if for the words “one lakh rupees ”, the words “one lakh and 
fifty thousand rupees ” steal.]  
(ii) any  other non -manufacturing unit established for the sole purpose of promoting, 
maintaining, assisting, servicing (including mother units) or managing any village industry;]  
3. [Power to add to the Schedule .] Omitted by Khadi  and Village Industries Commission 
(Amendment ) Act 1987 (12 of 1987), s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-7-1987).  
CHAPTER II  
THE KHADI AND VILLAGE INDUSTRIES COMMISSION  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Commission .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf, there shall be 
established a Commission to be called the Khadi and Village Industries Commission which shall be a 
body corporate having  perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose 
of property and to contract, and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
2[(1A) Save as otherwise provided under this Act and the rules made thereunder, the exercise of all 
powe rs and discharge of all functions under this Act, including general superintendence, direction and 
management of day -to-day affairs of the Commission, shall vest in the Commission.]  
3[(2) The Commission shall consist of the following members appointed by the Central Government, 
namely:— 
(a) six non -official members  4[having specialised knowledge and not less than ten years of 
experience of khadi or village industries] and representing such six geographical zones of the country, 
as may be prescribed;  
5[(b) four non -official members of whom each member shall be from the following disciplines, 
namely:— 
(i) one member having expert knowledge and experience in Science and Technology;  
(ii) one member having expert knowledge and experience in Marketing;  
(iii) one member having expert knowledge and experience in Rural Development; and  
(iv) one member having expert knowledge and experience in Technical Education and 
Training .] 
6[(ba) the Chairman of the State Bank of India constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section  3 of 
the State Bank of India Act, 1955  (23 of 1955) or an officer not below the rank of the Deputy 
Managing Director as may be nominated by the Chairman of the State Bank of India —ex officio ;]; 
7[(c) a Chief Executive Officer, ex officio ; and  
(d) a Financ ial Adviser, who shall also be the Chief Accounts Officer of the Commission,              
ex officio .] 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 4, for sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 3, for “having speciali sed knowledge and experience of khadi and village industries”  
(w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006) . 
7. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause s (c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  5 
 1*                               *                                *                                    *                                   *  
(3) The Central Government may appoint one of the members appointed under clause ( a) of           
sub-section ( 2) to be the chairman who shall be a full -time member.]  
2[5. Powers and functions of the Chief Executive Officer .—3[(1) Subject to the provisions 
contain ed in sub -section ( 1A) of section 4, the Chief Executive Officer, appointed under clause ( c) of    
sub-section ( 2) of section 4, shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions in respect of general 
superintendence over the affairs of the Commission and its day -to-day management, as may be 
prescribed.  
(1A) Without prejudice to the powers and functions referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Chief Executive 
Officer shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions under the general superin tendence, 
direction and management of the Commission.]  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer  4[shall, in addition to exercise of the powers and discharge of the 
functions referred to in sub -section ( 1), be responsible] for the furnishing of all returns, reports and 
statements required to be furnished to the Central Government under section 24.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Chief Executive Officer to place before the Commission for its 
consideration and decision any matter of financial import if the Financial Ad viser suggests to him in 
writing that such matter be placed before the Commission.  
5[5A. Powers and functions of the Financial Adviser .—The Financial Adviser  6[appointed under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 shall be in charge of such financial matters of the Commission 
including its budget, accounts and audit, as may be prescribed] and it shall be the duty of the Financial 
Adviser to bring to the notice of the Commission through the Chief Executive Officer any matter of 
financial import, which, in his opinion, requires consideration and decision by the Commission.  
6. Disqualifications for membership of the Commission .—A person shall be disquali fied for being 
appointed as, and for being, a member of the Commission — 
(a) if he is, or is found to be  a lunatic or a person of unsound mind; or  
(b) if he has been adjudged insolvent; or  
(c) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude; or  
(d) if he has any financial interest in any subsisting contract made with or in any work being don e 
by the Commission, except as a shareholder (other than a Director), in a company as defined in 
section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) : 
Provided that where he is a shareholder, he shall disclose to the Central Government, the nature 
and extent of shares held by him in such a company; or  
(e) if he has any financial interest in any business undertaking dealing with or any other village 
industry specified or deemed to be specified in the Schedule to the Act.  
7[6A. Removal of Chairman, Member, etc.,  from the Commission .—The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, remove from office any member of the Commission who — 
(a) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6; or  
(b) in the opinion of the C entral Government has failed or is unable to carry out his duties; or  
(c) absents himself from three consecutive meetings of the Commission without the leave of the 
Commission:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shal l give an opportunity 
to the member concerned to show cause against such removal.]  
                                                           
1.  The proviso omitted by Act 10 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 5, for sections 5 and 6 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “shall be responsible” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
7. Ins. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  6 
 7. Resignation of office by member .—Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing 
to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by that 
Government, shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
8. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Commission .—No act or 
proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any va cancy amongst its 
members or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
9. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for particular purposes .—(1) The 
Commission may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by 
regulations made under this Act any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with 
any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Commission under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have 
the right to take p art in the discussions of the Commission relevant to that purpose, but shall not have the 
right to vote, and shall not be a member for any other purpose.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, depute one or more officers 
of the Government to attend any meetings of the Commission and to take part in the discussions of the 
Commission, but such officer or officers shall not have the right to vote.  
10. Constitution of the Board .—1[(1)] For the purpose of assisting the Commissio n in the discharge 
of its functions under this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Board to be called the Khadi and Village Industries Board  and such number of other members 
as the Central Government may t hink fit, chosen from among persons who, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, are qualified as having had experience, and shown capacity, in matters relating to the 
development of  2[National Khadi and Village Industries Board.]  
3[(2) The Board shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), meet at such times and places and 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings including the 
quorum at meetings as may be prescribed;  
(3) The Board shall meet at leas t twice in a year.].  
11. Commission to consult the Board .—The Commission shall ordinarily consult the Board with 
respect to the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
12. Meetings of the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall meet at such times and place s and 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), observe such rules of procedure in regard to 
transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Commission under this Act: 
Provided that the Commission shall meet at least once in every month.  
4[(2) The chairman or, in his absence, any member (other than an ex officio  member) chosen by the 
members present from among themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Commission .] 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Commission shall be decided by a majority of the  5[votes of the 
members (including ex officio  members) present] and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the 
chairman or, in his absence the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
6[12A. Zonal Committee .—(1) The Commission shall constitute for each of the six geographical 
zones, referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4, a Zonal Committee, which shall consist of 
the following, namely: — 
(a) the non -official member representing the zone, referred to in clause (a) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 4, who shall be the  Chairman of the Zonal Committee constituted for respective zones;  
                                                           
1. Section 1 0 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof,  by Act 10 of 2006, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “Khadi and Village Industries Board” ( w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 6, for sub -section 2 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 7, for “votes of the members present” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
6. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-5-2006).  7 
 (b) one representative of each of the State Khadi and Village Industries Boards of the States or, as 
the case may be, the Government of each State in the zone, to be notified by the Central  Government 
in consultation with the State Government concerned —member;  
(c) the Zonal Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, who shall be the convener of 
the Zonal Committee —member;  
(d) the State Directors in charge of the Commission ’s Directora tes for the States in the             
zone—member;  
(e) a Zonal or Regional manager of one of the lead banks operating in the zone -member; and  
(f) one representative of an institution of repute, working for at least ten years in the khadi  or 
village industries sector and having a good record of performance, from each State in the zone, to be 
notified by the Central Government —member.  
(2) The Zonal Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3), observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
(including the quorum at the meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by the Commission 
under this Act:  
Provided that the Committee shall meet at lea st once in every three months.  
(3) The Chairman of the Zonal Committee or, in his absence, any member chosen by the members 
present from among themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Committee.  
(4) The Zonal Committee shall generally function as a fo rum for consultatio n and, accordingly,     
inter alia ,— 
(a) act as a conduit for the dissemination of information relating to the programmes and schemes 
of the Commission for the development of khadi and village industries in the zone;  
(b) monitor , from time to time, the implementation of the programmes and schemes referred to in 
clause ( a); 
(c) provide feedback to the Commission on the problems and difficulties envisaged and 
suggestions made by banks, voluntary agencies, artisans and others engage d in the operation of 
programmes and schemes referred to in clause ( a).] 
1[13. Term of office and conditions of service of the chairman and other members .—(1) Every 
member of the Commission, other than an ex officio  member, shall hold office  2[at the pleasure of the 
Central Government which shall not exceed continuous period of five years]:  
Provided that the chairman shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until his successor enters upon his office.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the chairman, Chief Executive Officer, Financial Adviser 
and other members shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
14. Officers and servants of the Commission .—3*                *                *                 *                *  
4*** Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Commission 
Commission may appoint such other officers and servants as it considers necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions:  
    4*                              *                                 *                               *                                   * 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 7, for section 13 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 9, for “ for a term of five years ” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
3. Sub -section ( 1), omitted by Act 12 of 1987, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
4. The proviso and  brackets and figure “( 2)” omitted by s. 8 , ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  8 
  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
1[15. Functions of the Commission .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Commission shall generally be to  2[plan, promote, facilitate, organise] and assist in the establishment and 
development of khadi and village industries in the rural area in co ordination with other agencies engaged 
in rural development wherever necessary.  
(2) In part icular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Commission may 
take such steps as it may think fit, — 
(a) to 3[plan and organise , directly or through specified agencies] training of persons employed or 
desirous of seeking employment in khadi and village industries;  
(b) to 4[build up, directly or through specified agencies] reserves of raw materials and implements 
and 5[supply them or arrange supply of the raw materials and implements] to persons engaged or 
likely to be engaged in production of handspun yarn or khadi or village industries at such rates as the 
Commission may decide;  
(c) to encourage and assist in the creation of commo n service facilities for the processing of raw 
materials or semi -finished goods and for otherwise facilitating production and marketing of khadi or 
products of village industries;  
(d) to promote the sale and marketing of khadi or products of village indust ries or handicrafts and 
for this purpose forge links with established marketing agencies wherever necessary and feasible;  
(e) to encourage and promote research in the technology used in khadi and village industries, 
including the use of non -conventional en ergy and electric power with a view to increasing 
productivity, eliminating drudgery and otherwise enhancing their competitive capacity and to arrange 
for dissemination of salient results obtained from such research;  
(f) to undertake directly or through ot her agencies studies of the problems of khadi or village 
industries;  
(g) to 6[provide financial assistance, directly or through specified agencies,] to institutions or 
persons engaged in the development and operation of khadi or village industries and guid e them 
through supply of designs, prototypes and other technical information for the purpose of producing 
goods and services for which there is effective demand in the opinion of the Commission;  
(h) to 7[undertake, directly or through specified agencies, e xperiments,] or pilot projects which in 
the opinion of the Commission are necessary for the development of khadi and village industries;  
(i) to establish and maintain separate organisations for the purpose of carrying out any or all of 
the above matters;  
(j) to promote and encourage co -operative efforts among the manufacturers of khadi or persons 
engaged in village industries;  
(k) to ensure genuineness and to set up standards of quality and ensure that products of khadi and 
village industries do conform to the said standards, including issue of certificates or letters of 
recognition to the concerned persons; and  
(l) to carry out any other matters incidental to the above.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 9, for section 1 5 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 10, for “plan, promote, organise” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “plan and organise” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “build up” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “supply them” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “provide financial assistance” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
7. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “undertake experiments” (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  9 
 1[Explanation. —For the purposes of clauses ( a), (b), (g) and ( h) of sub -section ( 2), the expression 
“specified agencies ” means the agencies which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette , specify in this behalf.]  
16. Power of Central Government to give directions .—In the discharge of its functions under this 
Act, the Commission shall be bound by such directions as the Central Government may give to it.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS  
17. Payment to the Commission .—The Central Government may, after due appropria tion made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission in each financial year such sums as may be 
considered necessary for the performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.  
2[17A. Commission to receive gifts, grants, etc. —The Commission may, for the purpose of 
development of Khadi,  3[the development of village industries or the development of Khadi and village 
industries], receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from the Government or any other person.]  
18. Funds o f the Commission .—4[(1) The Commission shall have stet separate funds to be called the 
the khadi fund, the village industries fund and the general and miscellaneous fund.  
(1A) There shall be credited, — 
(a) to the khadi  fund, all sums received by the Commission for the purposes relating to khadi.  
(b) to the village industries fund, all sums received by the Commission for the purposes relating 
to village industries and products of handicrafts;  
(c) to the general and misce llaneous fund, all other sums received by the Commission:  
Provided that if the amount available in any of the said funds is in excess 6f the requirements of that 
fund and the amount available in any other of the said funds is insufficient to meet the requi rements of 
that fund, the Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, transfer from the 
first mentioned fund the excess amount or such part thereof as may be necessary to the other fund.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of computing t he amount in any of the said funds, the amount 
received under section 17A shall not be taken into account.  
(1B) The sums credited under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) to the khadi fund, shall be applied for the purposes relating to khadi;  
(b) to the village industries fund, shall be stet for the purposes relating to village industries and 
products of handicrafts;  
(c) to the general and miscellaneous fund, shall be stet for the purposes relating to khadi and 
village industries and for meeting the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, 
officers and other employees of the Commission and other administrative expenses of the 
Commission.]  
(2) Except as otherwise directed by the Central Government, all moneys belonging to such funds sh all 
be deposited in the Reserve Bank of India or with the agents of the Reserve Bank of India, or, where there 
is neither an office of the Reserve Bank of India nor an agent of the Reserve Bank of India, in a 
Government Treasury, or be invested in such sec urities as may be approved by the Central Government.  
19. Power of the Commission to spend .—Subject to the provisions of section 20 the Commission 
shall have power to spend such sums as it thinks fit on purposes authori sed by this Act:  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 1961, s. 9 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 10, for “or the development of  village industries” (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 1B) (w.e.f. 1-4-1988). 10 
 Provided that nothin g in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Commission from spending, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government, such moneys, as it thinks fit on any such purpose 
outside the territories to which this Act extends.  
1[19A. Standing Finance Committees .—(1) There shall be constituted from among the members      
of the Commission in the prescribed manner, a Standing Finance Committee in respect of each of the  
2[three funds] referred to in section 18.  
3[Provided that the Chief Executive Officer and Financial Adviser shall be ex officio members of the 
Standing Finance Committee in respect of each of the three separate funds referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18,].  
(2) The Standing Finance Committee shall exercise such of the powers of the C ommission under 
section 19 as are delegated to it by the Commission.  
19B. Recovery of monies due to the Commission as arrears of land -revenue .—(1) Any sum 
payable to the Commission under any agreement, express or implied, or otherwise howsoever, may be 
recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) If any question arises whether a sum is payable to the Commission within the meaning of           
sub-section ( 1), it shall be referred to a Tribunal constituted by the Central Government for t he purpose 
which shall, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit and after giving to the person by whom the sum 
is alleged to be payable an opportunity of being heard, decide the question; and the decision of the 
Tribunal shall be final and shall not b e called in question by any court or other authority.  
(3) The Tribunal shall consist of one person who is not connected with the Commission or with the 
person by whom the sum is alleged to be payable.  
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Commission.]  
20. Budget .—(1) The Commission shall, by such date in each year as may be prescribed, prepare and 
submit to the Central Government for approval  4[three separate budgets] in the prescribed form for the 
next financial year, to be called the khad i budget  5[, the village industries budget and the general and 
miscellaneous budget], showing the estimated receipts and expenditure in respect to khadi  6[, village 
industries and products of handicrafts and khadi  and village industries respectively] during that financial 
year.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of 
the Commission unless the expenditure is covered by a specific provision in the budget approved by the 
Central Government.  
7[(3) The Commission may within the respective limits of the khadi budget, the village industries 
budget and the general and miscellaneous budget, sanction any reappropriation from one head of 
expenditure to another or f rom a provision made for one scheme to that in respect of another, but subject 
to the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 18, in no case shall a reappropriation of fund be made from 
one budget to any of the other two budgets:  
Provided that no reappropria tion from the head “Loan ” to any other head of expenditure and           
vice versa  in any of the budgets shall be sanctioned by the Commission, except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.] . 
(4) The Commission may, within such limits and s ubject to such conditions as may be prescribed, 
incur expenditure in excess of the limit provided in the budget approved by the Central Government   
under any head of expenditure or in connection with any particular scheme, so long as the aggregate 
amount in 8[the budget] approved by the Central Government is not exceeded.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1961, s. 11 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 12, for “two funds” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. The proviso ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 11 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 13, for “two separate budgets” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for “and the village industries budget” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
6. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for “and village industries respectively” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
8. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for “either budget” (w.e.f.  1-4-1988).  11 
 21. Borrowing of money .—Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Commission 
shall have power to borrow on the security of the khadi  fund or the village industries fund or any other 
asset for any purposes for which such funds m ay be applied.  
22. Transfer of liabilities and obligations to the Commission .—All liabilities incurred, by all 
contracts entered into with, and all matters and t hings engaged to be done by, or for, the Central 
Government in connection with the development of khadi or village industries at any time after the 14th 
day of January, 1953, and before the commencement of this Act, shall, after such commencement, be 
deeme d to have been incurred by, entered into with, or engaged to be done by, or for, the Commission.  
23. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance 
sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be prescribed by him.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall have the same rights and privileges and au thority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other document s and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon sha ll be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Returns and reports .—(1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Govern ment, at such 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such 
returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the 
promotion and development of khadi and village industries, as the Central Governme nt may, from time to 
time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year submit to the Central Government a report, in such form and before 
such date as m ay be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programme 
during the previous financial year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
1[24A. Exemption from liability to pay income -tax.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , the Commission shall not be liable to pay any income -tax on its 
income, profits or gains.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Dissolution of the Commission .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that the Commission shall be dissolved from such date as may be specified in the 
notification and thereupon the Commission shall be deemed to be dissolved accor dingly.  
(2) On and from the said date — 
(a) all properties and funds which, immediately before the said date, were in the possession of the 
Commission for the purposes of this Act shall vest in the Central Government; and  
(b) all members shall vacate their office as members of the Commission.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1977, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1962).  12 
 1[(3) Any time after the issue of the notification under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may 
re-establish the Commission in accordance with the provisions of section 4 and on and from  the date of 
the re -establishment of the Commission, the properties and funds which had previously vested in the 
Central Government under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall stand vested in the Commission so              
re-established.].  
26. Power to make  rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or a ny of the following matters, namely: — 
2[(a) the manner of filling casual vacancies among the members of the Commission and the terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairman, the Chief Executive Officer, the Financial Adviser and 
other members of the Commission including the salary and allowances to be paid to them and the 
travelling and daily allowances to be drawn by them when they are on tour;]  
3[(aa) the powers to be exercised and functions to be discharged by the Chief Executive Officer 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(ab) the financial matters in respect of which the Financial Adviser shall be in charge under 
section 5A;  
(ac) the transaction of business at the meetings of the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;];  
(b) 4***the procedure t o be followed in removing a member who is or becomes subject to any 
disqualification;  
(c) the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of functions by, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among  members of the Board;  
5*                                       *                                        *                                        *                                       * 
6[(dd) the constitution of the Standing Finance Committees under sub-section ( 1) of section 19 A;  
(ddd) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in deciding questions referred to it under      
sub-section ( 2) of section 19B;]  
(e) the date by which, and the form in which, the budget shall be prepared and submitted in  each 
year under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) the procedure to be followed for placing the Commission in possession of funds;  
(g) the procedure to be followed and the conditions to be observed in borrowing moneys or in 
granting loans;  
(h) the conditi ons subject to which , and the mode in which , contracts may be entered into by or 
on behalf of the Commission;  
(i) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Commission shall be maintained under     
sub-section ( 1) of section 23;  
(j) the form and mann er in which the returns, reports or statements shall be submitted under 
section 23; and  
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
7*                                   *                                    *                                   *                                *  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 14, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 13 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
4. The words  “the disqualifications for membership of the Commission and”  omitted by Act 12 of 1987, s. 14 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
5. Omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
6. Ins. by Act 32 of 1961, s. 13 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
7. Omitted by Act 12 of 1987, s. 14 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  13 
 27. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Commission may, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made t hereunder, for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the terms and condit ions of appointment and service and the scales of pay of officers and 
servants of the Commission, other than 1[the Chief Executive Officer] and the Financial Adviser to 
the Commission, including payment of travelling and daily allowances in respect of jour neys 
undertaken by such officers and servants for the purpose of this Act;  
(b) the time and place of meetings of the Commission, the procedure to be followed in regard to 
transaction of business at such meetings and the quorum necessary for the transaction  of such 
business at a meeting;  
2[(ba) the transaction of business at the meetings of the Zonal Committee under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12A;];  
3[(bb) the summoning and holding of meetings, and the conduct of business of a Standing Finance 
Finance Committee] ; 
(c) the delegation of powers and duties to  4*** or any employee of the Commission;  
(d) the maintenance of minutes of meetings of the Commission and of the Board and the 
transmission of copies thereof to the Central Government;  
(e) the persons by whom, and th e manner in which, payments deposits and investments may be 
made on behalf of the Commission;  
(f) the custody of moneys required for the current expenditure of the Commission and investment 
of moneys not so required;  
(g) the maintenance of accounts; and  
(h) the form in which certificates of genuineness of khadi and products of village industries may 
be granted by the Commission  5[and the fees chargeable in respect thereof.]  
6[(2A) The power to make regulations under this section with respect to the terms an d conditions of 
service and the scales of pay and pension to be paid to the employees of the Commission shall include the 
power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the commencement of this Act, to such 
regulations or any of them but n o retrospective effect shall be given to any such regulation so as to 
prejudicially affect the interest of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable.]  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, rescind any regulatio n 
which it has sanctioned and thereupon the regulation shall cease to have effect.  
7[28. Rules and Regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as t he case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987 , s. 15 , for clause (a) for “the secretary”  (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 2006, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1961, s. 14 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
4. The words “the Chief Executive Officer or” omitted by Act 10 of 2006, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2006).  
5. Adde d by Act 32 of 1961, s. 14 (w.e.f. 28 -8-1961).  
6. Ins. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 15 (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
7. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
1[See section 2 ( h)] 
1. Bee -keeping.  
2. Cottage match industry, manufa cture of Fireworks and Aggravates.  
3. Cottage pottery industry.  
4. Cottage soap industry.  
5. Flaying, curing and tanning of hides and skins and ancillary industries connected with the same and 
cottage leather industry.  
6. Ghani  oil industry.  
7. Hand -made p aper.  
8. Manufacture of cane -gur and khandsari.  
9. Palm -gur making and other palm -products industry.  
2[10. Processing, packaging and marketing of cereals, pulses, spices, condiments, masalas etc.]  
3[(i) Manufacture of shellac;  
(ii) Collection of forest plants and fruits for medicinal purposes;  
(iii) Fruit -processing and fruit preservation;  
(iv) Bamboo and cane -work;  
(v) Blacksmithy;  
(vi) Carpentry; and  
(vii) Fibre other than coir.]  
4[Manufacture and use of manure and methane gas from cowdung  arid other waste products (such as 
flesh and dead animals, night soil, etc.)]  
5[Cotta ge industry of limestone and its products.]  
6[Manufacture of household utensils in aluminium.]  
7[Manufacture of gum resins; manufacture of katha.]  
8[Lime Stone, Lime Shel l and other Lime Products industry.]  
9[Manufacture of Lokvastra cloth.]  
10[Processing of maize and Ragi.]  
11[Manufacture of Rubber Goods (Dipped Latex Products) .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1987, s. 17, for “[ See sections 2  (h) and 3  (1)]” (w.e.f. 24 -7-1987).  
2. Substituted by G.S.R. 1101, d ated 16-8-1979.  
3. Added by S. O. 3232.  
4. Added by S.O.1031.  
5. Added by S.O.1342.  
6. Added by S.O. 3647.  
7. Added by S.O.92.  
8. Added by G. S. R. 685(E) of 1977.  
9. Added by G. S. R. 6 (E).  
10. Added by G. S. R. 366.  
11. Added by G.S.R. 591  (E)/84.  
--------------------------The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF LIFE INSURANCE CORORATIO N OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Life Insurance Corporation of India.  
4. Constitution of the Corporation.  
5. Capital of Corporation.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
6. Functions of the Corporation.  
6A. Power to impose conditions, etc.  
CHAPTER IV  
TRANSFER OF EXISTING LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS TO THE CORPORATION  
7. Transfer of assets and liabilities of existing insurers carrying on controlled business.  
8. Provident, super annuation and other like funds.  
9. General effect of vesting of controlled business.  
10. Provisions as to composite insurers.  
11. Transfer of service of existing employees of insurers to the Corporation.  
12. Transfer of services of existing employees of ch ief agents of insurers to the Corporation in certain 
cases . 
13. Duty to deliver possession of property and documents relating thereto.  
14. Power of Corporation to modify contracts of life insurance in certain cases.  
15. Right of Corporation to seek relief in respect of certain transactions of the insurer.  
16. Compensation for acquisition of controlled business.  
17. Constitution of Tribunals.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT  
18. Offices, branches and agencies.  
19. Committees of the Corporation.  
20. Managing Directors.  
21. Corporation to be guided by the directions of Central Government.  
22. Zonal Managers.  
23. Staff of the Corporation.  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTION S 
24. Funds of the Corporation.  
25. Audit.  
26. Actuarial valuations.  
27. Annual report of activities of Corporation.  
28. Surplus from life insurance business, how to be utilised.  
28A. Profits from any business (other than life insurance business) how to be utili sed. 
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Corporation to have the exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business.  
30A. Exclusive privilege of Corporation to cease.  
31. Exception in the case of insurance business in respect of persons residing outside India.  
32. Power of Corporatio n to have official seal in certain cases.  
33. Requirement of foreign laws to be complied with in certain cases.  
34. Revesting of certain shares vested in the Administrator General.  
35. Repatriation of assets and liabilities in the case of foreign insurers in certain cases.  
36. Contracts o f chief agents and special agents to terminate.  
37. Policies to be guaranteed by Central Government.  
38. Liquidation of Corporation.  
39. Special provisions for winding up of certain insurers.  
40. Penalty for withholding pro perty, etc.  
41. Tribunal to have exclusive jurisdiction in certain matters.  
42. Enforcement of decisions of Tribunals.  
43. Application of the Insurance Act.  
43A.  [Omitted. ] 
44. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
45. Special provisions regarding transfer of  controlled business of certain composite insurer.  
46. Defects in constitution of Corporation or Committees not to invalidate acts or proceedings.  
47. Protection of action taken under Act.  
48. Power to make rules.  
49. Power to make regulations.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1956  
[18th June, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the nationalisation  of life insurance business in India by transferring all 
such business to a Corporation established for the purpose and to provide for the regulation 
and control of the business of the Corporation and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation   
Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “appointed day ” means the date on which the Corporation is established under section 3;  
(2) “composite  insurer ” means an insurer carrying on in addition to controlled business any other kind 
of insurance business;  
(3) “controlled business ” means — 
(i) in the case of any insurer specified in sub -clause ( a) (ii) or sub -clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of 
section 2 of  the Insurance Act and carrying on life insurance business — 
(a) all his business, if he carries on no other class of insurance business;  
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insurance business, if he carries on any other class 
of insurance busines s also;  
(c) all his business , if his certificate of registration under the Insurance Act in respect of 
general insurance business stands wholly cancelled for a period of more than six months on the 
19th day of January, 1956;  
(ii) in the case of any other i nsurer specified in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act and 
carrying on life insurance business — 
(a) all his business in India, if he carries on no other class of insurance business in India;  
(b) all the business appertaining to his life insurance  business in India, if he carries on any 
other class of in surance business also in India;  
(c) all his business in India if he certificate of registration under the Insurance Act in respect 
of general insurance business in India stands wholly cancelled for a period of more than six 
months on the 19th day of January, 1956.  
Explanation. —An insurer is said to carry on no class of insurance business other than life 
insurance business, if in addition to life insurance business, he carries on only capital redempti on 
business or annuity certain business or both; and the expression “business appertaining to his life 
insurance business ” in sub -clause s (i) and ( ii) shall be construed accordingly;  
(iii) in the case of a provident society, as defined in section 65 of the Insurance Act, all its 
business;  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1956, vide notification No. S. R. O. 1 456, dated 26th June, 1956, see Gazette  of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3.  4 
 (iv) in the case of the Central Government or a State Government, all life insurance business 
carried on by it, subject to the exceptions specified in section 44;  
(4) “Corporation ” means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under section 3;  
(5) “Insurance Act ” means the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938);  
(6) “insurer ” means an insurer as defined in the Insurance Act who carries on life insurance business 
in India and includes the Government and a provident society as defined in section 65 of the Insur ance 
Act; 
(7) “member ” means a member of the Corporation;  
(8) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(9) “Tribunal ” means a Tribunal constituted under section 17 and having jurisdiction in respect of any 
matter under the rules made und er this Act;  
(10) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Insurance Act 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION  OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Life Insurance Corporation of India .—(1) With effect 
from such date  as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there 
shall be established a Corporation called the Life Insurance Corp oration of India.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and may by its name 
sue and be sued.  
4. Constitution o f the Corporation .—(1) The Corporation shall consist of such number of persons 
not exceeding 1[sixteen] as the Central Government may think fit to appoint thereto and one of them shall 
be appointed by the Central Government to be the Chairman thereof.  
(2) Before appointing a person to be a member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that that 
person will have no such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the exercise or 
performance by him of his functions as a member, and the Central Government shall also satisfy itself 
from time to time with respect to every member that he has no such interest; and any person who is, or 
whom the Central Government proposes to appoint and who has consented to be, a member shall, 
whenever re quired by the Central Government so to do, furnish to it such information as the Central 
Government considers necessary for the performance of its duties under this sub -section.  
(3) A member who is in any way directly or indirectly interested in a contract  made or proposed to be 
made by the Corporation shall as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have come to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest to the Corporation and the member shall not take part in any 
deliberation or discussi on of the Corporation with respect to that contact.  
2[5. Capital of Corporation .—(1) The paid -up equity capital of the Corporation shall be one hundred 
crore of rupees provided by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law 
for the purpose.  
(2) The Corporation may issue and sell bonds and debentures or such other prescribed instruments 
carrying interest for the purpose of raising its working capital to such amount as may be prescribed.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 40, for “fifteen” (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 2, for section 5 (w.e.f.  31-3-2012 ). 5 
 CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
6. Functions of the Corporation .—(1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government 
in this behalf, it shall be the general duty of the Corporation to carry on life insurance business, whether 
in or outside India, and the Corporation shall s o exercise its powers under this Act as to secure that life 
insurance business is developed to the best advantage of the community.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) but subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, the Corporation shall have power — 
(a) to carry on capital redemption business, annuity certain business or reinsuranc e business in so 
far as such re insurance business appertains to life insurance business;  
(b) subject to the rules, i f any, made by the Central Government in this behalf, to invest the funds 
of the Corporation in such manner as the Corporation may think fit and to take all such steps as may 
be necessary or expedient for the protection or realisation of any investment; in cluding the taking 
over of and administering any property offered as security for the investment until a suitable 
opportunity arises for its disposal;  
(c) to acquire, hold and dispose of any property for the purpose of its business;  
(d) to transfer the whole or any part of the life insurance business carried on outside India to any 
other person or persons, if in the interest of the Corporation it is expedient so to do;  
(e) to advance or lend money upon the security of any movable property or otherwise;  
(f) to borrow or raise any money in such manner and upon such security as the Corporation may 
think fit;  
(g) to carry on either by itself or through any subsidiary any other business in any case where 
such other business was being carried on by a subsidiary  of an insurer whose controlled business has 
been transferred to an d vested in the Corporation under this Act;  
(h) to carry on any other business which may seen to the Corporation to be capable of being 
conveniently carried on in connection with its busine ss and calculated directly or indirectly to render 
profitable the business of the Corporation;  
(i) to do all such things as may be incidental or conducive to the proper exercise of any of the 
powers of the Corporation.  
(3) In the discharge of any of its fu nctions the Corporation shall act so far as may be on business 
principles.  
1[6A. Power to impose conditions, etc .—(1) In entering into any arrangement, under section 6, with 
any concern, the Corporation may impose such conditions as it may think necessary or expedient for 
protecting the interest of the Corporation and for securing that the accommodation granted by it is put to 
the best use by the concern.  
(2) Where any arrangement entered into by the Corporation under section 6 with any concern 
provides for  the appointment by the Corporation of one or more directors of such concern, such provision 
and any appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 19 56 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for the 
time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other instrument relating to the 
concern, and any provision regarding share, qualification, age limit, number of directorships, removal 
from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall 
not apply to any director appointed by the Corporation in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(3) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Corporation an d may be removed or substituted by any 
person by order in writing by the Corporation;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  52 of 1975, s. 41 (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  6 
 (b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to b e done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement.]  
CHAPTER IV  
TRANSFER OF EXISTING LIFE INSURANCE BUSINESS TO THE CORPORATION  
7. Transfer of assets and liabilities of existing insurers carrying on controlled business .—(1) On 
the appointed day  there shall be transferred to and vested in the Corporation all the assets and liabilities 
appertaining to the controlled business of all insurers.  
(2) The assets appertaining to the controlled business of an insurer shall be deemed to include all 
rights and powers, and all property, whether movable or immovable, appertaining to his controlled 
business, including, in particular, cash balances, reserve funds, investments, deposits and all other 
interests and rights in or arising out of such property as may be in the possession of the insurer and all 
books of account or documents re lating to the controlled business of the insurer; and liabilities shall be 
deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then existing and appertaining to 
the controlled business of the insurer.  
Explanation. —The expression “assets appertaining to the controlled business of an insurer ”— 
(a) in relation to a composite insurer, includes that part of the paid -up capital of the insurer or 
assets representing such part which has or have been allocated to the controlled business of the 
insurer in accordance with the rules made in this behalf;  
(b) in relation to a Government, means the amount lying to the credit of that business on the 
appointed day.  
(3) Where any such assets are subject to any trust referred to in sub -section ( 6) of section 27 of the 
Insurance Act or to any other trust for the benefit of policy -holders, the assets shall be deemed to have 
vested in the Corporation free from any such trust.  
8. Provident, superannuation and other like funds .—(1) Where an insurer whose co ntrolled 
business is to be transferred to and vested in the Corporation under section 7, has established a provident 
or superannuation fund or any other like fund for the benefit of his employees and constituted a trust in 
respect thereof (hereinafter in t his section referred to as an existing trust), the moneys standing to the 
credit of any such fund on the appointed day, together with any other assets belonging to such fund, shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), stand transferred to and ves t in the Corporation on the 
appointed day free from any such trust.  
(2) Where all the employees of any such insurer do not become employees of the Corporation under 
section 11, the moneys and other assets belonging to any such fund as it referred to in sub -section ( 1), 
shall be apportioned between the trustees of the fund and the Corporation in the prescribed manner; and in 
case of any dispute regarding such apportionment, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall 
be final.  
(3) The Corporation sh all, as soon as may be after the appointed day, constitute in respect of the 
moneys and other assets which are transferred to and vested in it under this section, one or more trusts 
having objects as similar to the objects of the existing trusts as in the circumstances may be practicable.  
(4) Where all the moneys and other assets belonging to an existing trust are transferred to and vested 
in the Corporation under this section, the trustees of such trust, shall as from the appointed day, be 
discharged from the trust, expect  as respects things done or omitted to be done before the appointed day.  
9. General effect of vesting of controlled business .—(1) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or 
under this Act, all contracts, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the appointed day and to which an insurer whose controlled business has been 
transferred to and vested in the Corporation is a party or which are in favour of such insurer shall in so far 7 
 as th ey relate to the controlled business of the insurer be of as full force and affect against or in favour of 
the Corporation, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if, 
instead of the insurer, the Corporation had be en a party thereto or as if they had been entered into or 
issued in favour of the Corporation.  
(2) If on the appointed day any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature is pending by 
or against an insurer, then, in so far as it relates to h is controlled business, it shall not abate, be 
discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Corporation of the 
business of the insurer or anything done under this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be  
continued , prosecuted and enforced by or against the Corporation.  
10. Provisions as to composite insurers .—(1) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in 
any case where an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to an vested in  the corporation 
under this Act is a composite insurer, the provisions of the preceding sections shall only apply to the 
extent to which any property appertains to his controlled business and to rights and powers acquired, and 
to debts, liabilities and obl igations incurred, and to contracts, agreements and other instruments made by 
the insurer for the purposes of his controlled business and to legal proceedings relating to those purposes, 
and the provisions of those sections shall be construed accordingly.  
(2) The Central Government may, by rules made in this behalf provide — 
(a) for the determination of the question whether any property appertains to his controlled 
business or whether any rights, powers, debts, liabilities or obligations were acquired or incurred or 
any contract, agreement or other instrument was made by the insurer for the purposes of his 
controlled business or whether any documents relate to those purposes;  
(b) for the allocation of the paid -up capital or assets representing such paid -up capital, as the case 
may be, between the controlled business of the insurer and any other business;  
(c) for substituting for any agreements entered into by any insurer partly for the purposes of his 
controlled business and partly for other purposes separate agreements in the requisite terms and for 
any apportionments and indemnities consequent thereon;  
(d) for the severance of leases comprising property of which part only is transferred to and vested 
in the Corporation by virtue of this Act and for a pportionment consequent on such severance;  
(e) for the apportionment and the making of financial adjustments with respects to any debts, 
liabilities of obligations incurred by any such insurer partly for the purposes of his controlled business 
and partly f or other purposes and for any necessary variation of mortgages and encumbrances relating 
to such debts, liabilities or obligations;  
(f) for the apportionment of the moneys and other assets belonging to any provident or 
superannuation fund or any other like  fund to which the provisions of section 8 do not apply between 
persons employed in connection with the controlled business of an insurer and other persons;  
(g) for any other matters supplementary to or consequential on the matters aforesaid for which 
provision appears to be necessary or expedient.  
(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not less than thirty days before both Houses of 
Parliament as soon as possible after they are made , and shall be subject to such modifications as 
Parliament  may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following.  
(4) Where at any time before the expiration of six months from the appointed day a question has 
arisen under this section or under any rules made thereunder as to whether any property is or was held or 
used by the insurer for the purposes of his controlled business, the question shall be referred to the 
Tribunal for decision.  
11. Transfer of service of existing employees of insurers to the Corporation .—(1) Every       
whole -time employee of an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the 
Corporation and who was employed by the insurer wholly or mainly in connection with his controlled 
business immediately before the appointed day shall, on  and from the appointed day, become an 
employee of the Corporation, and shall hold his office therein by the same tenure, at the same 8 
 remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension and gratuity and  other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if this Act 
had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Corporation is 
terminated or until his remuneration , terms and conditions are duly altere d by the Corporation:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any such employee who has, by 
notice in writing given to the Central Government prior to the appointed day, intimated his intention of 
not becoming an employee of the Corporation . 
1[(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose of securing uniformity in the 
scales of remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service applicable to employees of insurers 
whose controlled business has been tran sferred to, and 2[vested in the Corporation ], it is necessary so to 
do, or that, in the interests of the Corporation and its policy -holders, a reduction in the remuneration 
payable, or a revision of the other terms and conditions of service applicable , to employees or any class of 
them is called for, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), or 
in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any 
award, settlem ent or agreement for the time being in force, alter (whether by way of reduction or 
otherwise) the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service to such manner as it thinks fit; 
and if the alteration is not acceptable to any employee, the Corp oration may terminate his employment by 
giving him compensation equivalent to three months remuneration unless the contract of service with 
such employee provides for a shorter notice of termination.  
Explanation. —The compensation payable to an employee und er this sub -section shall be in addition 
to, and shall not affect , any pension, gratuity provident fund money or any other benefit to which the 
employee may be entitled under his contract of service.]  
(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was  a whole time employee of an insurer or as to 
whether any employee was employed wholly or mainly in connection with the controlled business of an 
insurer immediately before the appointed day the question shall be referred to the Central Government 
whose de cision shall be final.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee of an insurer to the 
Corporation shall not entitl e any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law, and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
12. Transfer of services of existing employees of chief agents of insurers to the Corporation in 
certain cases .—Subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf, every       
whole -time salaried employee of a chief agent of an insurer whose controlled business has been 
transferred to and vested in the Corporation and, — 
(a) who was employ ed by the chief agent wholly or mainly in connection with the controlled 
business of the insurer;  
(b) whose salary on the appointed day did not exceed five hundred rupees per mensem; and  
(c) who was in the employment of the chief agent for a continuous per iod of not less than one 
year immediately before the appointed day;  
shall, on and from the appointed day, become, an employee of the Corporation and the provisions of 
section 11 shall, so far as may be , apply in relation to such employee as they apply in relation to a             
whole -time employee of the insurer:  
Provided that this section shall not apply except in cases where the chief agent of the insurer was 
required under the terms of his contract with the insurer to render the prescribed services to policy holders 
of the insurer.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 1957, s. 2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 6 -6-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for “vested in it” (w.e.f. 17 -9-1957).  9 
 Explanation. —In the case of a whole -time salaried employee of a chief agent who has been 
retrenched by the chief agent on or after the 19th day of January, 1956 , the provisions of this section shall 
apply as if for the words „the appointed day ‟ the words and figures „the 19th day of January, 1956 ‟ had 
been substituted.  
13. Duty to deliver possession of property and documents relating thereto .—(1) Where any 
propert y appertaining to the controlled business of an insurer has been transferred to and vested in the 
Corporation under this Act, then, — 
(a) every person, in whose possession, custody or control any such property may be, shall deliver 
the property to the corpo ration forthwith;  
(b) any person who, on the appointed day, has in his possession, custody or control any books, 
documents or other papers relating to such controlled business shall be liable to account for the said 
books, documents and papers to the Corpo ration, and shall deliver them to the Corporation or to such 
person as the Corporation may direct.  
(2) In particular, all the assets of an insurer appertaining to life insurance business held in deposit by 
the Reserve Bank of India under the Insurance Act or by trustees in trust shall be delivered to the 
Corporation.  
(3) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this section, it shall be lawful for the 
Corporation to take all necessary steps for securing possession of all properties which have been 
transferred to and vested in it under this Act.  
14. Power of Corporation to modify contracts of life insurance in certain cases .—The corporation 
may, having regard to the financial condition on the appointed day of any insurer whose controlled 
business has been transferred to an vested in the Corporation, reduce the amounts of insurance under 
contracts of life insurance entered into by such insurer before the 19th day of January , 1956, in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as it thinks f it: 
Provided that no such reduction shall be made except in accordance with a scheme prepared by the 
Corporation in this behalf and approved by the Central Government.  
15. Right of Corporation to seek relief in respect of certain transactions of the insure r.—(1) 
Where an insurer whose controlled business has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation under 
this Act has, at any time within five years before the 19th day of January, 1956 ,— 
(a) made any payment to any person without consideration;  
(b) sold or disposed of any property of the insurer without consideration or for an inadequate 
consideration;  
(c) acquired any property or right s for an excessive consideration;  
(d) entered into or varied any agreement so as to require an excessive consideratio n to be paid or 
given by the insurer;  
(e) entered into any other transaction of such an onerous nature as to cause a loss to, or impose a 
liability on, the insurer exceeding any benefit accruing to the insurer;  
(f) if a composite insurer, transferred any property from his life department to his general 
department without consideration or for an inadequate consideration;  
and the payment, sale, disposal, acquisition, agreement or variation thereof or other transaction or  transfer 
was not reasonably necessary for the purpose of the controlled business of the insurer or was made with 
an unreasonable lack of prudence on the part of the insurer, regard being had in either case to the 
circumstances at the time, the Corporation  may apply for relief to the Tribunal in respect of such 
transaction, and all parties to the transaction shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise directs, be made parties 
to the application.  10 
 (2) The Tribunal may make such order against any of the parties to the application as it thinks just 
having regard to the extent to which those parties were respectively responsible for the transaction or 
benefited from it and all the circumstances of the case.  
(3) Where an application is made to the Tribunal under this s ection is respect of any transaction and 
the application is determined in favour of the Corporation, the Tribunal shall have exclusive jurisdiction 
to determine any claims outstanding in respect of the transaction.  
16. Compensation for acquisition of contr olled business .—(1) Where the controlled business of an 
insurer has been transferred to and vested in the Corporation under this Act, compensation shall be given 
by the Corporation to that insurer in accordance with the principles contained in the First Sc hedule.  
(2) The amount of the compensation to be given in accordance with the aforesaid principles shall be 
determined by the Corporation in the first instance, and if the amount so determined is approved by the 
Central Government it shall be offered to th e insurer in full satisfaction of the compensation payable to 
him under this Act, and if, on the other hand, the amount so offered is not acceptable to the insurer he 
may within such time as may be prescribed for the purpose have the matter referred to the  Tribunal for 
decision.  
17. Constitution of Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government may for the purposes of this Act 
constitute one or more Tribunals and each of the Tribunals shall consist of three members appointed by 
the Central Government one of whom sha ll be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or 
has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, and he shall be the Chairman thereof.  
(2) A Tribunal may choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge of any matter relating 
to any case under inquiry to assist the Tribunal in determining any question which has to be decided by it 
under this Act.  
(3) Every Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the fo llowing matters: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents.  
(4) Every Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure and decide all matters within its 
competence, and may review any of its decisions in the event of there being a mistake on the face of the 
record or correct any arithmetic al or clerical error therein.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT  
18. Offices, branches and agencies .—(1) The central office of the Corporation shall be at such place 
as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) The Corporation shall  establish a zonal office at each of the following places, namely, Bombay, 
Calcutta, Delhi, Kanpur and Madras, and, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, 
may establish such other zonal offices as it thinks fit.  
(3) The territorial lim its of each zone shall be such as may be specified by the Corporation.  
1[(4) There may be established as many divisional offices and branches in each zone as may be 
decided by the Corporation in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Insurance Regula tory and 
Development Authority established under the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority           
Act, 1999 (41 of 1999) in this regard.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 3, for sub -section  (4) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  11 
 19. Committees of the Corporation .—(1) The Corporation may entrust the general superintendence 
and direction of its affairs and business to an Executive Committee consisting of not more than five of its 
members and the Executive Committee may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things as may be 
delegated to it by the Corporation.  
(2) The Corpor ation may also constitute an investment Committe e for the purpose of advising it in 
matters relating to the investment of its funds, and the Investment Committee shall consist of not more 
than 1[eight members of whom not less than four] shall be members of  the Corporation and the remaining 
members shall be persons (whether members of the Corporation or not) who have special knowledge and 
experience in financial matters, particularly, matters relating to investment of funds.  
(3) The Corporation may constitute such other Committees as it may think fi t for the purpose of 
discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to them.  
20. Managing Directors .—The Corporation may appoint one or more persons to be the Managing 
Director or Directors of the C orporation, and every Managing Director shall be a whole -time officer of 
the Corporation and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be entrusted or delegated 
to him by the Executive Committee or the Corporation.  
21. Corporation to be gui ded by the directions of Central Government .—In the discharge of its 
functions under this Act, the Corporation shall be guided by such directions in matters of policy involving 
public interest as the Central Government may give to it in writing; and if any  question arises whether a 
direction relates to a matter of policy involving public interest the decision of the Central Government 
thereon shall be final.  
22. Zonal Managers .—(1) The Corporation may entrust the superintendence and direction of the 
affairs  and business of a zonal office to a person whether a member or not, who shall be known as the 
Zonal Manager and the Zonal Manager shall perform all such functions of the Corporation as may be 
delegated to him with respect to the area within the jurisdicti on of the zonal office.  
(2) The Corporation may constitute for each zone a Board consisting of such number of persons as it 
thinks fit to appoint thereto for the purpose of advising the Zonal Manager in respect of such matters as 
are referred to it under t he regulations made by the Corporation.  
(3) The Corporation shall constitute in the prescribed manner for each zonal office an Employees and 
Agents Relations Committee consisting of such number of persons as it thinks fi t and every such 
Committee shall consist of representatives of the Corporation and of its employees and agents, so 
however, that the number of representatives of the employees and agents on the Committee shall not be 
less than the number of representatives of the Corporation and  it shall be duty of the Committee to advise 
the Zonal Manager on matters which relate to the welfare of the employees and agents of the Corporation 
or which are likely to promote and secure amity and good relations between them and t he Corporation.  
23. Staff of the Corporation .—(1) For the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under this 
Act, the Corporation may employ such number of persons as it thinks fit.  
(2) Every person employed by the Corporation or whose services h ave been transferred to the 
Corporation under this Act, shall be liable to serve anywhere in India.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
24. Funds of the Corporation .—The Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts of the 
Corporation shall be cr edited thereto and all payments of the Corporation shall be made therefrom.  
25. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to act as 
auditors of companies under the law for the time being in force relating to com panies, and the auditors 
shall be appointed by the Corporation with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall 
receive such remuneration from the Corporation as the Central Government may fix.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 42, for “seven members of whom not less than three” (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  12 
 (2) Every auditor in the performance of his duti es shall have at all reasonable times access to the 
books, accounts and other documents of the Corporation.  
(3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Corporation and shall also forward a copy of their 
report to the Central Government.  
26. Actuarial valuations .—The Corporation shall,  1[every year], cause an investigation to be made 
by actuaries into the financial conditions of the 2[life insurance business of the Corporation, including a 
valuation of the liabilities of the Corporation in re spect thereto], and submit the report of the actuaries to 
the Central Government.  
27. Annual report of activities of Corporation .—The Corporation shall, as soon as may be, after 
the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Central Government i n such form as may be 
prescribed a report giving an account of its activities during the previous financial year, and the report 
shall also give an account of the activities, if any, which are likely to be undertaken by the Corporation in 
the next financia l year.  
3[28. Surplus from life insurance business, how to be utilised.—(1) If as a result of any 
investigation undertaken by the Corporation under section 26, any surplus emerges, — 
(a) ninety per cent. or  more such surplus, as the Central Government may approve, shall be 
allocated to or reserved for the life insurance policyholders of the Corporation;  
(b) such percentage of remaining surplus as the Central Government may approve shall be 
credited to separa te account maintained by the Corporation; and  
(c) the remainder shall be paid as dividend.  
(2) The funds available in the account maintained by the Corporation under clause ( b) of                 
sub-section ( 1) shall be utilised  for such purpose and in such manner as the Central Government may 
determine.]  
4[28A. Profits from any business (other than life insurance business) how to be utili sed.—If for 
any financial year profits accrue from any business (other than life insurance business) carried on by the 
Corporation, then, after making provision for reserves and other matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient, the balance of such profits shall be paid to the Central Government.]  
29. Reports to be laid before Parliame nt.—The Central Government shall cause the report of the 
auditors under section 25, the report of the actuaries under section 26 and the report giving an account of 
the activities of the Corporation under section 27 to be laid before both Houses of Parliam ent as soon as 
may be after each such report is received by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Corporation to have the exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business .—Except 
to the extent otherwise expressly provided in this Act, on and from the appointed day the Corporation 
shall have the exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business in India; and on and from the said 
day any certificate to registration under the Insurance Act held by any insurer immediately befo re the said 
day shall cease to have effect in so far as it authorises him to carry on life insurance business in India.  
5[30A. Exclusive privilege of Corporation to cease .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business in India by the Corporation shall cease 
on and from the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 , and 
the Corporation shall, thereafter, carry on life insurance business in India in accordance with the 
provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938  (4 of 1938) .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 4, for “once at least in every two years” (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1965, s. 2, fo r certain words (w.e.f. 29 -9-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 5, for section 28 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  
4. Ins. by Act 33 of 1965, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -9-1965).  
5. Ins. by Act 41 of 1999, s. 31 and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 19 -4-2000).  13 
 31. Exception in the case of insurance business in respect of persons residing outside India .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 30 or in the Insurance Act, the Central Government may, 
by order, permit any person who has made an application in that behalf, to carry on life insurance 
business in India, in respect of the lives of persons  ordinarily resident outside India, subject to such 
restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the order and any such order shall be deemed to have 
effect as if it were a certificate of registrations issued by the 1[Authority ] to such person under section 3 of 
the Insurance Act in respect of that class of business.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall authorise any person permitted to carry on life insurance business 
of the nature referred to in that sub -section, to insure the life of any person ord inarily resident outside 
India, during any period of his temporary residence in India.  
32. Power of Corporation to have official seal in certain cases .—The Corporation may have for 
use in any zonal office , divisional office or in any office outside India a n official seal which shall be a 
facsimile  of the common seal of the Corporation, with the addition on its fact of the name of the zonal 
office, divisional office or other office where it is to be used, and any such official seal may be affixed to 
any deed or document to which the Corporation is a  party.  
33. Requirement of foreign laws to be complied with in certain cases .—Where any property or 
rights appertaining to the controlled business of an insurer are transferred to and vested in the Corporation 
under this Act or would be so transferred and vested but for the fact that such transfer and vesting are 
governed otherwise than by the law of India, the insurer shall comply with such directions as may be 
given to him by the Corporation for the purpose of securing that the ownership of the property o r, as the 
case may be, that the right is effectively transferred to the Corporation.  
34. Revesting of certain shares vested in the Administrator General .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Insurance Act, all shares which have vested in the Administr ator General of any State 
under sub-section ( 8) of the section 6A of that Act and which have not been disposed of in accordance 
with the provisions of that sub -section before the appointed day, shall, on payment of the amount of 
expenditure, if any, incurr ed by the Administrator General in relation to such shares by the persons who 
would have been entitled to those shares if the said sub -section had not been enacted, revest in such 
persons.  
35. Repatriation of assets and liabilities in the case of foreign i nsurers in certain cases .—(1) Any 
insurer incorporated outside India may, before the appointed day, make an application to the Central 
Government stating that among the assets appertaining to the controlled business of the insurer there are 
assets brought into India by the insurer for the purpose  of building up his life insurance business in India, 
which, notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, should not be transferred to and vested in the 
Corporation.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall determine the 
value of the assets of the insurer appertaining to his controlled business in existence on 31 st day of 
December, 1955, computed as at that date in accordance with the provisions contained in paragraph 3  of 
Part B of the First Schedule, and deduct therefrom the total amount of the liabilities of the insurer 
appertaining to his controlled business in existence on the 31st day of December 1955, computed as at 
that date in accordance with the provisions cont ained in the Second Schedule; and if there is any excess, 
the Central Government may, by order, direct that such assets equivalent in value to the excess as may be 
specified in the order shall not be transferred to or vested in the Corporation, or where th e order is made 
after the appointed day, that the Corporation shall be divested of the said assets.  
(3) In the case of any insurer incorporated outside India, the Central Government may also, by order, 
direct that any such liabilities in respect of life in surance policies expressed in any foreign currency issued 
on the lives of persons who are not citizens of India as are specified in the order together with any such 
assets necessary to meet the liabilities, as may be so specified, shall not be transferred to or vested in the 
Corporation or, if the order is made after the appointed day, that the Corporation shall be divested of such 
liabilities and assets as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1 999, s. 31 and the Second Schedule , for “Controller” (w.e.f. 19 -4-2000).  14 
 (4) The amount of liabilities in respect of the policies referred to in an order made unde r                 
sub-section ( 3) shall be computed as at the 31st day of December, 1955, — 
(a) in any case where in respect of the insurer concerned an order has been made under            
sub-section ( 2), in accordance with the provisions contained in clause ( b) of the Second schedule; and  
(b) in any other case, in accordance with method A specified in the Second Schedule.  
Explanation. —In computing the amount of liabilities in respect of the policies referred to in this        
sub-section, allowance  shall be made for receipts and payments in respect of such policies from the 31st 
day of December, 1955, up to the date of the order.  
(5) Every order made by the Central Government under this section shall be carried out by the 
Corporation in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
36. Contracts o f chief agents and special agents to terminate .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Insurance Act or in any other law for the time being in force every contract appertaining 
to controlled business subsisting immediately before the appointed day, — 
(a) between an insurer and his chief agent or between an insurer and a special agent; or  
(b) between the chief agent of an insurer and a special agent;  
shall, as from the appointed day, cease to have effect  and all rights accruing to the chief agent or the 
special agent under any such contract shall terminate on that day:  
Provided that in every such case compensation shall be given by the Corporation to the chief agent or 
the special agent, as the case may b e, in accordance with the principles contained in the Third Schedule, 
and the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 16 shall, so far as may be, apply in every such case.  
37. Policies to be guaranteed by Central Government .—The sums assured by all policies issued by 
the Corporation including any bonuses declared in respect thereof and, subject to the provisions contained 
in section 14 the amounts assured by all policies issued by any insurer the liabilities under which have 
vested in the Corporation  under this Act, and all bonuses declared in respect thereof, whether before or 
after the appointed day , shall be guaranteed as to payment in cash by the Central Government.  
1[Provided that the Corporation shall endeavour that its funds are invested in the  attractive schemes 
formulated by it to ensure increased bonus to policyholders while having least investment risk so as to 
enable the Corporation to play a greater role in economic enrichment of the masses while maintaining its 
position as a leading playe r in the market.]  
38. Liquidation of Corporation .—No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies or 
corporations shall apply to the corporation established under this Act, and the Corporation shall not be 
placed in liquidation save by order of  the Central Government and in such manner as that Government 
may direct.  
39. Special provisions for winding up of certain insurers .—Where any insurer being a company 
(other than a composite insurer) whose controlled business has been transferred to and ve sted in the 
Corporation under this Act has in accordance with the provisions of this Act collected and distributed any 
moneys paid to him by the Corporation by way of compensation or otherwise and has also complied with 
any direction given to him by the Co rporation for the purpose of securing that the ownership of any 
property or any right is effectively transferred to the Corporation, the Central Government may on 
application being made to it in this behalf by such insurer grant a certificate to the insure r that there is no 
reason for the continued existence of the insurer and where such a certificate has been granted shall cause 
the certificate to be published in the Official Gazette and upon the publication thereof the insurer shall be 
dissolved.  
40. Pena lty for withholding property, etc .—If any person wil fully withholds or fails to deliver to 
the Corporation as required by section 13, any property or any books, documents or other papers which 
may be in his possession or unlawfully retains possession of an y property of an insurer which has been 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 6 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  15 
 transferred to and vested in the Corporation under this Act or wilfully applies any such property to 
purpose s other than those expressed in or authorised by this Act, he shall, on the complaint of the 
Corporation, be  punishable with imprisonment which may extent to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
41. Tribunal to have exclusive jurisdiction in certain matters .—No civil court shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain or adjudicat e upon any matter which a Tribunal is empowered to decide or 
determine under this Act.  
42. Enforcement of decisions of Tribunals .—Any decision of a Tribunal may be enforced in any 
civil court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the person against  whom the decision is to be 
enforced actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain or owns any 
property, as if it were a decree passed by that court.  
43. Application of the Insurance Act .—(1) The following section s of the Insurance Act shall, so far 
as may be, apply to the Corporation as they apply to any other insurer, namely: — 
Sections 2, 2B, 3, 18, 26, 33, 38, 39, 41, 45, 46, 47A, 50, 51, 52, 110A, 110B, 110C, 119, 121, 
122 and 123.  
(2) The Central Government shall as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the following sections of the Insurance Act shall apply to 
the Corporation subject to such conditions and modifications as may be specified in the notification, 
namely:— 
Sections 2D, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27A, 28A, 35, 36, 37, 40, 40A,  40B,  43, 44, 
102 to 106, 107 to 110, 111, 113, 114 and 116A.  
1[(2A) Section 42 of the Insurance Act shall have effect in relation to the issue to  any individual of a 
licence to act as an agent for the purpose of soliciting or procuring life insurance business for the 
Corporation as if the reference to an officer authorised by the 2[Authority ] in this behalf in sub -section ( 1) 
thereof included a ref erence to an officer of the Corporation authorised by the 2[Authority ] in this behalf.]  
(3) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the 
provision of the Insurance Act other than those specified in sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), shall apply 
to the Corporation subject to such conditions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.  
(4) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before both Houses of Parliament as soon as possible after it is issued, and shall be subject to 
such modifications as Parliament may make during the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following.  
(5) Save as provided in t his section, nothing contained in the Insurance Act shall apply to the 
Corporation.  
43A. [Deduction of income -tax not to be made on interest or dividend .] Omitted by the Finance        
Act, 2002  (20 of 2002 ), s. 157 (w.e.f . 1-6-2002 ). 
44. Act not to apply in certain cases .—Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in relation to — 
(a) any insurer whose business is being voluntarily wou nd up or is being wound up under the 
orders of the Court;  
(b) any insurer to whom the Insurance Act does no t apply by reason of the provisions contained 
in section 2E thereof;  
3[Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply on and from the date on which the 
provisions contained in section 2E of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) shall cease to ope rate.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1957, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 1999, s. 1, for “Controller” (w.e.f. 19-4-2000).  
3. The proviso ins. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 7 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  16 
 (c) any composite insurer in respect of the management of whose affairs an Administrator has 
been appointed under section 52A of the Insurance Act;  
(d) the scheme run by the Central Government known as the Post Office Life Insurance Fund;  
(e) any ap proved superannuation fund as defined in clause ( a) of section 58N of the Indian       
Income -tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), which is in existence on the appointed day;  
(f) any scheme in existence on the appointed day or any scheme framed after the appointed day 
with the approval of the Central Government whereby, in consideration of certain compulsory 
deductions made by Government from the salaries of its employees as part of the conditions of 
service, the payment of money is assured by Government on the deat h of the employee concerned or 
on the happening of any contingency dependent on his life.  
1[(g) any Family Pension Scheme Framed under the Coal Mines Provident Fund, Family Pension 
and Bonus Schemes Act,  1948 (46 of 1948), or the Employees Provident Funds and Family Pension 
Fund Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), for the purpose of providing family pension and life assurance benefits 
to the employees covered by the said Scheme.]  
2[45. Special provisions regarding transfer of  controlled business of certain composite 
insurer .—Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( c) of section 44, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that on and with effect from such date as may be specified in 
the notification the assets and liabilities a ppertaining to the controlled business of a composite insurer in 
respect of the management of whose affairs an Administrator has been appointed under section 52A of the 
Insurance Act shall be transferred to the vested in the Corporation, and on the issue o f such a notification 
the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such insurer and to the transfer and 
vesting of the assets and liabilities of his controlled business in the Corporation as they apply in relation 
to all other i nsurers and to the transfer and vesting of assets and liabilities of their controlled business in 
the Corporation, subject to the modification that references in this Act to the appointed day shall be 
construed as references to the day specified in the not ification.]  
46. Defects in constitution of Corporation or Committees not to invalidate acts or 
proceedings .—No act or proceeding of the Corporation or of any Committee of the Corporation shall be 
called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the 
Corporation or Committee, as the case may be.  
47. Protection of action taken under Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any member or employee of the Corporation for anything  which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done under this Act.  
48. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office and the conditions of service of members;  
3[(aa) the instruments which may be issued and the amount of working capital under                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 5;]  
(b) the manner in which the moneys and other assets belonging to any such fund as is referred to 
in section 8 shall be apportioned between the trustees of the fund and the Corporation;  
(c) the services which the chief agent should have rendered for the purpose of the proviso to 
section 12;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 31 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 17 of 1957, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -6-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 8 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  17 
 1[(cc) the terms and conditions of service of the employees  2*** of the Corporation, including  
those who became employees  2*** of the Corporation on the appointed day under this Act;]  
(d) the jurisdiction of the Tribunals constituted under section 17;  
(e) the manner in which, and the persons to whom, any compensation under this Act may be paid;  
(f) the time within which any matter which may be referred to a Tribunal for decision under this 
Act may be so referred;  
(g) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which investments may be made by the 
Corporation;  
(h) the manner in which an Employ ees and Agents Relations Committee may be constituted for 
each zonal office;  
(i) the form in which the report giving an account of the activities of the Corporation shall be 
prepared;  
(j) the conditions subject to which the Corporation may appoint employee s; 
(k) the fees payable under this Act and the manner in which they are to be collected;  
(l) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed;  
3[(2A) The regulation s and other provisions as in force immediately before the commencement of the 
Life Insu rance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1981, with respect to the terms and conditions of service 
of employees and agents of the Corporation including those who became employees and agents of the 
Corporation on the appointed day under this Act, shall be deemed to be rules made under clause ( cc) of 
sub-section ( 2) and shall, subject to the other provisions of this section, have effect accordingly.  
(2B) The power to make rules conferred by clause ( cc) of sub -section ( 2) shall include — 
(i) the power to give retrospective effect to such rules; and  
(ii) the power to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal, the regulations and other 
provision refereed to in sub -section ( 2A), with retrospective effect,  
from a  date not earlier than the twentie th day of June, 1979.  
(2C) The provisions of clause ( cc) of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 2B) and any rules made under 
the said clause ( cc) shall have effect, and any such rule made with retrospective effect from any date shall 
also be deemed to have ha d effect from th at date, notwithstanding any judgement, decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes             
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any other law or any agreement, settl ement, award or other instrument for the 
time being in force.]  
4[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of t hirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rul e or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validit y of anything preciously done 
under that rule.]  
49. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Gazette of India,  make regulations not inconsistent with th is 
Act and the rules made there under to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1981, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -6-1979).  
2. The words “and agents” omitted by Act Act 8 of 2012, s. 8 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 1981, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1981).  
4. Subs. by Act 52 of 1975, s. 43, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 16 -2-1976).  18 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provid e for— 
(a) the powers and functions of the Corporation which may be delegated to the Zonal Managers;  
1[(b) the method of recruitment of employees and agents of the Corporation and the terms and 
conditions of the agents;]  
2*                               *                                *                                    *                                 *  
(c) the number, term of office and conditions of service of members of Boards constituted under 
section 22;  
(d) the territorial limits of each zone esta blished under this Act and the business to be transacted 
in each Zone;  
(e) the manner in which the Fund of the Corporation shall be maintained;  
(f) the maintenance of separate funds and accounts at each of the zonal offices;  
(g) the jurisdiction of each divisional office and the establishment of Councils representative of 
policy -holders in each area served by a divisional office for the purpose of advising the divisional 
office in respect of any matter which may be referred to it;  
(h) the conduct of busin ess at meetings of the Corporation;  
(i) the formation of Committees of the Corporation and the delegation of powers and functions of 
the Corporation to such Committees, and the conduct of business at meetings of such Committees;  
3*                             *                                  *                                    *                                * 
(k) the classification of policies, whether issued by the Corporation or by any insurer whose 
controlled business has been transferred to and ves ted in the Corporation, for the purposes of 
declaring differential bonuses, wherever necessary;  
(l) the manner in which and the intervals within which the accounts of the various zonal offices, 
divisional offices and branch offices may be inspected and the ir accounts audited,  
(m) the conditions subject to which any payment may be made by the Corporation.  
4[(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation].  
   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2012, s. 9, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  
2. Omitted by Act 1 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1981).  
3. Omitted by Act 8 of 2012, s. 9 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2012).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1981).  19 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 16)  
PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING COMPENSATION  
PART A 
The compensation to be given by the Corporation to an insurer having a share capital on which 
dividend or bonus is payable, who has allocated as bonus to policy -holders the whole or any part of the 
surplus as disclosed in the abstracts prepared in accordan ce with Part II of the Fourth Schedule to the 
Insurance Act in respect of the last actuarial investigation relating to his controlled business as at a date  
earlier than the 1st day of January, 1955, shall be computed in accordance with the provisions cont ained 
in paragraph 1 or paragraph 2, whichever is more advantageous to the insurer.  
Paragraph  1.—Twenty times the annual average of the share of the surplus allocated to               
share -holders as disclosed in the abstracts aforesaid in respect of the relevant actuarial investigations 
multiplied by a figure which represents the proportion that the average business in force during the 
calendar years 1950 to 1955 bears to the average business in force during the calendar years comprised in 
the period betw een the date as at which the actuarial investigation immediately preceding the earliest of 
the relevant actuarial investigations was made and the date as at which the last of such investigations was 
made.  
Paragraph  2.—Half the amount payable under paragrap h 1 plus the paid -up capital or assets 
equivalent thereto, or, in the case of a composite insurer, that part of the paid -up capital or assets 
equivalent thereto which has or been transferred to and vested in the Corporation under this Act less the 
amount, if any of expenses or losses or both capitalised by the insurer for the purposes of Form A in the 
First Schedule to the Insurance Act.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of paragraph 1, — 
(a) “relevant actuarial investigations ” means such minimum number of latest actuarial 
investigations as at dates earlier than the 1st day of January, 1955 (not being less than two in any 
case), as would leave the period intervening between the date as at which the actuarial investigation 
immedi ately preceding the first of such investigations was made and the date as at which the last of 
such investigations was made, to be not less than four years;  
(b) “average business in force ” means the average of total sums assured by the insurer (including 
any bonus) in respect of his controlled business as on the 31st day of December of each of the 
relevant calendar years.  
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of paragraph 1, where an insurer has allocated to share -holders 
more than 5 per cent, of any such surplus as is referred to therein, the insurer shall be deemed to have 
allocated only 5 per cent, of the surplus and where an insurer has not allocated any such surplus to      
share -holders or has allocated to share -holders less than 31/2 per cent, of any such surplus, the insurer 
shall be deemed to have allocated 31/2 per cent, of the surplus.  
Explanation  3.—In the case of any insurer incorporated outside India, the annual  average of the share 
of the surplus allocated to share -holders for the purposes of paragraph 1 shall be deemed to be the annual 
average of the surplus as disclosed in the abstracts prepared in accordance with Part II of the Fourth 
Schedule to the Insuranc e Act in respect of the relevant actuarial investigations multiplied by a figure 
which is the average of the two figures mentioned below: — 
(i) a figure representing the proportion which the share allocated to share -holders out of the 
surplus in respect of the world business of the insurer (such share being computed subject to the 
provisions of Explanation 2) bears to the whole of such surplus as ascertained with reference to the 
last actuarial investigation relating to such business as at a date earlier tha n the 1st day of          
January, 1955; and  
  20 
 (ii) a figure representing the proportion which the share allocated to share -holders out of the 
surplus in respect of the world business of the insurer (such share being computed subject to the 
provisions of E xplanation 2) bears to the whole of such surplus as ascertained with reference to the 
actuarial investigation relating to such business immediately preceding the actuarial investigation 
referred to in clause ( i): 
Provided that in the case of any such insurer in respect of whom an order has been made under 
section 35 the amount computed as follows shall be deemed to be the annual average of the surplus: — 
(a) there shall be deducted from the annual average of the surplus, interest at 31/2 per cent . per 
annum for one year calculated on the assets specified in any order made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 35;  
(b) with respect to the balance arrived at under clause ( a), there shall be computed an amount that 
bears the same proportion to the said balance as  the liability on policies appertaining to the controlled 
business of the insurer, other than those expressed in any foreign currency issued on the lives of 
persons who are citizens of India, bears to the liability in respect of all policies appertaining t o such 
business, the liabilities on policies being computed as at the 31st day of December, 1955, in 
accordance with the provisions contained in clause ( b) of the Second Schedule:  
Provided further that — 
(a) in any case where the order made under section 35  is with reference to sub -section ( 2) only, 
the preceding proviso shall have effect as if clause ( b) had been omitted therefrom; and  
(b) in any case where the order made under section 35 is with reference to sub -section ( 3) only, 
the preceding proviso shal l have effect as if — 
(i) clause ( a) has been omitted;  
(ii) in clause ( b), the words, brackets and letter “with respect to the balance arrived at under 
clause ( a)” had been omitted; for the words “the said balance ” the words “annual average of the 
surplus ” had been substituted; and for the words, brackets and letter “with the provisions 
contained in clause ( b) of”, the words and letter “with method a specified in ” had been 
substituted.  
Explanation 4.—Where an insurer incorporated outside India whose paid -up capital is outside 
India— 
(a) the provisions contained in paragraph 1 shall have effect as if the words “less a sum equal to 
that part of the paid -up capital of the insurer as may be determined by the Central Government to be 
allocable to the controlled b usiness of the insurer ” were inserted at the end of that paragraph; and  
(b) the provisions contained in paragraph 2 shall have effect as if, — 
(i) the words “without making the deduction referred to in clause ( a) of Explanation  4” had 
been inserted after the words “half the amount payable under paragraph 1 ”; and 
(ii) the words beginning with “plus the paid -up capital ” and ending with “in the First 
Schedule to the Insurance Act ” had been omitted.  
PART B 
The compensation to be given by the Corporation to an insurer having a share capital on which 
dividend or bonus is payable who has not made any such allocation as is referred to in Part A in respect of 
the last actuarial investigation as at a date earlier than the 1st day of January, 1955, shall be an amount 
equal to the value of the assets of the insurer appertaining to his controlled business in existence, on the 
19th day of January, 1956, computed as at that date in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 less 
the amount of li abilities of the insurer appertaining to such business in existence on the 19th day of 
January, 1956, computed as at that date in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 4.  
  21 
 Paragraph  3.—Assets .—(a) The market value of any land or buildings.  
(b) The market value of any shares, securities or other investments held by the insurer.  
(c) The total amount of the premiums paid by the insurer in respect of all leasehold properties reduced 
in the case of each such premium by an amount which bears to suc h premium the same proportion as the 
expired term of the lease in respect of which such premium shall have been paid bears to the total term of 
the lease.  
(d) The amount of debts due to the insurer, whether secured or unsecured, to the extent to which they  
are reasonably considered to be recoverable.  
(e) The amount of premiums which have fallen due to the insurer on policies of life Insurance but 
have not been paid and the days of grace for payment of which have not expired.  
(f) The amount of cash held by t he insurer whether in deposit with a bank or otherwise.  
(g) The value of all tangible assets other than those falling within any of the preceding clauses.  
Paragraph  4.—Liabilities. —(a) The total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders of policies i n 
respect of his controlled business on account of matured claims on which payment has to be made.  
(b) The total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders of policies in respect of his controlled 
business which have not matured for payment, the liabilities in respect thereof being calculat ed on the 
following actuarial bases: — 
(i) in respect of whole -life assurances and endowment assurances, the mortality table to be used 
shall be the Oriental (2 5-35) ultimate mortality table, and an interest rate  of 31/4 per cent . per annum 
shall be assumed and for expenses 20 per cent . of office premiums in the case of with -profit policies 
and 15 per cent . of office premiums in the case of non -profit policies shall be reserved;  
(ii) in respect of other policies s uch actuarial bases determined by the actuary making the 
valuation as may be consistent with the basis specified in clause ( i); and  
(iii) in determining the liabilities of insurers under clause ( b) the actuary shall make all the usual 
provisions and reser ves as are ordinarily done in such cases.  
(c) The total amount of all other liabilities of the insurer.  
(d) Where, as a result of the actuarial valuation of policy liabilities made under clause, ( b) the life 
insurance fund is shown to be in surplus, a sum equal to 96 per cent of such surplus shall be deemed to be 
a liability under this paragraph.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Part, in the case of an insurer incorporated outside India in 
respect whom an order under section 35 has been made, the assets or the assets and liabilities as the case 
may be, specified in the order shall be excluded.  
Paragraph  5.—If the insurer to whom compensation is to be given under this part is a displaced 
insurer, the compensation to be given shall be computed in acc ordance with following provisions: — 
Firstly,  there shall be ascertained the losses incurred by the displaced insurer in respect of claims 
arising by deaths established by the displaced insurer to have been caused by the civil disturbances which 
took place on the occasion of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, the total loss being 
taken as the difference between the amounts paid as claims in respect of such deaths and the total amount 
of the actuarial reserve in respect of the relevant pol icies;  
Secondly,  there shall be ascertained the difference between the market value as at the 15th day of 
August 1947, of any immovable property in West Pakistan belonging to the displaced insurer and the 
market value thereof determined under Paragraph  3 of this part, or, where any such immovable property 
has been sold before the 19th day of January, 1956, the difference between the market value thereof as at 
the 15th day of August 1947, and the sale price;  22 
 Thirdly,  there shall be ascertained the amount of deposits held by the displaced insurer in banks which 
could not be withdrawn on account of a moratorium declared under any law for the time being in force, to 
the extent to which such deposits have become losses;  
Fourthly,  there shall be ascertained the di fference between the market value as at the 15th day of 
August, 1947, of any shares in any company now carrying on business in West Pakistan held by the 
displaced insurer and which had been acquired before the 15th day of August, 1947, and the market value  
of such shares as at the 19th day of January, 1956.  
The amount of compensation to be given to the displaced insurer under this part shall be — 
(a) the amount which would have to be given to him if this Paragraph  had not been enacted, plus 
(b) an amount which represents one -half of the difference between the compensation which 
would have to be given to him if to the value of the assets referred to in Paragraph  3 there had been 
added the sum of the four items referred to in this Paragraph and w ith respect to the liabilities referred 
to in Paragraph 4, the life insurance fund had been increased by a like sum, and the compensation 
which would have to be given to him if this Paragraph had not been enacted.  
Or 
one half of the paid -up capital of the displaced insurer whichever is less.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this Paragraph “displaced insurer ” means an insurance company 
whose registered office during any part of the year 1947 was in any area now forming part of West 
Pakistan and whose registe red office is now in India.  
PART C 
The compensation to be given b y the Corporation to an insurer — 
(a) having no share capital; or  
(b) having a share capital on which a dividend or bonus is not payable;  
shall  be in the form of an addition at the rate of rupee one per thousand in respect of the su m assured 
(excluding bonuses) under each with -profit policy, and in the case of an insurer falling under clause ( b), 
such compensation shall also include a su m equival ent to the paid -up capital of the insurer to be paid to 
him. 
 
  
  23 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 35)  
PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING THE VALUE OF LIABILITIES IN CERTAIN CASES  
The total amount of the liabilities of an insurer incorporated outside India for the  purposes of           
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 5 shall be the sum of the amounts computed in accordance with the following 
provisions: — 
(a) the total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders of policies in respect of his controlled 
business on account of matured claims on which payment has to be made ; 
(b) the total amount of liabilities of the insurer to holders of policies in respect of h is controlled 
business which have not matured for payment, the liabilities in respect thereof being the liabilities 
calculated in accordance with method B below or the mean of the liabilities calculated in accordance 
with method A and method B below, which ever is greater.  
Method A. —Actuarial liability calculated on the same bases as adopted by the insurer at the last 
actuarial investigation as at a date earlier than the 1st of January, 1955.  
Method B. —Actuarial liability calculated on the methods know n as the modified net premium method 
of valuation, the mortality table to be used being the Oriental (25 -35) ultimate mortality table, an interest 
rate of 21/2 per cent . per annum being assumed and the allowance for first year expenses being Rs.40 per 
thousand r upees of the sum assured by the policy.  
Explanation 1.—Before ascertaining the liability under method A and method B, there shall be added 
to each with -profit policy in force on the 31st day of December, 1955 (unless such addition has already 
been made) bo nus at the same rate as declared at the said last actuarial investigation in respect of each 
year or part of a year the policy had been in force since the date as at which the said last actuarial 
investigation was made.  
Explanation  2.—In calculating the li abilities in accordance with method A or method B, — 
(i) in respect of policies other than whole -life assurance and endowment assurance, such actuarial 
basis determined by the actuary making the valuation as may be consistent with the basis specified in 
the method shall be employed; and  
(ii) the actuary shall make all the usual provisions and reserves as are ordinarily done in such 
cases;  
(c) the total amount of all other liabilities of the insurer.  
 
  
  24 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 36)  
PRINCIPLES FOR DET ERMINING COMPENSATION PAYABLE TO CHIEF AGENTS  
The compensation payable to a chief agent shall consist of seventy -five per cent, of the overriding 
commission specified in the contract relating to chief agency with the insurer on the renewal premiums 
receive d by the Corporation during a period of ten years from the appointed day in respect of the business 
procured by the chief agent before the appointed day; and such compensation shall be determined and 
paid annually for the said period.  
PRINCIPLES FOR DETERMINING COMPENSATION PAYABLE TO SPECIAL AGENTS  
The compensation payable to a spe cial agent shall consist of one eighth of his annual average 
earnings during the period beginning on the 1st day of January, 1952, and ending on the 31st day of 
December, 1955, in the form of overriding commissions in respect of business procured by him through 
insurance agents.  
 
--------------------------The Lok Sahayak Sena Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE LOK SAHAYAK SENA ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 53 OF 1956  
[15th September, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of Lok Sahayak Sena for imparting military training to 
citizens of India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called  the Lok Sahayak Sena Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “camp” means any place established under section 4 as a camp where any   body of volunteers 
is for the time being undergoing training;  
(b) “Force” means the Lok Sahayak Sena constituted under this Act;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “superior officer ” means any officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer or                 
non-commissioned officer of the regular Army or of the Territorial Army;  
(e) “volunteer ” means a person enrolled in the Force under this Act;  
(f) all words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the Army                     
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or in the Territorial Army Act, 1948 ( 56 of 1948), shall have  the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the said Acts.  
3. Constitution of the Lok Sahayak Sena .—There shall be raised and maintained by the Central 
Government a force to be designated the Lok Sahayak Sena by the enrolment of volunteers in the manner  
hereinafter provided.  
4. Establishment of camps .—The Central Government may establish such number of camps for the 
purposes of the Force as it thinks fit and may close down or re -establish any such camps.  
5. Enrolment .—Any citizen of India not below the a ge of eighteen years and not above the age of 
forty years may offer himself for enrolment as a volunteer and may, if he satisfies the prescribed 
conditions, be enrolled in the prescribed manner by the prescribed authority for such period and subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed.  
6. Duties of volunteers .—No person shall, on the ground only of being a volunteer be liable for 
military service, but subject thereto a volunteer may be called upon to undergo such training as may be 
prescribed, and while  undergoing such training shall perform such duties and discharge such obligations 
as the prescribed authority may, by general or special order, direct.  
7. Discharge .—Every volunteer shall be entitled to receive his discharge from the Force on the 
expiration of the period for which he was enrolled, but may, prior to the expiration of that period, be 
discharged from the Force by such authority and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
8. Offences and penalties .—(1) If any volunteer commits any of the following offences, that is          
to say,— 
(i) without sufficient cause fails to attend at any place when duly required to do so; or  
(ii) while in camp on duty — 
(a) absents himself from the camp without leave;  
(b) uses criminal force or uses threatening or insubordinate language to a superior officer or 
assaults a superior officer;  
(c) disobeys any lawful command of a superior officer;  2 
 (d) neglects to obey any standing, general or other orders by the officer commanding the 
camp;  
(e) uses crimi nal force to, or assaults, any volunteer or any person subject to the Army       
Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948);  
(f) knowingly  does any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of good   order or military 
discipline in camp;  
he shall be punishable summarily by order of the prescribed authority with fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees or, in default , by being confined to barra cks for a term which may extend to seven days.  
(2) Any fine imposed by order of the prescribed authority under sub -section ( 1), may on application 
made in this behalf by the prescribed authority to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where the 
volunteer resides or has a place of business, be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as if it were a fine imposed by such magistrate.  
9. Liability for causing loss of, or damage to, Government property .—If any volunteer wilfully or 
negligently causes loss of, or damage to, any property of the Government, the prescribed authority may, 
after giving him an opportunity of being heard and after  making such inquiry into the matter as it thinks 
fit, make an order requiring him to make good the loss or damage within such time as may be specified in 
the order within such further time as may be allowed by the prescribed authority in this behalf, and where 
the amount thereof as determined by the prescribed authority is not paid within the time allowed, it shall, 
on application made by the prescribed authority to the Collector of the district in which the volunteer 
resides or has   a place of business, b e recovered from him in the same manner as an arrear of land 
revenue.  
10. Presumption as to certain documents .—Where a volunteer is required by or in pursuance of any 
rule made under this Act to attend at any place, a certificate purporting to be signed by  the prescribed 
officer, stating that the volunteer so required to attend failed to do so in accordance with such requirement 
shall, without proof of the signature or appointment of such officer, be evidence of the matters stated 
therein.  
11. Power to make  rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide f or all or any of t he following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the authorities by which, the manner in which, the period for which, and the conditions 
subject to which, any person may be enrolled as a volunteer;  
(b) the training, discipline, duties, and obligations which a volunteer has to undergo, observe, 
perform or discharge under this Act;  
(c) the authorities by which, and the conditions subject to which, a volunteer may be discharged;  
(d) the manner in which , and the conditions subject to which,   a volunteer may be called out for  
training or duties;  
(e) the determination of authorities for the purposes of this Act;  
(f)  the officers by whom certificates may be signed under section 10; and  
(g) any other matter which under this Act is to be or may be prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befor e the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that  the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Manipur (Village Authorities in Hill Areas) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR (VILLAGE AUTHORITIES IN HILL AREAS) ACT, 1956  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONS OF VILLAGE  AUTHORITIES  
3. Constitution of Village Authorities.  
4. Qualifications for membership of Village Authorities.  
5. Disqualifications for membership of Village Authorities.  
6. Term of office of members of Village Authorities.  
7. Election of members of Village Authorities.  
8. Power to remov e members of Village Authorities.  
9. Resignation of members.  
10. Filling of causal vacancies.  
11. Bar to interference by courts in election matters.  
12. Election disputes.  
13. Validation of acts and proceedings.  
14. Incorporation of Village Authorities.  
15. Control of Village Authorities by sub -divisional magistrate.  
16. Functions of Village Authorities.  
17. Obligation to assist Village Authorities.  
18. Power of Chief Commissioner to call for records of Village Authorities, sub -divisional magistrate 
or Deputy Commissioner.  
19. Constitution of village courts.  
20. Jurisdiction of village courts in criminal cases.  
CHAPTER III  
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE BY VILLAGE AUTHORITIES  
21. How cases may be instituted.  
22. Power of village courts to dismiss or refuse to entertain complaint.  
23. Dismissal of case for default.  
24. Proceedings preliminary to trial . 
25. Bar to appeal from the order of village courts, but power to order retrial.  
26. Power of village courts to impose fine or to award compensation.  
27. Power of village to release certain offenders after admonition or on probation of  good conduct.  
28. Power of village courts to permit compounding of offences.  
29. Power to transfer criminal cases.  
30. Jurisdiction of village courts in civil cases.  
31. Certain suits not to be tried by village courts.  
32. Local limits of jurisdiction of village courts.  2 
 SECTIONS  
33. How suits may be instituted.  
34. Suits barred by limitation are not triable by village courts.  
35. Dismissal of suits for default.  
36. Summons to defendants to appear and answer.  
37. Ex parte  decision  
38. No order to be set aside without notice to opposite party.  
39. Powe r of village courts to determine necessary parties.  
40. Certain suits not to be tried by village courts.  
41. Decision of village courts.  
42. Instalments.  
43. Decision of village court to be final; but power to order retrial.  
44. Death of parties.  
45. Fees.  
46. Execution of decree.  
47. Limitation for execution of decree or order.  
48. Procedure before village courts.  
49. Persons who are to preside over village courts.  
50. Village courts not to try any case or suiting in which the Village authority or any member thereof 
is interested.  
51. Attendance of wi tnesses.  
52. Appearance of parties before village courts.  
53. Appearance of women.  
54. Realisation of fees, fines, etc . 
55. Registers and records . 
56. Language of village courts.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
57. Power to make rules . 
58. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE MANIPUR (VILLAGE AUTHORITIES IN HILL AREAS) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 80 OF 1956  
[22nd December , 1956.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the constitution and functions of Village 
Authorities in the hill areas of the Union territory of Manipur.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follow: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur 
(Village   Authorities in Hill Areas) Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the hill areas of the Union territory of Manipur.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this   Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of Manipur;  
(b) “Deputy Commissioner ” means the Deputy Commissioner of Manipur and includes the 
Additional Deputy commissioner thereof;  
(c) “heinous offence ” means— 
(i)  any of the following offences puni shable un der the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860), that is 
to say, any of fence under Chapter VI, rioting , any offence under Chapter XII, murder, 
culpable   homicide  not amounting to murder, grievous hurt, kidnapping or abducting in order to 
subject a person to slavery, buying or disposing of any person as a slave, habitual dealing in 
slaves, rape, robbery, dacoity, mischief by fire or explosive substance, and house b reaking;  
(ii) any offence punishable under the Indian Arms Act, 1 878 (11 of 1878);  
and includes any attempt, preparation or conspiracy to commit, and abetment of, any of the offences 
specified in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii); 
(d) “hill areas” mean suc h areas in the Hill tracts of the Union territory of Manipur as the Chief 
Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be hill areas;  
(e) “legal practitioner ” includes a pleader, mukhtar or revenue -agent;  
(f) “prescribed ” means pre scribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION AND FUNCTIONS OF VILLAGE  AUTHORITIES  
3. Constitution of Village Authorities .—(1) For every village having twenty or more tax -paying houses 
there shall be a village Authority consisting of — 
(a) five members, where the number of tax -paying houses in the village is not less than twenty 
but is not more than sixty;  
(b) seven members, where the number of tax -paying houses in the village is more than sixty but is 
not more than one hundred;  
(c) ten memb ers, where the number of tax -paying houses in the village is more than one hundred 
but is not more than one hundred and fifty;  
                                                           
1. 18th April, 1957, vide notification No. S.R.O.  88, dated 7th January, 1957,  see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3.  4 
 (d) twelve members, where the number of tax -paying houses in the village is more than one 
hundred and fifty.  
(2) The Chief Commis sioner may, having regard to the general interests of the people of any 
village   as also to the demand, if any, from the people of that village for an elected Village Authority, 
declare, b y notification in the Official Gazette, that the village shall have an elected Village Authority, 
and thereupon the members of the Village Authority of that village shall be elected in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) Where no declaration under sub -section ( 2) has been made in r elation to any village the members 
of the Village Authority of that village shall be nominated by the Chief Commissioner.  
(4) Where there is a Chief Khulakpa in a village, he shall be the   ex officio   chairman of the 
Village   Authority of that village; and  where there is no such Chief or Khulakpa in the village, the 
chairman of the village Authority of that village shall be elected by the members of the Village Authority 
from among themselves.  
4. Qualifications for membership of Village Authorities .—A perso n shall not be qualified to be 
chosen as a member of a Village Authority unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India;  
(b) is not less than twenty -five years of age; and  
(c) in the case of membership of an elected Village Authority, is registered in the electoral roll as 
a voter for the election of a member of the Village Authority.  
5. Disqualifications for membership of Village Authorities .—A person shall be disqua lified for 
being chosen as, and  for being, a member of a Village Authority, — 
 (a) if he is a member of any other Village Authority;  
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent authority.  
6. Term of office of members of Village Authorities .—The te rm of office of members of a Village 
Authority shall be three years from the date appointed for its first meeting.  
7. Election of members of Village Authorities .—The election of members of the Village Authority 
of a village shall be on the basis of adult suffrage, that is to say, every person who is a citizen of India and 
who is ordinarily resident in the village and is not less than twenty -one years of age on such date as may 
be fixed by rules made under this Act, shall be entitled to be registered as a v oter at any such election.  
 Explanation. —A person shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident in a village if he ordinarily resides 
in that village or owns, or is in possession of, a dwelling house  therein.  
8. Power to remove members of Village Authorities .—(1) The Deputy Commissioner may remove 
any member of a Village Authority from his office — 
(a) who is convicted of any non -bailable offence; or  
(b) who refuses to act, or becomes incapable of acting, or is declared to be insolvent; or  
(c) who has been decla red by notification to be disqualified for employment in the public service; 
or 
(d) who, without an excuse sufficient in the opinion of the Deputy Commissioner, absents himself 
from six consecutive meetings of the Village Authority; or  
(e) who has been gui lty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties, or of any disgraceful 
conduct, if two -thirds of the total number of the members of the Village Authority at a meeting 
recommend his removal.  
(2) No person who has been removed from his office under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election except with the previous permission of the Chief 
Commissioner obtained by such person in the prescribed manner.  5 
 9. Resignation of members .—A member of a Village Authorit y may resign his office by writing 
under   his hand addressed to the chairman of the Authority but shall continue   in office until his 
resignation has been accepted in a meeting of the Authority.  
10. Filling of causal vacancies .—When the office of a member of a Village Authority becomes 
vacant by his removal, resignation or death, a new member shall be nominated or elected to fill the 
vacancy and shall hold office so long as the member whose place   he fills would have been entitled to 
hold office if such vac ancy had not occurred.   
11. Bar to interference by courts in election matters .—No election of a member of a Village 
Authority shall be called in question in any court, and no court shall grant an injunction, — 
(a) to postpone the election of a member of a V illage Authority; or  
(b) to prohibit a person, declared to have been duly elected under this Act, from taking part in the 
proceedings of a Village Authority of which he has been elected a member; of  
(c) to prohibit members nominated or elected for a Village Authority from entering upon their 
duties.  
12. Election disputes .—(1) If a dispute arises as to the election of any member of a Village 
Authority, the matter shall be referred to the Deputy Commissioner who shall decide the same after 
giving notice to the parties concerned and after taking such evidence as may be produced.  
(2) The order of the Deputy Commissioner may, within thirty days from the date thereof, be revised 
by the Chief Commissioner whose dec ision shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
13. Validation of acts and proceedings .—No Act done or proceedings taken by a Village 
Authority   under this Act shall be questioned on the ground merely of — 
(a) the existence of any vacancy in,  or any defect in the constit ution of, the Village Authority;  
(b) any defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.  
14. Incorporation of Village Authorities .—Every Village Authority shall be a body corporate by the 
name of the village for wh ich it is constituted and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and 
shall by the said name sue and be sued, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and do all other things necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
15. Control of Village Authorities by sub -divisional magistrate .—Subject to the general 
superintendence and control of the Deputy commissioner, the sub -divisional magistrate shall have control 
over all the Village Authorities with in the local limits of his jurisdiction.  
16. Functions of Village Authorities .—(1) Every Village Authority constituted under this Act shall, 
within the local limits of its jurisdiction, perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) it shall, to the best of  its ability maintain law and order and for there purpose exercise and 
perform the powers and duties generally conferred and imposed on the police by or under the Police 
Act, 1861 (5 of 1861):  
Provided that a Village Authority shal l not be deemed to be a p olice officer within the meaning of 
sections 25 and 16 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , or section 162 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898);  
(b) it shall cause to be arrested without any order from a magistrate and without a warrant — 
(i) any person who is a vagrant or commits a heinous offence or who has been concerned in 
any such offence or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made or credib le information 
has been received or a reasonable suspicion exists of his having been so concerned,  
(ii) any person against whom a hue and cry has been raised on the ground of his having been 
concerned in any heinous offence, whether such offence has been o r is being committed within its 
jurisdiction or  outside it,  6 
 (iii) any person for whose arrest a requisition has been  received from a police officer;  
provided that the requisition specifies   the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for 
which  the arrest is  to be made or it appears there from that the person might lawfully be arrested 
without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition,  
(iv) any person designing to commit any heinous offence of which the Village Authority has 
knowledge, if the commission of offence cannot otherwise be prevented,  
(v) any person who obstructs the Village Authority in the performance of its functions under 
this Act or rules made thereunder or a police officer while in the execution of his duty, and  
(vi) any person who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody:  
Provided that where a Village Authority is unable to arrest an offender it shall forthwith 
report the matter to the sub -divisional magistrate who shall provide the Village Authority with 
such assistance as it requires:  
Provided further that the Village Authority may pursue beyond the local limits of its 
jurisdiction any person who has committed a heinous offence or is a vagrant or of bad or 
suspicious character, and arrest such person outside the local limits of its jurisdiction with the 
consent of the Village Authority within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the person pursued 
is found;  
(c) it shall give immediate information to the sub -divisional magistrate of every unnatural, 
suspicious or sudden death which may occur, and of any heinous offence which may be committed, 
within the local limits of its jurisdiction and shall keep the sub -divisional magistrate informed of all 
disputes which are likely to lead to a riot or serious af fray; and  
 (d) it shall supply any information which any police officer or the sub -divisional magistrate or 
the Deputy commissioner may require from it.  
(2) No person who is arrested under this section shall be detained in cust ody without being informed, 
as soon as may be, of the grounds of such arrest.  
(3) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall   be produced before the nearest 
magistrate within a period of twenty four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in 
custody beyond the said  period without the authority of a magistrate.  
17. Obligation to assist Village Authorities .—(1) Every person shall be bound to render, to a 
Village Authority performing the functions under this Act, all the assistance which he is bound to render 
to a poli ce officer under section 42 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), and every 
person who refuses or neglects to comply with any requisition for such assistance shall be punishable 
with fine may extend to — 
(a)   two hundred rupees, where the se ntence passed by a Village court; or  
(b) five hundred rupees, where the sentence is passed by the court of a sub -divisional magistrate.  
(2) Against an order passed under sub -section ( 1) an appeal shall lie — 
  (a) to the court of sub -divisional magistrate, where the order is passed by a village court;  
  (b) to the court of session, where the order is passed by the court of the                                          
sub-divisional   magistrate,  
within period of thirty days from the date of such order or with in such longer period as the appellate court 
may allow:  
 Provided that no appeal shall lie in any case in which a village court passes a sentence of fine not 
exceeding twenty rupees or in any case in which the court of a sub -divisional magistrate passes a sentence 
of fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.  
  7 
                 
18. Power of chief Commissioner to call for records of Village Authorities, sub -divisional 
magistrate or Deputy Commissioner .—The Chief Commissioner may at any time call for and examine 
the record of any proceeding before a Village Authority, village court, sub -divisional magistrate or 
Deputy Commissioner under section 17 for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctnes s, legality 
or propriety of any finding, sentence or order recorded or passed and after perusing the record set aside, 
modify or   confirm such finding, sentence or order : 
Provided that where an order has been made by the court of session  in an appeal preferred under           
sub-section ( 2) of section 17, the Chief Commissioner shall not interfere with such appellate order.   
CHAPTER III  
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE BY VILLAGE AUTHORITIES  
19. Constitution of village courts .—Whenever a Villag e Authority has been constituted for any 
village, the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any two or more of 
the members of the Village Authority to be a village court during their term of office as members of the 
Villa ge Authority.  
20. Jurisdiction of village courts in criminal cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), the village court shall have jurisdiction concurrent with 
that of the criminal court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction   the village is situated for the trial of 
all offences specified in the Schedule.  
21. How cases may be instituted .—(1) A case before   a village court m ay be instituted by a 
complaint , made orally or in writing, to a membe r of the village court.  
(2) If the complaint is made orally, the member shall record the name of the complainant, the name of 
the person against whom the complaint is made, the nature of the offence and such other particulars, if 
any, as may be, prescribed , and shall direct the complainant to appear before the village court.  
22. Power of village courts to dismiss or refuse to entertain complaint .—(1) If upon the fact of the 
complaint, or on examining the complaint, the village court is of opinion that the c omplaint is frivolous 
vexatio us or untrue , it shall dismiss the case by  order in writing.  
(2) If at any time it appears to the village court — 
(a) that it has no jurisdiction to cry the case, or  
(b) that the offence is one for which the sentence which the c ourt is competent to pass would be 
inadequate, or  
(c) that the case is one which should not be tried  by the court,  
it shall direct the complainant to the   proper court.  
 23. Dismissal of case for default .—If in any case before a village court the complain ant fails to 
appear  on the day fixed, or if in the opinion of the court he shows negligence in prosecuting his case , the 
court may dismiss the case for default, and such order of dismissal shall operate as an acquittal.  
24. Proceedings preliminary to trial .—(1) If the complaint is not dismissed, the village court shall , 
subject to   the provisions of section 53, by summons or otherwise require the accused to appear and 
answer the complaint.  
(2) If the accused fails to appear or cannot be found, the court shall report the fact to the nearest 
magistrate, who may issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused and when arrested may forward him for 
trial to the village court or release him on bail to appear before it.  
(3) The village court shall, if possible, tr y the case on the day on which the accused appears or is 
brought before it; but if that is not possible, the village court shall release him on his executing a bond for 
a sum not exceeding two hundred rupees to appear before the court on any subsequent day  to which the 
trial may be adjourned.  8 
 25. Bar to appeal from the order of village courts, but power to order retrial .—Notwith standing 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), there shall be no appeal by a 
convicted person in any case tried by a village court:  
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner or the sub -divisional magistrate, if satisfied that a failure of 
justice has occurred, may, of his own motion or on the application of the parties concerned, cancel or 
modify any orde r of conviction or of compensation made by a village court or direct the retrial of any 
case by a court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to him.  
26. Power of village courts to impose fine or to award compensation .—(1) A village court shall 
record its decision in writing and may sentence an offender convicted by it to pay a fine not exceeding 
two hundred rupees or in default to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month.  
(2) When a village court imposes a fine under sub -section ( 1), it may, when pa ssing the order, direct 
that whole or any part of the fine recovered shall be applied in payment of compensation for any loss or 
injury caused by the offence.  
(3) When a person has been   sentenced to imprisonment under sub -section ( 1) in default   of paymen t 
of fine, if such   fine be not paid within ten days of the passing of the sentence or within such further time, 
if any, as the village court may allow, the court may cause him to be arrested and may commit him to the 
nearest jail to serve his sentence:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) — 
(a) the fine imposed by a village court shall not be realised from any person who has served his 
term of imprisonment under this section;  
(b) the  person serving his term of imprisonment shall be forthwith released, if the fine is paid 
before the expiry of the term of imprisonment:  
Provided further that no woman shall be sentenced to imprisonment in default of payment of fine.  
27. Power of village  courts  to release certain offenders after admonition or on probation of 
good conduct .—When any person is   convicted by a  village court of an offence punishable under section 
26  and no previous conviction is proved against him, if it appears to the said co urt, regard being had to 
the age, character and antecedents of the offender and the circumstances in which the offence was 
committed, that it is expedient — 
(a) that the offender should be released after due admonition, the village court may instead of 
sentencing him to any punishment, release him after due admonition; or  
(b) that the offender should be released on probation of   good conduct, the village court may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), instea d of 
sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be released on his executing a bond for a 
sum not exceeding two hundred rupees to appear and receive sentence when called upon during such 
period not exceeding one year as the village court may direct, and in  the meantime to keep the peace 
and be of good behaviour.  
28. Power of village courts to permit compounding of offences .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), the village court may allow the partie s to 
compound any offence tried by it.  
29. Power to transfer criminal cases .—The Deputy Commissioner or the sub -divisional magistrate, 
either on application made to him in this behalf, or on his own motion, may transfer any case from one 
village cour t to another or to any other court subordinate to him.  
30. Jurisdiction of village courts in civil cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or in any other law for the time being in force, but subject to t he 
provisions of section 31 and section 32, the village court and the ordinary civil court, within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction the village is situated, shall have concurrent jurisdiction to try the following 
classes of suits, namely: — 
(a) suits for money due on contracts;  9 
 (b) suits for the recovery of movable property or the value of such property;  
(c) suits for compensation for wrongfully taking or injuring movable property; and  
(d) suits for damages by cattle trespass;  
when the value of the sui t does not exceed five hundred rupees.  
31. Certain suits not to be tried by village courts .—No suit shall lie in any village court — 
(a) on a  balance of partnership account,  
(b) for  a share or part of a share under an intestacy of for a legacy or part of a legacy under 
a  will, 
(c) by or against the Government or public officers in their official capacity,  
(d) by or  against minors or persons of unsound mind.  
(e) for the assessment, enhancement, reduction, abetment, apportionment, or recovery of rent of 
immovable property.  
(f) for recovery of immovable  property , or 
(g) for enforcement or redemption of a mortgage of immovable property.  
32. Local limits of jurisdiction of village courts .—No suit shall lie in any village court, unless at 
least one of the defendants resides within the local limits of its jurisdiction at the time of the institution of 
the suit, and the cause of action has arisen wholly or in part within tho se limits.  
33. How suits may be instituted .—(1) A suit before a village court may be instituted by a petition 
made orally or in writing, and if the petition, is made orally, the court shall record such particulars as may 
be prescribed.  
(2) The plaintiff on  instituting his suit shall state the value of the claim.  
34. Suits barred by limitation are not triable by village courts .—(1) If at any time the village 
court is of opinion that the suit is barred by limitation, the court shall, by order in writing, dismiss the 
suits.  
(2) If at any time it appears to the village court that it has no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, the court 
shall direct the plaintiff to the proper court.  
35. Dismissal of suits for default .—If in any suit before a village court the  plaintiff fails to appear on 
the date fixed or if in the opinion of the court he shows negligence in prosecuting his suit, the court may 
dismiss the suit for default:  
Provided that a village court may restore a suit dismissed for default, if within thirty  days from the 
date of such dismissal the plaintiff satisfies the court that he was prevented by sufficient cause from 
appearing on the date fixed.  
36. Summons to defendants to appear and answer .—If on receiving the petition the village court is 
satisfied that the trial of the suit may be proceeded with, it shall by summons or otherwise require   the 
defendant to appear and answer orally or in writing the claim made in the suit.  
37. Ex parte  decision .—If the defendant fails to appear and the village court is  satisfied that he has 
received notice of the date fixed for hearing , the court may   decide the suit  ex parte : 
Provided that any defendant against whom a suit has been decided   ex parte  may, within thirty days 
from the date of executing any processes for e nforcement of the decision, apply orally or in writing, to the 
village court to set aside the order; and the court, if satisfied, that the defendant did not receive due notice 
of the date of hearing or was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing o n the date   fixed, shall set 
aside the decision and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit.  10 
 38. No order to be set aside without notice to opposite party .—No decision or order or a village 
court shall be set aside under section 35 or section 37 u nless notice in writing has been served by the 
village court on the opposite party in the prescribed manner.  
39. Power of village courts to determine necessary parties .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
clause ( c) or clause  (d) of section 31 the village court may add as parties to a suit any persons whose 
presence as parties it considers necessary for the proper decision thereof, and shall enter the names of 
such parties in the register of suits, and the suit shall be trie d as between the parties whose na mes are 
entered in the said register:  
Provided that when any party is added, notice shall be given to him and he shall be given an 
opportunity of appearing before the trial of the suit is proceeded with.  
(2) In all cases where a new party appears under the  proviso to sub -section ( 1) during the trial of a 
suit, he may require that the trial shall begin  de novo.  
40. Certain suits not to be tried by village courts .—No village  court  shall proceed with the trial of 
any suit in which the matter directly and    substantially in   dispute is pending for decision in the same 
court or in any other court in a previously instituted suit between the same parties or between parties 
under whom they or any of them claim, or has been heard and finally decided in a suit between  the same 
parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them claim.  
41. Decision of village courts .—When the parties or their agents have been heard and the evidence 
on both sides considered, the village court shall, by written order, pass such dec ree as may seem just, 
equitable and according to good conscience, stating in the decree the amounts payable as fees under 
section 45, and the amount, if any, paid to witness es under section 51 and the persons by whom such 
amounts are payable.  
42. Instalmen ts.—A village court in ordering the payment of a sum of money or the delivery of any 
movable property may direct that the money be paid or the movable property be delivered, by instalments.  
43. Decision of village court to be final; but power to order retrial .—The decision of a village 
court in any suit shall be final as between the parties to the suits:  
Provided that the district judge may on application of any party to the suit made within thirty days 
from the date of the decree of the village court, cancel or modify the decree or order of the village court or 
direct a retrial of the suit by the same or any other village court or by any other court subordinate to him if 
he is satisfied that there has been a failure of justice.  
44. Death of parties .—If the plaintiff or defendant in any suit dies before the suit has been decided, 
the suit may, subject to the provisions of clause ( d) of section 31, be proceeded with at the instance of or 
against the legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff or defend ant, as the case may be.  
45. Fees .—(1) In all suits instituted in a village court a fee of one anna in the rupee shall be payable 
in  advance by the plaintiff on the amount of the claim upto fifty rupees, and of half anna for every rupee 
of the claim above  fifty rupees, and such fees shall not be paid to either party.  
(2) If the claim in the suit is decreed in full, the amount equal to the fee shall be realised from the 
judgement -debtor together with the amount decreed.  
(3) If the claim in a suit is decreed  in part, an amount equal to a proportionate part of the fee shall be 
realised from the judgement -debtor together with the amount decreed.  
(4) Any amount realised under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall be paid to the decree -holder.  
46. Execution of  decree .—(1) If the village court passing a decree is unable to effect satisfaction 
thereof, it shall grant the decree -holder a certificate  to that effect stating the amount  due to him on 
account of the decree and the amount due on account of fees under section 45.  
  11 
 (2) Any decree -holder wishing to execute a decree of a village court may apply to the court of the 
munsiff within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the vill age is situated and shall present with his 
application a certified copy of the decree of the village court; but no application for execution shall be 
entertained by the court of the munsiff, — 
(a) unless the village court has certified that it is a unable t o effect satisfaction of the decree, and  
(b) unless the application is made after the expiry of three months from the date of the decree.  
(3) In executing a decree of the village court the court of the munsiff shall have the same powers and 
shall follow th e same procedure as if it were executing a decree passed by itself.  
47. Limitation for execution of decree or order .—An application for execution of a decree of a 
village court made after the expiry of three years from the date of the decree or of any orde r under   
section 43 modifying any such decree, shall be dismissed, although limitation has not been pleaded:  
Provided that where the application is made for execution of a decree or order to enforce payment of 
a sum of money or delivery of any movable property which the decree or order directs to be made at a 
certain date, the application may be made within three years from that date.  
48. Procedure before village courts .—(1) The provisions of — 
(a) the Court Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870),  
(b) the Code of Cr iminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), and  
(c) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),  
shall not apply to any trial or any criminal case or civil suit before a village court.  
(2) The procedure to be followed by a village court in any criminal case or c ivil suit and in the 
enforcement of its decisions, sentences, decrees and orders, and in the method of forming a quorum shall 
be prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
(3) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) shall not apply in the trial of any case  or suit by a 
village court but the village court shall observe as far as possible the principles underlying that Act.  
49. Persons who are to preside over village courts .—(1) The village court shall be presided over by 
the chairman of the Village Authority  if he is a member of the court.  
(2) If the chairman of the Village Authority is absent from a sitting of the village suit of if he is not a 
member of the court  shall   elect its own President.  
(3) In the case of difference of opinion among the members of t he court the opinion of the majority 
shall prevail and the decisions and orders of the court shall be expressed in terms of the views of the 
majority.  
(4) In the case of an equality of votes the person presiding over the court shall have a second or 
castin g vote.  
50. Village courts not to try any case or suiting in which the Village Authority or any member 
thereof is interested .—No village court shall try any criminal case or any civil suit to or in which the 
Village Authority or any member thereof is a par ty or is interested.  
51. Attendance of witnesses .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 53 a village court may by 
summons or otherwise   send for any person to appear and give evidence or to produce or cause the 
production of any document.  
(2) A village court shall refuse to summon a witness or to enforce a summons already issued against a 
witness, where in the opinion of the court the attendance of the  witness cannot be procured without an 
amount of delay, expense, or inconvenience which under the circum stances of the case would be 
unreasonable.  
(3) A village court shall not require any person living at a distance of five miles or more from the seat 
of the village court to give evidence or produce any document unless such sum of money be paid to him 12 
 as appears to the court to be sufficient to defray his travelling and other expenses in passing to and from 
the court and for one day's attendance.  
(4) If any person whom a village court summons by written order to appear or give evidence or to 
produce any do cument before it, fails to obey such summons, such person shall be guilty of an offence 
and the village court may take cognizance of such offence and may sentence any person convicted thereof 
to a fine not exceeding twenty -five rupees.  
52. Appearance of pa rties before village courts .—(1) The parties to criminal cases triable by a 
village court shall app ear personally before the court:  
Provided that the village court, if it sees reason so to do, may dispense with the personal attendance of 
the accused and pe rmit him to appear by agent.  
(2) The parties to civil suits triable by a village court may appear by agent.  
Explanation. —In sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2), “agent” means a full -time servant or a partner or 
a relative of the party whom the village cour t may admit as a fit person to represent that party and who is 
authorised to appear and plead for such party.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, legal practitioners shall not be permitted to 
practice before a village court.  
53. Appearance o f women .—No woman shall, against her will, be compelled to   appear in person 
before a village court as an accused or as a party or as a witness.  
54. Realisation of fees, fines, etc .—All fees and fines imposed, all sums decreed or compensation 
awarded and all sums due on bonds under this Act may be realised under orders of the village court in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
55. Registers and records .—Every village court shall maintain registers and records and submit such 
returns as may  be prescribed.  
56. Language of village courts .—All proceedings before a village court shall be Manipuri.   
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 57. Power to make rules .—(1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out   the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the preparation, revision and final publication of electoral rolls for el ection of members of a 
Village Authority and the particulars to be entered in such rolls;  
(b) the preliminary publication of electoral rolls in the village to which they relate;  
(c) the manner in which and the time within which claims and objections as to entries in electoral 
rolls may be preferred and the authority by whom such claims and objections may be decided;  
(d) the nomination of candidates, the time and manner of holding elections and the manner in 
which votes shall be given;  
(e) any other matter r elating to elections to Village Authorities or election disputes arising 
therefrom;  
(f) the regulation of the conduct of business of the Village Authorities and the number of 
members necessary to form a quorum;  
(g) the  registers and records to be maintained and the returns to be submitted by Village 
Authorities and village courts and the particulars to be entered in such registers, records and returns;  13 
 (h) the procedure to be followed by a village court in the instituti on, trial and disposal of criminal 
cases and civil suits and the number of members necessary to form a quorum   of a village court;  
(i) the issue, service or execution of summons and other processes by village courts and the issue 
and service of notice by v illage Authorities;  
(j) the procedure for the transfer of criminal cases and civil suits from one village court to another 
village court or to any other court;  
(k) the procedure for the execution of decrees , orders and sentences of village courts;  
(l) the fees to be levied by village courts for copies of documents and the procedure to be 
followed in furnishing such copies; and  
(m) any other mater which has to be or may be prescribed under this Act.  
58. Repeal and savings .—The Manipur State Hill Peoples (Administration) Regulation, 1947, in so 
far as it relates to the constitution and functions of village Authorities and the administration of justice, 
both civil and criminal, by courts of village Authorities, is hereby repealed:  
Provided that the said rep eal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the said Regulation, or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under   the said 
Regulation, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment in respect of any offence c ommitted under the said 
Regulation, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any right, privilege, obligation, 
liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty , forfeiture of punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that subject to the above provisions , anything done or any action taken (including 
any appointment or d elegation made or any notification, instruction or direction issued or any rule, 
regulation or form made or framed) under the said Regulation shall in so far as such thing or action is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force, an d be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act, unless and until it is superseded by anything done or any 
action taken under the provisions of this Act.  
  
  14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 20]  
OFFENCES TRIABLE BY A VILLAGE COURT  
1. Offences under sections 24, 26 and 27 of the Cattl e Trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871 ). 
2. Offences under enactments (other than the Indian P enal Code (45 of 1860 ) and this Act) or any 
rules and bye -laws made thereunder which are punishable with fine only upto a limit of two hundred 
rupees.  
3. Offences under section 34 of the Police A ct, 1861 (5 of 1861 ). 
4. Offence s under the following sections  of the Indian Penal  Code (45 of 1860 ), namely: — 
sections 160, 178, 179, 269, 277, 289, 290, 294, 323, 334, 34 1, 352, 358, 426, 447,   448, 504  and 
510; and when the value of the property in the opinion of the village court is not over two hundred 
rupees, sections 379 and 411.  
  
 
--------------------------The National Highways Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS ACT, 1956  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Declaration of certain highways to be national highways . 
3. Definitions . 
3A. Power to acquire land, etc . 
3B. Power to enter for survey, etc . 
3C. Hearing of objections . 
3D. Declaration of acquisition . 
3E. Power to take possession . 
3F. Right to enter into the land where land has vested in the Central Government . 
3G. Determination of amount payable as compensation . 
3H. Deposit and pay ment of amount.  
3-I. Competent authority to have certain powers of civil court.  
3J. Land Acquisition Act 1 of 1894 not to apply . 
4. National highways to vest in the Union.  
5. Responsibility for development and maintenance of national highways.  
6. Power to issue directions.  
7. Fees for services or benefits rendered on national highways.  
8. [Omitted. ] 
8A. Power of Central Government to enter into agreements for development and maintenance of 
national highways . 
8B. Punishment for mischief by injury to national highway . 
9. Power to make rules.  
10. Laying of notifications, rules, etc., before Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE .  2 
 THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS ACT, 1956 * 
ACT NO. 48 OF 1956  
[11th September, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the declaration of certain highways to be national highways and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: -- 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Highways 
Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of certain highways to be national highways .—(1) Each of the highways 
specified in the Schedule 2*** is hereby  declared to be a national highway.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any other 
highway to be a national highway and on the publication of such notification such highway shall be 
deemed to be specified in the Schedule.  
(3) The Central Government may, by like notification, omit any highway from the Schedule and 
on the publication of such notification, the highway so omitted shall cease to be a national highway.  
3[3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context o therwise requires, — 
(a) “competent authority ” means any person or authority authorised  by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform the functions of the competent 
authority for such area as may be specified in the notification;  
(b) “land” includes benefits to arise out of land and things attached to the ear th or 
permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth.  
3A. Power to acquire land, etc. —(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for a public 
purpose any land is required for the building, maintenance, management or operation of a national 
highway or part thereof, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to acquire 
such land.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall give a brief description of the land.  
(3) The competent authority shall cause the subst ance of the notification to be published in two 
local newspapers, one of which will be in a vernacular language.  
3B. Power to enter for survey, etc. —On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3A, it shall be lawful for any person, auth orised by the Central Government in this                 
behalf, to — 
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or enquiry;  
(b) take levels;  
(c) dig or bore into sub -soil; 
(d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work;  
(e) mark  such levels, boundaries and lines placing marks and cutting trenches; or  
                                                           
1. 15th April, 1957, vide S.R.O. 1180(E), dated 4th April, 1957, see Gazette of India, 1 957, Part II, s. 3(ii). 
2. The words “except such parts thereof as are situated within any municipal area” omitted by Act 16 of 1997, s. 2            
(w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 19 97, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  
* Subject to verification a nd confirmation by the administrative ministry.  3 
 (f) do such other acts or things as may be laid down by rules made in this behalf by that 
Government.  
3C. Hearing of objections .—(1) Any person interested in the land may, within twe nty-one days 
from the date of publication of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3A, object to the use 
of the land for the purpose or purposes mentioned in that sub -section.  
(2) Every objection under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the compe tent authority in writing and 
shall set out the grounds thereof and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of 
being heard, either in person or by a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing all such objections and 
after making such  further enquiry, it any, as the competent authority thinks necessary, by order, either 
allow or disallow the objections.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “legal practitioner ” has the same meaning as 
in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1.961).  
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub -section ( 2) shall be final.  
3D. Declaration of acquisition .—(1) Where no objection under sub -section ( 1) of section 3C has 
been made to the competen t authority within the period specified therein or where the competent 
authority has disallowed the objection under sub -section ( 2) of that section, the competent authority 
shall, as soon as may be, submit a report accordingly to the Central Government and  on receipt of 
such report, the Central Government shall declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the land 
should be acquired for the purpose or purposes mentioned in sub -section ( 1) of section 3A.  
(2) On the publication of the declaration un der sub -section ( 1), the land shall vest absolutely in 
the Central Government free from all encumbrances.  
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been published under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3A for its acquisition but no declaration under sub-section ( 1) has been published within a 
period of one year from the date of publication of that notification, the said notification shall cease to 
have any effect:  
Provided that in computing the said period of one year, the period or periods during whi ch any 
action or proceedings to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3A is stayed by an order of a court shall be excluded.  
(4) A declaration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall not be cal led in 
question in any court or by any other authority.  
3E. Power to take possession .—(1) Where any land has vested in the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3D, and the amount determined by the competent authority under                
section 3G with respect to such land has been deposited under sub -section ( 1) of section 3H, with the 
competent authority by the Central Government, the competent authority may by notice in writing 
direct the owner as well as any other person who may be in  possession of such land to surrender or 
deliver possession thereof to the competent authority or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf 
within sixty days of the service of the notice.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any directio n made under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall apply — 
(a) in the case of any land situated in any area falling within the metropolitan area, to the 
Commissioner of Police;  
(b) in case of any land situated in any area other than the area referr ed to in clause ( a), to the 
Collector of a District,  
and such Commissioner or Collector, as the case may be, shall enforce the surrender of the land, to the 
competent authority or to the person duly authorised by it.  
3F. Right to enter into the land where land has vested in the Central Government .—Where 
the land has vested in the Central Government under section 3D, it shall be lawful for any person 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, to enter and do other act necessary upon the land 4 
 for ca rrying out the building, maintenance, management or operation of a national highway or a part 
thereof, or any other work connected therewith.  
3G. Determination of amount payable as compensation .—(1) Where  any land is acquired 
under this Act, there shall be paid an amount which shall be determined by an order of the               
competent authority.  
(2) Where the right of user or any right in the nature of an easement on, any land is acquired 
under this Ac t, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other person whose right of 
enjoyment in that land has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such acquisition an 
amount calculated at ten per cent, of the amount determined under sub -section (1), for that land.  
(3) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the 
competent authority shall give a public notice published in two local newspapers, one of which will be 
in a vernacular language inviting clai ms from all persons interested in the land to be acquired.  
(4) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land and shall require all persons interested in 
such land to appear in person or by an agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub -sectio n (2) of 
section 3C, before the competent authority, at a time and place and to state the nature of their 
respective interest in such land.  
(5) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) 
is not acceptable t o either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by either of the parties, be 
determined by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government -- 
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and  Conciliation  Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply to every arbitration under this Act.  
(7) The competent authority or the arbitrator while determining the amount  under sub -section 
(1) or sub -section ( 5), as the case may be, shall take into  consideration — 
(a) the market value of the land on the date of publication of the  notification under 
section 3A;  
(b)  the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of  taking possession of 
the land, by reason of the severing of such land  from other land;  
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of  taking possession of 
the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously  affecting his other immovable property in any 
manner, or his earnings;  
(d)  if, in consequences of the acquisitio n of the land, the person interested  is compelled to 
change his residence or place of business, the  reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to 
such change.  
3H. Deposit and payment of amount .—(1) The amount determined under section 3G shall be 
deposited by the Central Government in such manner  asmay  be laid down by rules made in this 
behalf by that Government, with the competent  authority before taking possession of the land.  
(2)  As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under sub -section  (1), the competent 
authority shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the  amount to the person or persons 
entitled thereto.  
(3)  Where several persons claim to be interested in the amount deposited under  sub-section ( 1), 
the competent authority shall deter mine the persons who in its opinion are entitled to receive the 
amount payable to each of them.  
(4)  If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of the amount or any part thereof or to any 
person to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the  competent authority shall refer the 
dispute to the decision of the principal civil  court of original jurisdiction within the limits of 
whose jurisdiction the land is  situated.  5 
 (5)  Where the amount determined under section 3G by the arbitrator is in  excess  of the 
amount determined by the competent authority, the arbitrator may award interest at nine per cent, 
per annum on such excess amount from the date of taking possession under section 3D till the date 
of the actual deposit thereof.  
(6) Where the amount determined by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount determined by the 
competent authority, the excess amount together with interest,  if any, awarded under sub -section  
(5) shall be deposited by the Central  Government in such manner as may be laid down b y rules 
made in this behalf by  that Government, with the competent authority and the provisions of sub -
sections  (2) to ( 4) shall apply to such deposit.  
3I. Competent authority to have certain powers of civil court .—The competent authority shall 
have, for the purposes of this Act, all the powers of a  civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),  in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on o ath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for examination of witnesses.  
3J. Land Acquisition Act 1 of 1894 not to apply .—Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
shall apply to an acquisition under this Act.]  
4. National highways to vest in the Union .—All national highways shall vest in the Union, and 
for the purposes of this Ac t “highways ” include -- 
(i) all lands appurtenant thereto, whether demarcated or not;  
(ii) all bridges, culverts, tunnels, causeways, carriageways and other structures constructed on 
or across such highways; and  
(iii) all fences, trees, posts and boundary, furlong and milestones of such highways or any 
land appurtenant to such highways.  
5. Responsibility for development and maintenance of national highways .—It shall be the 
responsibility of the Central Government to develop and maintain in proper repair all national 
highways; but the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any 
function in relation to the development or maintenance of any national highway shall, subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the  notification, also be exercisable by the Government of 
the State within which the national highway is situated or by any officer or authority subordinate to 
the Central Government or to the State Government.  
6. Power to issue directions .—The Central Gover nment may give directions to the Government 
of any State as to the carrying out in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, 
notification or order made thereunder.  
7. Fees for services or benefits rendered on national highways .—(1) The  Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, levy fees at such rates as may be laid down by rules made 
in this behalf for services or benefits rendered in relation to the use of ferries,  1[permanent bridges the 
cost of construction of each of which is more than rupees twenty -five lakhs and which are opened to 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  
 6 
 traffic on or after the 1st day of April, 1976,] temporary bridges and tunnels on national highways  
1[and the use of sections of nati onal highways].  
(2) Such fees when so levied shall be collected in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
(3) Any fee leviable  immediately before the commencement of this Act for services or benefits 
rendered in relation to the use of ferries, temporary bridges and tunnels on any highway specified in 
the Schedule shall continue to be leviable under this Act unless and until it is  altered in exercise of the 
powers conferred by sub -section ( 1): 
2[Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary in the public interest so 
to do, it may, by like notification, specify any bridge in relation to the use of which fees shall not be 
leviable under this sub -section.]  
38.*   *    *    *    *  
4[8A. Power of Central Government to enter into agreements for development and 
maintenance of national highways .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in this Act, the 
Central Government may enter into an agreement with any person in relation to the development and 
maintenance of the whole or any part of a national highway.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the pers on referred to in sub -section ( 1) is 
entitled to collect and retain fees at such rate, for services or benefits rendered by him as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify having regard to the expenditure 
involved in bui lding, maintenance, management and operation of the whole or part of such national 
highway, interest on the capital invested, reasonable return, the volume of traffic and the period of 
such agreement.  
(3) A person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall have powers to regulate and control the traffic in 
accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 
1988) on the national highway forming subject -matter of such agreement, for proper management 
thereof.  
8B. Punishm ent for mischief by injury to national highway .—Whoever commits mischief by 
doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any national highway referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 8A impassable or less safe for traveling or conv eying property, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with a 
fine, or with both.]  
9. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to whi ch, any function in relation to the 
development or maintenance of a national highway or any part thereof may be exercised by the 
State Government or any officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or the            
State Government;  
5[(aa) the manner in which the amount shall be deposited with the competent authority under 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 6) of section 3H;]  
6[(b) the rates at which fees for services rendered in relation to the use of ferries, permanent 
bridges, temporary bridges and tun nels on any national highway  7[and the use of sections of any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1993, s. 2 (w.r.e.f. 23 -10-1992).  
2. The proviso ins. by Act 30 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-8-1977).  
3. Section 8 omitted by Act 16 of 1997, s. 4 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1995).  
5. Ins. by Act 16 of  1997, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21 -1-1997).  
6. Subs. by Act 30 of 1977, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  
7. Ins. by Act 1 of 1993, s. 3 (w.r.e.f. 23 -10-1992).  7 
 national highway] may be levied, and the manner in which such fees shall be collected, under 
section 7;]  
(c) the periodical inspection of national highways and the submission of inspection reports to 
the Central Government;  
(d) the reports on works carried out on national highways;  
(e) any other matter for which provision should be made under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, b efore the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect on ly in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.]  
10. Laying of notifications, rules, etc., before Parliament .—All notifications or agreements 
issued or entered into under this Act shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be 
after they are issued or entered into  2***. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  
2. Certain words omitted by Act 30 of 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1977).  
 8 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2]  
NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS  
Serial No.  Natio nal 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1 1 The highway connecting Delhi, Ambala, Jullundur and Amritsar and 
proceeding to the border between India and Pakistan.  
2 1A The highway connecting Jullundur, Madhopur, Jammu, Banihal, 
Srinagar, Baramula  and Uri.  
1[2-A. 1B The highway starting from its junction at Botole on National 
Highway No. 1A and connecting Doda with kishtwar to be a 
national highway.]  
2[2-AA Extension of 
NH No. 1B  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
1B near Kishtwar and connecting Chhatree, Symthan Maidan and 
terminating at Sym than pass in Jammu and Kashmir.  
2-AAA  1C The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
1A near Domel and terminating at Katra in Jammu and Kashmir.]  
3[3 2 [The highway connecting Delhi, Mathura, Agra, Kanpur, Allahabad, 
Banaras, Mohania, Barhi Palsit, Baidyabati, Bara, Calcutt a.] 
* 2A Sikandra - Bhognipur  
4 3 The highway connecting Agra, Gwalior, Shivpuri, Indore, Dhulia, 
Nasik, Thana and Bombay.  
4[5 302 The highway starting from its junction with NH -2 near Theriat 
connecting Lunglei, Lungseni, Tuiehong and terminating at 
Demagir i in the State of Mizoram. ] 
5[5A 4A The highway connecting Belgaum, Anmod, Panda and Panaji.]  
6[5B 4B The highway starting from its junction with Panvel - Uran State 
Highway near Nhava -Sheva  Port Complex and proceeding further 
with one arm terminating of Kalamboli on National Highway No. 4 
and another arm crossing National Highway No. 17 near Palaspe 
and proceeding further to terminate on National Highway No. 4.]  
6 5 The highway starting fro m its junction near Baharagora with the 
highway specified in serial No. 7 and connecting Cuttack, 
Bhubaneswar, Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Madras.  
                                                           
1. Ins. b y notification No. S.O. 1980(E), d ated 25 th May, 1977.  
2. Ins by S.O. 7 (E), d ated 6th January, 1999.  
3. Ins. by notification S.O. 380(E), d ated 25 th July, 1975.  
4. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 839(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3344(E) , dated 21 st July, 1971.  
6. Ins . by notification No. S.O. 865(E) , dated 12 th November, 1984.  9 
 Serial  No. National  
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[6A 5A The highway starting from its junction near Haridaspur with 
National Highway No. 5 and terminating at the Paradip Port.]  
7 6 The highway starting from its junction near Dhulia with the 
highway specified in serial No. 4 and connecting Nagpur, Raipur, 
Samba lpur, Baharagora and Calcutta.   
2[7A Extension of 
N.H. No. 6  The highway starting from its junction with N.H. No.  6 near Dhule 
in Maharashtra and terminating at Surat in Gujarati.]  
3[7AA  Extension of  
NH No. 6  The highway starting from its junction near Surat on National 
Highway No. 6 and terminating at Hajira in Gujarat.]   
8 7 The highway starting from its junction near Banaras with the 
highway specified in serial No. 3 and connecting Mangawan, Rewa, 
Jabalpur, Lakhnadon , Nagpur, Hyderabad, Kurnool, Bangalore, 
Krishnagiri, Salem, Dindigul, Madurai and Cape Comorin.  
4[8A 7A The highway connecting Palayankottai on National Highway No. 7 
with the Tuticorin Port.]   
9 8 The highway connecting Delhi, Jaipur, Ajmer, Udaipur, 
Ahmedabad, Baroda and Bombay.   
10 8A The highway connecting Ahmedabad, Limbdi, Morvi and Kandla.   
1[10A  Extension of  
NH No. 8A  The highway starting from its junction near Kandla on National 
Highway No. 8A connecting Mundra and terminating at Mandvi  in 
Gujarat.]   
11 8B The highway starting from its junction near  Bamanbhore with the 
highway specified in serial No. 10 and connecting Rajkot and 
Porbandar.  
5[11A  8C The highway connecting Chiloda on National Highway No. 8, in 
Gujarat, Gandhinagar  and terminating at Sa rkej on National 
Highway No. 8A shall be a national highway. ]   
1[11AA  8D The highway starting from its junction near Jetpur on National 
Highway No. 8B and connecting Junagarh, Keshod and terminating 
at Somnath in Gujarat.]   
 *8E Somnath -Bhavnagar  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 865(E), Dated 21st July, 1971.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 116(E), Dated 9th February, 1998.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E), Dated 6th January, 1999.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 179(E), Dated 7th March, 1972.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3114(E), Dated 18th October, 1978.  10 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
12 9 The highway connecting Poona, Sholapur,  Hyderabad and 
Vijayawada.  
1[12A  Extension of  
NH No. 9  The highway starting from its junction near  Vijayawada on National 
Highway No. 5 connecting Vuyyuru, Pammari and terminating at 
Machilipatnam in Andhra Pradesh.]  
13 10 The highway connecting Delhi and Fazilka and proceeding to the 
border between India and Pakistan.   
2[13A  11 The highway connecting Agra, Jaipur and Bikaner. ]  
3[13B 12 The highway starting from Jabalpur, connecting  Bhopal Biaora , 
Rajgarh, Khilehipur, Aklera Jhalawar, Kota, Bundi, Devil, Tonk and 
terminating at Jaipur on National Highway No. 8.]   
4[13C 13 The highway connecting Sholapur and Chitradurga.]  
1[13CC  
 Extension of  
NH No. 13  The highway starting from its junction near  
 Mangalore on National Highway No. 48 and connecting Tirthahalli, 
Shimoga and terminating at its junction with National Highway No . 
4 near Chitradurga in Karnataka.]  
 *14 Beawar -Sirohi -Radhapur  
5[13D  21 The highway starting from its junction near  
Chandigarh with National Highway No. 22 and connecting Ropar, 
Bilaspur, Mandi, Kulu and Manali.]   
1[13DD  21A The highway starting from its junction near Pinjore on National 
Highway No. 22 in Haryana connecting Baddi, Nalagarh and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 21 near 
Swarghat in Himachal Pradesh.]   
6[13E 15 The highway connecting Pathankot -Amritsar, Bhatinda, Ganganagar, 
Bikaner, Jaisalmer, Barmer to its junction with National Highway 
No. 8A near Samakhiali (near Kandla).]  
7[13F 17 The highway connecting Panvel on National  Highway No. 4 Mahad, 
Panaji, Karwar, Mangalore, Cannanore , Calicut (Kozhikode), Feroke, 
Kuttipuram, Pudu Ponnani, Chowghat Cranganpur to junction with 
National Highway No. 47 near Edapally.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , Dated 6th January, 1999.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1199(E), Dated 4th March, 1960.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 114(E), Dated 17th February, 1981.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3114(E), Dated 18th October, 1978.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3344(E), Dated 21st July, 1971  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 179(E), Dated 7t h March, 1972.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 442(E), Dated 17th July, 1974.  11 
 Serial  No. National  
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[13G 17A The highway starting from its junction near  Cortalim with National 
Highway No. 17 and  terminating at the Marmugao Port.]  
2[13GG  17B The highway starting from its junction with NH No. 4A near Ponda 
connecting Barim -verna and terminating near Vasco in Goa.]  
3[13H  *18 Junction with National Highway No. 7 near Kurnool - Nandyal - 
Cuddapah Junction with National Highway No. 4 Near Chittoor   
4[13-J *19 Gazipur - Ballia - Patna   
 *20 Pathankot - Mandi  
14 22 The highway connecting Ambala, Kalka, Simla, Narkanda , Rampur 
and Chini and proceeding to the border between India and Tibet near 
Shipki -La.  
1[14A  23 The highway connecting Chas, Ranchi, Rourkela, Talcher and 
terminating at National Highway No. 42.]   
15 24 The highway connecting Delhi, Bareilly and Lucknow.  
5[16 6 The highway starting from its junction with NH -27 near Jorabat in 
the State of Assam connecting Shillong, Dhaleshwar, Kanpui, 
Aizawal, Selling, Lumtui, Khawthlir, Tuisen, Neihdawn and 
terminating at Champai in the State of Mizoram.]  
6[16-A 25A The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
25 at Km 19 and terminating at Bakshi ka Talab in National 
Highway No. 24 in Uttar Pradesh.]   
17 26 The highway connecting Jhansi and Lakhnadon.  
18 27 The highway connecting Allahabad with the highway specified in 
serial No. 8 near Mangawan.  
19 28 The highway starting from its junction near Barauni with the 
highway specified in serial No. 23 and connecting Muzaffarpur, 
Pipra, Gorakhpur and Lucknow.   
20 28A The highway starting from its junction near Pipra with the highway 
specified in serial No. 19 and connecting Sagauli and Raxaul and 
proceeding to the border between India and Nepal.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by  notification No. S.O. 179(E), d ated 7th March, 1972.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 116(E), dated 9th February, 1998.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 57( E), dated 19th January, 1993.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 87( E), dated 31st January, 1996.  
5. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 839(E),  dated 4th March, 2014.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  12 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[20A 11A The highway starting from Mnoharpura on National Highway No. 8 
connecting Andhi to terminate at Dausa on National Highway No. 11 
in the State of Rajasthan.]  
21 29 The highway connecting Gorakhpur, Ghazipur and Banaras.   
22 30 The highway starting from its junction near Mohania with the 
highway specified in serial No. 3 and connecting Patna and 
Bakhtiyarpur.   
2[22A  30A The highway starting from its junction near Phatuha on National 
Highway No. 30 and connecting Chandi Harnaut  National Highway 
No. 31, Saksohara and terminating in its junction on National 
Highway No. 31 near Barh in Bihar.]   
3[23 31 The highway starting from its junction near Barhi with the highway 
specified in serial No. 3 and connecting Bakhtiyarpur, Mokameh,  
Purnea, Dalkhola, Siliguri, Sivok, and Cooch -Behar, North Salmara 
and proceeding generally via Nalbari, Charali and Amingaon to its 
junction with the highway specified in serial No. 28 near Pandu.]   
1[23A 16 The highway starting from its junction at Nizamabad on National 
Highway No. 7 in the State of Andhra Pradesh connecting 
Mancheral -Sironcha -Bhopalpatnam -Bijapur to terminate at Jagdalpur 
on National Highway No. 43 in the State of Madhya Pradesh.]  
24 31A The highway connecting Sivok and Gangtok.  
3[24A  32 The highway starting from its junction near Govindpur with National 
Highway No. 2 and connecting Dhanbad with Jamshedpur.]   
4[24AA  31B The highway starting from near North Salmara to its junction with 
National Highway No. 37 near Goalpara.]  
5[24AAA  31C The highway starting from near Galgalia, connecting  Baghdogra, 
Chalsa, Nagrakata, Goyerkata.]  
25 33 The highway starting from its junction near Barhi with the highway 
specified in serial No. 3 and connecting Ranchi and Tatanagar  and 
proceeding to its junction with the highway specified in serial No. 7 
near Baharagora.  
6[25A  20 The highway starting from its junction at Pathankot in the State of 
Punjab connecting Chakki -Palampur -Joginder Nagar to terminate at 
Mandi  in the State of Himachal Pradesh.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 147(E), dated 20th February, 1989.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 568(E), dated 6th January, 1999.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 513(E), d ated 12th February, 1963.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O . 698(E), d ated 1st September, 1980.  
6. Ins. b y notification No. S.O. 147(E), d ated 20th February, 1989.  13 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
26 34 The highway starting from its junction near Dalkhola with the 
highway specified in serial No. 23 and connecting Berhampore, 
Barasat and Calcutta.  
27 35 The highway connecting Barasat and Bangaon and proceeding to the 
border between India and Pakistan.   
1[27A  36 The highway connecting Nowgong, Dabaka, and Dimapur (Manipur 
Road).]   
28 37 The highway starting from its junction near Goalpara  with the 
highway specified in serial No. 23 and connecting Gauhati, Jorabat, 
Kamargaon, Makum and Saikhoa Ghat.   
 *37A  Kuarital -Junction with National Highway No. 52 Near Tezpur   
29 38 The highway connecting Makum, Ledo and Lekhapani.  
30 39 The highway connecting Kamargaon, Imphal and Palel and 
proceeding to the border between India and Burma.   
31 40 The highway connecting Jorabat and Shillong and proceeding to the 
border between India and Pakistan  near Dawki.  
2[31A  Extension of  
NH No. 40  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
44 near Jowai connecting Amlarem and terminating at its junction 
with National Highway No. 40 near Dawki in Meghalaya.]   
32 42 The highway starting from its junction near Sambalpur with the 
highway specified in serial No. 7 and  proceeding via Angul to its 
junction with the highway specified in serial No. 6 near Cuttack.   
33 43 The highway connecting Rajpur and Vizianagaram  and proceeding 
to its junction with the highway specified in serial No. 6 near 
Vizianagaram.   
2[33A  44 The highway connecting Shillong, Passi, Baderpur and Agartala.]   
3[33AA  44A The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
54 near Aizawl in Mizoram and connecting Sairang, Lengpui, Mamit 
and terminating at Manu in Tripura.]   
3[33B  Extension of 
NH 44  The highway starting from its junction near Agartala on NH 44 and 
terminating at Sabroom in Tripura.]  
34 45 The highway connecting Madras, Tiruchirappalli and Dindigul.  
4[34A  45A The highway starting from Villuspuram on National Highway No. 45 
and terminating at Pondicherry.]  
                                                           
1 Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3344(E), dated 21st July, 1971.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  
3. Ins by notification No. S.O. 116(E), dated 9th February, 1998.  
4 Ins. by notification No. S.O. 803(E), dated 7th November, 1983.  14 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[34-AA Extension  of 
NH No. 45A  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
45A near Pondy in Pondicherry and connecting Cuddalore -
Chidambaram and terminating at its junction with National Highway 
No. 67 near Nagapattinam in Tamil Nadu.]   
1[34-AAA  45B The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
45 near Trichy and connecting Viralimalai, Tovarankuruchchi, 
Melur, Madurai (National Highway No. 7), Aruppakottai and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 7A near 
Tuticorin  in Tamil Nadu.]   
35 46 The highway connecting Krishnagiri and Ranipet.   
36 47 The highway connecting Salem, Coimbatore, Trichur, Ernakulam, 
Trivandrum and Cape Comorin.  
1[36A  41 The highway between its junction (near Kolaghat ) with the National 
Highway No. 6 and the point where it touches Haldia Port to be a 
National Highway.]  
2[36B  47A The highway starting from Willingdon Islads and Terminating at 
Cochin on National Highway No. 47 .]  
37 47A 3*         *           *          *           *             * 
4[37A  48 The highway connecting Bangalore, Hassan and Mangalore.]   
38 49 The highway connecting Madurai and Dhanushkodi.  
39 50 The highway connecting Nasik with the highway specified in serial 
No. 5 near Poona.  
5[40 51 The highway starting from its junction at Baihata Charali on National 
Highway No. 37, in Assam, connecting Tura and terminating at Dalu 
in Meghalaya.   
41 52 The highway starting from its junction at Baihata Charali on National 
Highway No. 31, in Assam, co nnecting Tejpur, Bander Dewa, 
Northlakhimpur, Pasighat, Tezu, Sitapani and terminating near 
Saikhoaghat on National Highway No. 37.  
42 52A The highway starting from its junction at Bander Dewa on National 
Highway No. 52 in Assam and terminating at Hanagar  in Arunachal 
Pradesh.]  
6[42A  Extension of  
NH 52 A  The highway starting from its junctions near Itanagar on National 
Highway No. 52A in Arunchal Pradesh and terminating at its 
junction with. National Highway No. 52 near Gohpur in Assam.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 39(E), dated 18th December, 1967.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 849(E), dated 18th November, 1 986. 
3. Omitted by notification No. S.O. 178(E), dated 6th March, 1972.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 179(E), dated 7th March, 1972.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 698(E), dated 1st September, 1980.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 116(E), dated 9th F ebruary, 1998.  15 
 Serial No.  National  
Highway No  Description of National Highways  
1[43 53 The highway starting from its junction near Badarpur on National 
Highway No. 44, in Assam connecting Silchar, Jirighat and terminating 
near Imphal on National Highway No. 39.]  
  2*         *            *           *            *             *  
3[44A  54 The highway starting from its junction at Silcharin Assam on N.H. No. 
53 connecting Aizawal and terminating at Tuipang in Mizoram.]  
4[44-AA Extension of  
NH No. 54  The highway starting from its junction near Daboka on National 
Highway No. 36 and connecting Lumding, Langdin, Haflong and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 54 near            
Silcharin Assam.]   
4[44B  54A The highway starting from its junction at Theriat in Mizoram on 
National Highway No. 54 and terminating at Lungli in Mizoram.  
44C 54B The highway starting from its junction at “Venas Saddle” in Mizoram 
on National Highway No. 54 and terminating at Saiha  in Mizoram.]   
5[44D  55 The highway starting from Siliguri on National  
Highway No. 31 passing through Kurseong and terminating at 
Darjeeling.]  
6[45 56 The highway starting from Lucknow and connecting Jagdishpur, 
Sultanpur and Jaunpur  and terminating near Varanasi.]   
 5[45-A 
 *56A  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 28 
near Chenhat and terminating at Km. 16 of NH  No. 56 in Uttar Pradesh.  
45-AA 
 56B 
 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 56 
near Km 16 and terminating at Km 19 of NH No. 25 in Uttar Pradesh.]  
7[46 
 *NE-1 
 The highway starting from Ahmedabad passing close to the town of 
Nadiad, Anand and terminating at Vadodara.]  
8[47 
 61 
 The highway starting from its junction near Kohima on National 
Highway No. 39 in Nagaland and connecting Workha -Moko -Kchung -
Amguri and terminating at its junctions with National Highway No. 37 
near Jhanji in Assam.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 698(E), dated 1st September, 1980.  
2. Omitted by notification No. S.O. 457(E), dated 4th August, 1986.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 458(E), dated 4th August, 1986.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 845(E), dated 6th November, 1990.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 868(E), dated 17th November, 1984.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 92(E), dated 13th March, 1986.  
8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 116(E), dated 9th February, 1998.  16 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[48 
 52B 
 The highway starting from its junctions on National Highway 52 near 
Kuljan and terminating at its junction with National Highway 37 in 
Assam.]  
1[49 
 62 
 The highway starting from its junction on National Highway 37 near 
Damra in Assam and terminating at Bhaghmara in Meghalaya.]   
1[49-A 
 Extension of  
NH No. 62  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 62 
near Baghmara  and terminating at its junction with National Highway 
No. 51 near Dalu in Meghalaya.]   
1[50 
 63 
 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 17 
near Ankola -Hospet and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 7 near Gooty  in Andhra Pradesh.]  
51 
 64 
 The highway starting from its junction on National Highway No. 22 
near Chandigarh and connecting Rajpura -Patiala -Sangrur and 
terminating at its junction with NH  No. 15 near Bhatinda in Punjab.   
2[51A  
 Extension of  
NH No. 64  
 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 15 
near Bhatinda in Punjab and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 10 near Dabwali in Haryana. ]  
52 
 65 
 The highway starting from its junction with NH No. 1 near Ambala  in 
Haryana and connecting Kaithal -Hisar and terminating at its junction 
with NH No. 1 1 near Fatehpur in Rajasthan.   
1[52-A 
 Extension of  
NH No. 65  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 11 
near Fatehpur and connecting Nagaur , Jodhpur and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 14 near Pali in Rajasthan.]   
53 
 66 
 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
45A in Pondicherry and connecting Tindivanam -Gingee -
Thiruvannamalai and terminating a t its junction with National Highway 
No. 7 near Krishnagiri in Tamil Nadu.   
54 
 67 
 The highway starting from Nagapattinam and  connecting Trichy and 
terminating at its junction on  National Highway No. 7 near Karur in 
Tamil Nadu.  
1[54-A 
 Extension of  
NH No. 67  
 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 7 
near Karur and connecting Palladam and terminating at its junction 
with National Highway No. 47 near Coimbatore in Tamil Nadu.]  
55 
 68 
 The highway starting from its junction on National Highway No. 45 
near Ulundrupet and terminating at its junction with National Highway 
No. 7 near Salem in Tamil Nadu.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E), d ated 6th January, 1999.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  
 17 
    Serial No.       National                       Description of National Highways                 
                       Highway No.                                                        
1[57 70 The highway starting from its junction near Jalandhar on National 
Highway No. 1 in Punjab and connecting Hoshiarpur, Hamirpur, Toni 
Devi, Ahwa  Devi, Dharampur and terminating at its junction with 
National Highway No. 21 near Mandi in Himachal Pradesh.]   
1[58 71 The highway starting from its junction near Jalandhar on National 
Highway No. 1 in Punjab and connecting, Moga, Barnala, Sangrur, 
Narwa na, Rohtak, Jhajjar and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 8 near Bawal in Haryana.]   
1[59 71A The highway starting from its junction near Rohtak on National 
Highway No. 10 and connecting Gohana  and terminating at its junction 
with National Highway No. 1 near Panipat in Haryana.]   
1[59A  24A The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 24 
near Bakshi Ka Talab and terminating near Chenhat on National 
Highway No. 28 in Uttar Pra desh.]   
1[60 72 The highway starting from its junction near Ambala on National 
Highway No. 1 and connecting Nahan, Paonta Sahib, Dehradun and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 58 near 
Rishikesh (Haridwar) in Uttar Pradesh.]   
2[60A 09 Extension of National Highway No. 49 starting from Madurai in the 
State of Tamil nadu connection Muvattupuza -Munnar Theni to 
terminate at Cochin in the State of Kerala.]  
1[61 73 The highway starting from its junction near Roorkee  on National 
Highway No. 58 in Uttar Pradesh and connecting Saharanpur, 
Yamunanagar, Saha and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 22 near Panchkula in Haryana.]   
1[62 74 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 58  
near Haridwar and connecting Najibabad, Nagina, Afzalgarh, Kashipur, 
Kichha, Jehanabad, Pilibhit and terminating at its junction with 
National Highway No. 24 near Bareilly in Uttar  Pradesh.]   
 
1[63  
75 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 3 
near Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh and connecting Jhansi (Uttar 
Pradesh), Khajuraho,  Chhatarpur, Pann a, Satna and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 7 near Rewa in Madhya Pra desh.]  
1[64 76 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 14 
near Pindwara in Rajasthan and connecting Udaipur, Mangarwar, 
Chittaurgarh, Kota (National Highway No. 12), Shivpuri  (National 
Highway No. 3), Jhansi (National Highway No. 25), Mahoba, Banda, 
Karwi, Mau and terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 
27 near Allahabad in Uttar Pradesh.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E), dated 6th January, 199 9. 
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 147(E), dated 20th February, 1989.  18 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways                 
1[65 77 The highway starting from its junction near Hajipur on National 
Highway No. 19 and connecting Muzaffarpur (National Highway No. 
28), Sitamarhi and Sonbarsa in Bihar.]   
1[66 
 78 
 The highway starting from its junction near Katni  on National Highway 
No. 7 in Madhya Pradesh connecting, Shahdol, Nagar, Ambikapur -
Jashpurnagar and terminating at its junction with National Highway 
No. 23 near Gumla in Bihar.]   
1[67 79 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 8 
near Ajmer in Rajasthan and connecting Nasirabad, Bhilwara, 
Chittaurgarh, Nayagaon, Nimach, Ratlam and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 59 near Ghatbilod (Indore) in 
Madhya Pradesh.]   
1[68 80 The highway starting from its junction near Mokama on National 
Highway No. 31 in Bihar and connecting Munger, Bhagalpur, 
Sahebganj, Rajmahal and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 34 near Farakka in West Bengal.]   
2[68A  81 The highway s tarting from its junction with National Highway No. 31 
near Kora in Bihar and connecting Katihar and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 34 near Maldah in West Bengal]   
1[68B  .82 The highway starting from its junction near Gaya on Nation al Highway 
No. 83 and connecting Rajgir, Bihar Sharif and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 31 near Mokama in Bihar.]   
 1[68C  83 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 30 
near Patna and connecting Punpun , Gaya, Bodh Gaya and terminating 
at its junction with National Highway No. 2 near Dobhi in Bihar. ] 
1[68D 84 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 30 
near Arrah and connecting Bhojpur and terminating on National 
Highway No. 19 n ear Buxar in Bihar. ]  
1[68E 85 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 19 
near Chhapra and connecting Siwan and terminating at its junction 
with National Highway No. 28 near Gopalganj in Bihar.]   
1[68F 86 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 2 
near Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh and connecting Chhatarpur and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 26 near Sagar in 
Madhya Pradesh. ] 
3[68G 87 The highway starting from its ju nction with National Highway No. 24 
near Rampur and connecting Bilaspur, Pantnagar, Haldwani and 
terminating at Nainital in Uttar Pradesh. ]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E), d ated 6th January, 1999.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S. O. 561(E) , dated 7th July, 1999.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S. O. 561(E), dated 7th July, 1 999. 19 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
1[68H 88 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 22 
near Simla and connecting Bilaspur, Hamirpur, Nadaun, Ranital, 
Kangra and terminating near Bhawan on National Highway No. 20 in 
Himachal Pradesh.]   
1[68-1 89 The highway starting from its  junction with National Highway No. 8 
near Ajmer and connecting Nagaur, and terminating at its junction with 
National Highway No. 11 near Bikaner in Rajasthan.]   
 *90 Baran - Aklera  
 *91 Ghaziabad - Aligarh - Eta - Kannauj - Kanpur  
 *92 Bhongaon - Etawah - Gwaiior   
 *93 Agra - Aligarh - Babrala - Chandausi - Moradabad  
 *94 Rishikesh - Ampata - Tehri - Dharasu - Kuthnaur - Yamnotr  
 *95 Kharar (Chandigarh) - Ludhiana - Jagaron - Ferozepu  
 *96 Faizabad - Sultanpur - Pratapgarh - Allahabad  
 *97 Ghazipur - Zamania - Saiyedraja   
  *98 Patna - Aurangabad - Rajhara  
  *99 Dobhi - Chatra - Chandwa  
  *100  Chatra - Hazaribagh - Bogoda  
  *101  Chhapra - Baniapur - Maharajganj - Barauli  
  *102  Chhapra - Rewaghat - Muzaffarpur  
  *103  Hazipur - Musahrigharar  
  
  1[104 
 The highway strating form its junction near Chakia on National 
Highways No. 28 connecting Narhar -Pakri Bridge -Madhuban -Shivhar -
Sitamarhi -Umagaon -Jayanagar -Lakoush -Laukahiand terminating at its 
junction near Narahia  on National Highway No. 57 in the State of 
Bihar.]  
  *105  Darbhanga - Aunsi - Jaynagar  
  *106  Birpur - Madhepura - Bihpur  
  *107  Maheshkhunt - Sonbar Saraj - Simri Bakhtiarpur - Bariahi - Saharsa - 
Madhepura - Purnea  
 
  
  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 251(E) , dated 27th February, 2002.  20 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
3[69 150 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 54 
near Aizawl in Mizoram and connecting Ipaimukh, Churachandpur, 
Imphal, Ukhrul, Jessami and terminating at its junction with Nationa l 
Highway No. 39 near Kohima in Nagaland.]   
 *151  Karimganj - Bangladesh Border  
3[69-A Extension of  
NH No. 60  The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 6 
near Kharagpur and connecting Bishnupur, Bankura  and terminating at 
its junction with National Highway No. 2 near Asansol in West 
Bengal]  
1[69B  152 The highway starting from its junction near Patacharkuchi on National 
Highway No. 31C,  connecting Hajua and terminating at Indo -Bhutan 
border.]   
 *15 Ledo  - Lekhapani - Indo/Mynamar Border  
 *154  Dhaleshwar - Bhairabi - Kanpu   
2[70 200 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 6 
near Raipur in Madhya Pradesh and connecting Bilaspur, Sarangarh, 
Raigarh, Kanaktura, Jharsuguda, Kochinda , Pravasuni, Deogarh. 
Talcher, and terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 5 
near Chandikhol in Orissa.]   
3[71 201 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 43 
near Boriguma and connecting Bhawanipatna, Bolangir, Barap ali and 
terminating at its junction with National Highway No. 6 near Bargarh 
in Orissa.]   
1[72 202 The highway starting from its junction near Hyderabad on National 
Highway No. 7 in Andhra Pradesh and connecting Warangal, 
Venkatpuram and terminating at it s junction near Bhopalpatnam on 
National Highway No. 16 in Madhya Pradesh.]   
1[73 203 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 5 
near Bhubaneshwar and terminating at Puri in Orissa.]   
1[74 204 The highway starting from Ratnagiri  and connecting Hathkamba 
(National Highway No. 17), Pali (National Highway No. 17), 
Sakharpa, Malkapur, and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 4 near Kolhapur in Maharashtra.]   
[75 205 The highway starting from its junction near Ananthapur on National 
Highway No. 7 in Andhra Pradesh and connecting Kadiri, Tirupati, 
Renigunta, Tiruttani and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 5 near Chennai in Tamil Nadu.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 561(E) , dated 7th July, 1999.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  21 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
1[76 206 The highway starting from its junction near Tumkur on National 
Highway No. 4 and connecting Shimoga and terminating at its junction 
with National Highway No. 17 near Honnavar in Karnataka.]  
1[77 207 The highway starting from its junction near Hosur on National 
Highway No. 7 in Tamil Nadu connecting Sarjapur, Devenhalli (on 
National Highway No. 7), Doda Ballapur and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 4 near Nelamangala in 
Karnataka.]   
1[78 208 The highway starting from its junction near Kollam on National 
Highway No. 47 in Kerala and connecting Punalur, Tenkasi, 
Rajapalaiyam, Srivilliputtur and terminating at its junction with 
National Highway No. 7 near Tirumangalam in Tamil Nadu.]   
1[79 209 The highway starting from its junction near Dindigul on National 
Highway No. 7 in Tamil Nadu and connecting Pollachi, Coimbatore, 
Annur, Satyamanglam, Chamrajnagar, Kollegal  and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 7 near Bangalore in Karnataka.]    
1[80 210 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 45 
near Trichy and connecting Pudukottai, Devakottai and terminating at 
its junction wit h National Highway No. 49 near Ramanathpuram in 
Tamil Nadu.]   
1[81 211 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 9 
near Solapur and connecting Osmanabad, Aurangabad and terminating 
at is junction with National Highway No. 3 near Dhule in 
Maharashtra.]   
2[82 212 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 17 
near Kozhikode in Kerala connecting Mysore, and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 209 near Kollegal in Karnataka.]   
1[83 213 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 
47 near Palghat and terminating at its junction with National 
Highway No. 17 near Kozhikode in Kerala.]   
1[84 214 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 5 
near Kath ipudi and connecting Kakinada, and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 9 near Pamarru in Andhra 
Pradesh.]   
1[85 215 The highway starting from its junction with National Highway No. 5 
near Panikoli and connecting Keonjhar , and terminating at its 
junction with National Highway No. 23 near Rajamunda in Orissa.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 7(E) , dated 6th January, 1999.  
2.  Ins. by notification No. S.O. 561(E), dated 7th July, 1999.  22 
 National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
*216  Raigarh - Sarangarh - Saraipalli   
*217     Raipur - Gopalpur   
*218  Bijapur - Hubli  
*219  Madnapalli - Kuppam - Krishnagiri  
*220  Kollam (Quilon) - Teni.  
1[225 563 The highway starting from its junction with NH -63 near Mancheral 
connecting Karimnangar and terminating at NH -163 near Warangal 
in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
226 365A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -65 near Kodad 
connecting Khammam and terminating at NH -365 near 
Mahboobabad in the State of Andhra Pradesh.]  
2[227 334B  The highway starting from its junction with new NH -34 near Meerut 
in the State of Uttar Pradesh connecting Sonipat, Kharkhauda, 
Sampla, Jhajjar, Charkhi Dadri and terminating at its junction with 
NH-709 near Loharu in the State of Haryana.]  
3[228 150 Extn.  The highway starting from its junction with new NH -50 near 
Gulbarga connecting Chowdapur, Afzalpur in the State of Karnataka, 
Dudhani, Akkalkote and terminating at its junction with new NH -52 
near Sholapur in the State of Maharashtra.]  
4[229 848B  The highway starting from its junction with NH -48 near Karembali 
Phatak connecting Bama npunja, Dholar Road in the State of Gujarat, 
Ambawadi, Patalia Costal Highway in the Union Territory of Daman 
and Diu and terminating at NH -48 near Udvada in the State of 
Gujarat.  
230 251 The highway starting from its junction with NH -51 near Una  in the 
State of Gujarat connecting Ghoghla in the Union Territory of 
Daman and Diu and terminating at NH -51 near Kesaria in the State 
of Gujarat.]  
5[231 248A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -48 near Sahpura 
connecting Alwar, Ramgarh, Haryan a/Rajasthan border in the State 
of Rajasthan, Nuh and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
48 near Gurgaon in the State of Haryana.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 775(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 766(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 772(E), d ated 24 th February, 2014.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 838(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 842(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  23 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
1[232 107A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 7 near 
Chamoli connecting Gopeshwar, Okhimath and terminating at its 
junction on new NH No. 107 near Baramwari in the State of 
Uttrakhand.  
233 309A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 9 near 
Rameshwar connecting Gangolihat, Berinag, Chaukori, Kanda, 
Bagheshwar, Takula and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
109 near Almora in the State of Uttrakhand.]  
3[234 325 The highway starting from its junction with NH -25 near Balotra 
connecting Siwana, Jalore, Ahor and terminating at its junction with 
new NH No. 62 near Sandera in the State of Rajasthan.  
235 25 Ext ension. The highway starting from Barmer connecting Ramsar and 
terminating at Munabao Road in the State of Rajasthan.]  
2[236 102C  The highway starting from its junction with NH -2 near Maram in the 
State of Manipur connecting Peren, Jaluki, Pimla, Junction, Razaphe 
Junction and terminating at NH -29 Near Dimapur  in the State of 
Nagaland.]  
3[237 381 The highway starting from its junction with NH -544 near Avinashi 
connecting Tirupur and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
81 near Avinashipalaiym in the State of Tamilnadu.]  
4[238 367 The highway starting from its junction with NH -67 near Bhanapur 
connecting Kukunur, Yelburga, Gajendragad, Badami, Guledaguda, 
Bagalkote, Bagalkot and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
52 near Gaddankeri in the State of Karnataka.  
239 173 The hi ghway starting from its junction with NH -73 near Mudigere 
connecting Chikkamagaluru and terminating at its junction with new 
NH No. 69 near Kadur in the State of Karnataka.  
240 275 The highway starting from its junction with NH -75 near Bantwala  
connecting Puttur, Sulya, Madikeri, Priyapatna Mysuru, 
Srirangapattana, Mandya, Channapatnam, Ramanagaram and 
terminating at its junction with new NH No. 75 on Bengaluru in the 
State of Karnataka.  
241 150A  The highway starting from its junction w ith NH -50 at Jevargi 
connecting Siriguppa, Bellary, Hiriyur, Huliyur, 
Chikkanayakanahalli, Nagamangala Srirangapatna -Mysore -
Nanjangud and terminating at its junction with NH -948 at 
Chamarajanagar in the State of Karnataka.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 867(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  
2. Ins. by  notification No. S.O. 767(E), d ated  4th March, 2014.  
3. .Ins. by notification No. S.O.  770(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 774(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  24 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
1[242 154A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -154 near Chakki, 
Dhar in the State of Punjab connecting Banikhet, Chamba and 
terminating at Bharmour in the State of Himachal Pradesh  
243 505 The highway starting from its junction with NH -5 near Khab Sangam 
connecting Chango, Sumdo, Tabo, Attargo, Kaza, Morang, Hanse, 
Losar, Lachu, Chhota Dhara and terminating at Gramphoo in the 
State of Himachal Pradesh.  
244 503 Ext ention. The highway starting from its junction with NH -3 near Mubarakpur 
connecting Amb, Una, Dehlan in the State of Himachal Pradesh, 
Anandpur Sahib, Kiratpur and terminating at its junction with new 
NH No. 205 in the State of Punjab.]  
2[245 444 The highway star ting from its junction with NH -44 near Srinagar 
connecting Badgam, Pulwama, Shupiyan, Kulgam and terminating at 
its junction with new NH No. 44 near Quazigund in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
246 144A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -44 near Jammu 
connecting Akhnur, Naoshera, Rajauri and terminating at Punch in 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.]  
3[247 627 The highway starting from its junction with new NH -27 near Nelle 
(Amsoi Gate) connecti ng Rajagaon, Doyangmukh, Umrangso, 
Khobak and terminating at NH -27 near Harangajao in the State of 
Assam]  
4[248 310A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -10 near Tashiview 
point connecting Phodang and terminating at Mangan in the State of 
Sikkim  
249 710 The highway starting from its junction with NH -10 near Melli 
connecting Manpur, Namchi and terminating at Damthang in the 
State of Sikkim  
250 510 The highway starting from its junction with NH -10 near Singtham 
connecting Damthang, Legship  and terminating at Geyzing in the 
State of Sikkim.]  
5[251 427 The highway starting from its junction with NH -27 near Howli 
connecting Barpeta, Hajo and terminating at its junction with new 
NH No. 27 near Jalukbari in the State of Assam  
  
252 329 The highway starting from its junction with NH -29 near Manja 
connecting Diphu and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
27 near Lumding in the State of Assam  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 836(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 764(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 840(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 768(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 863(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  25 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of National Highways  
253 117A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -17 near Bilasipara 
connecting Kokrajhar and terminating at its junction with New NH -
27 near Garubhasa in the State of Assam  
254 715A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -27 near Nakhola 
connecting Jagiroad, Marigaon, Kaupati, Rowta, Udalguri, 
Khoirabari and terminating at Indo/Bhutan border in the State of 
Assam  
255 127E  The highway starting from its junction with NH -27 near Barama 
connecting Baska, Subankhata and terminating at Indo/Bhutan border 
in the State of Assam]  
1[256 326A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 326 near 
Mohana connecting Chandiput, Chheligada, Ramagiri Udayagiri, 
Raygarh, Parlakimidi, Kotabommali and terminating at its junction 
with NH -16 near Narasannapeta  in the State of Odisha.]  
2[257 702 The highway starting from its junction with NH -2 near Chantongia 
connecting Longling, Lonhching, Mon, Lapa, Tizit in the State of 
Nagaland, Sonari and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 
215 near Sapekhati in th e State of Assam.  
258 702A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No 2 near 
Mokokchung connecting Zunheboto, Phek in the State of Nagaland 
and terminating at Jessam near new NH No. 29 in the State of 
Manipur.  
259 208 The highway starting from its junction with NH -8 near Kumarghat 
connecting Kailashahar, Khowai and terminating at its junction with 
new NH -8 near Teliamura in the State of Tripura.  
260 108A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 8 near 
Jolaibari connecting Belonia and terminating at Indo/Bangladesh 
border.  
261 102C  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 102 near 
Palel and terminating at Chandel in the State of Manipur.]  
3[262 103A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH -3 near 
Hoshiarpur connecting Mahalpur, Gurhshankar, Nawanshahr, 
Balachur and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 205 near 
Rupnagar in the State of Punjab.  
263 703A  The highway starting from its ju nction with new NH -3 near 
Jalandhar connecting Kapurthala, Sultanpur Lodhi, Pindi and 
terminating at its junction with new NH No. 54 near Makhu in the 
State of Punjab.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O.869(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 868(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 864(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  26 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
1[264 512 The highway starting from its junction with NH -12 near Gajol 
connecting Daulatpur, Bansihari, Gangarampur, Harsura, Balurghat 
and terminating at Hilli in the State of West Bengal near 
Indo/Bangladesh Border.]  
1[265 754 The highway starting from its junction with new NH -54 near Kot 
Kapurthala connecting Khara, Muktsar, Saidoke and terminating at 
Jalalabad in the State of Punjab.]  
2[266 185 The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 85 near 
Adimali connecting Cheruthoni, Painavu and terminating at its 
junction with new NH No. 183 near Kumily in the State of Kerala.  
267 183A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 183 near 
Adur connecting Pathanamthitta, Vadserikkara, Lahai, and 
terminating at it s junction with new NH No. 183 near Vandiperiyar 
in the State of Kerala.]  
3[268 333A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -33 near Bar Bigha 
connecting Shekhpura, Sikandra, Jamui, Jha -Jha, Banka in the State 
of Bihar and terminating at its junction with NH -133 near Godda in 
the State of Jharkhand.  
269 527A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 527 B near 
Pokhrauni Chowk connecting Madhubani, Rampatti and terminating 
at its junction with new NH No. 27 near Jhanjharpur in the State of 
Bihar.  
270 219 The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 19 near 
Mohania connecting Bhabhua, Chainpur, Chand in the State of Bihar 
and terminating at its junction with NH -19 near Chandauli in the 
state of Uttar Pradesh.]  
4[271 753 The highway starting from its junction with NH -53 near Duggipar 
connecting Goregaon, and terminating at Gondia in the State of 
Maharashtra.  
272 753A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -53 near Malkapur 
connecting Buldhana, Chikhli, Deulgaon Raja, Jalna and terminating 
near Aurangabad on NH -52 in the State of Maharashtra.  
273 753B  The highway starting from its junction with NH -53 near Sheval i 
connecting Nizampur, Chhadvel, Nundurbar, Taloda, Akkalkura in 
the State of Maharashtra, Dediapada and terminating at Netrang on 
NH-56 in the State of Gujarat.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 871(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
2 Ins. by notification No. S.O. 866(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O.870(E), dated 4th March, 2014.  
4.  Ins. by notification No. S.O. 875(E), dated 5th March, 2014.  27 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of national highways  
274 166A  The highway starting from Vadkhal on NH -66 and terminating at 
Alibag inthe State of Maharashtra.]  
1[275 130D  The highway starting from its junction with NH -30 on Kondagaon 
and terminating at Narainpur in the State of Chhattisgarh.  
276 163A  The highway starting from Geedam(Gidam) on NH -63 and 
terminating at Dantewara in the State of Chhattisgarh.  
277 149B  The highway starting from its junction with NH -49 near Champa 
connecting Korba, Chhuri  and terminating at its junction with new 
NH No. 130 near Katghora in the State of Chhattisgarh  
278 130C  The highway starting from its junction with NH -30 near Abhanpur 
connecting Rajim, Gariaband, Bardula, Deobhog in the State of 
Chhattisgarh and termina ting at its junction with new NH No. 201 
near Baldhimal in the State of Odisha.  
279 930 The highway starting from its junction with NH -30 near Purur 
connecting Balod, Kusumkasa, Kumhari, Manpur in the State of 
Chhattisgarh, Muramgaon, Dhanora, Gadchiroli , Mul, Chandrapur, 
Warora, Wani and terminating near Karanji on NH -44 in the State of 
Maharashtra.  
280 130A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -30 near Pondi 
connecting Pandaria, Mungeli, and terminating at NH -130 on 
Bilaspur in the State of Ch hattisgarh.  
281 130B  The highway starting from Raipur on NH -30 connecting Palari, 
Baloda Bazar, Kasdol and terminating at its junction with NH No. 
153 near Sarangarh in the State of Chhattisgarh.]  
2[282 133A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -33 near Baharwa 
connecting Pakur in the State of Jharkhand and terminating with NH -
12 near Nimtala in the State of West Bengal.  
283 419 The highway starting from its junction with NH -19 near Kulti  in the 
State of West Bengal connecting Chittaranjan, Jamtara and 
terminating at Gobindpur in the State of Jharkhand.  
284 143A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -43 near Gumla 
connecting Ghaghra, Lohardaga and terminating at its junction with 
NH-39 near Kuru in the State of Jharkhand.]  
3[288 713 The Highway starting from its junction with NH -13 near Joram 
connecting Palin, Sangram and terminating at Koloriang in the State 
of Arunachal Pradesh.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 874(E) , dated 5th March, 2014.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 873(E) , dated 4th March, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1515(E), dated 13th June, 2014.  28 
 Serial No.  National 
Highway No.  Description of  national highways  
289 513 The Highway starting from its junction with NH -13 near Passighat 
connecting Mariyang and terminating at Yingkiong in the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
290 313 The Highway starting from its junction with NH -13 near Meka  and 
terminating near Anini in the State of Arunachal Pradesh.  
291 113 The Highway starting from its junction with NH -13 near Hawacamp 
connecting Hayuliang and terminating near Hawai in the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
292 713A  The Highway starting from its junction with NH -13 near Hoj 
connecting Yupia and terminating at its junction with NH -415 near 
Pappu (near Nahurlagun) in the State of Arunachal Pradesh.]  
1[293 341 The highway starting from its junction with NH -41 near Bhimasar 
connecting Anjar, Bhuj, Khavda and terminating at Dharmshala in 
the State of Gujarat.  
294 147A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -47 near Limbdi 
connecting Surendranagar, Dhrangadhra and terminating at Kuda in 
the State of Gujarat.  
295 351 The highway starting from its junction with NH -51 near Mahuva 
connecting Saverkundla, Amreli, Bagasara and terminating at Jetpur 
on NH -27 in the State of Gujarat.  
296 953 The highway starting from its junction with NH -53 near Songudh 
connecting Ahwa in the State of Gujarat, Sarad, Vani and terminating 
at its junction with NH -60 near Pimpalgaon Baswant in the State of 
Maharashtra.  
297 927D  The highway starting from its junction with NH -27 near Dhoraji 
connecting Jamkandorna, Kalavad  and terminating at Jamnagar in 
the State of Gujarat.]  
2[298 348 A  The highway starting from its junction with NH -348 near Jawahar 
Lal Nehru Port Trust connecting Gavanphata section of SH -54             
(Km. 5.300 to km. 14.550), Amara Marg (km. 0.000 to km. 6.500) 
and terminating at its junction with Palm Beach Road in the State of 
Maharashtra.]  
3[313 709A  The highway starting from its junction with new NH No. 709 at 
Bhiwani  connecting Mundal, Jind, Karnal in the State of Haryana, 
Shamli, Budhana  and terminating at its junction with new NH No. 34 
at Meerut in the State of Uttar Pradesh.]  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1522(E), dated 13th June, 2014.  
2. Ins. b y notification No. S.O. 1513(E), d ated 13th June, 2014.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 699(E) , dated 10th March, 2015.  
--------------------------The Representation of the People (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS)  ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 88 OF 1956  
[28th December, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the removal of disqualifications for membership of, and voting at elections 
to, Parliament and State Legislatures, and for certain miscellaneous matters in connection 
with such elections.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Miscellaneous Provisions) 
Act, 1956.  
2. Removal of disqualifications .—(1) Every disqualification for membership of Parliament or          
of the Legislature of a State incurred by any person under the Representation of the People                     
Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) (hereinaf ter referred to as the principal Act) before the commencement of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 (27 of 1956), for failure to lodge a return of 
election expenses as required by clause ( c) of section 7 of the principal Act is h ereby removed.  
(2) Every disqualification for membership of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State or for voting 
at an election incurred by any person under the principal Act before the commencement of the 
Representation of the People (Second Amendmen t) Act, 1956  (27 of 1956) , for any illegal practice or for 
any corrupt practice other than the corrupt practice of bribery or undue influence is hereby removed.  
3. [Amendment of section 7 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
4. Special provision for nomination in case for prisoners in Portuguese territory .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 33 of the principal Act, where a person detained in prison 
or other custody in any Portuguese territory wishes to stand as a candidate at any election that may be 
held within one year from the commencement of this Act, the nomination paper of such person and any 
declaration contained therein may be signed on his behalf by the proposer; b ut no such nomination paper 
shall be received by the returning officer unless at the time of its delivery the proposer produces before 
that officer — 
(a) a writing signed by such person and showing his intention to stand as a candidate, and  
(b) a certificate signed by a Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of External 
Affairs that the person is detained in prison or other custody in Portuguese territory.  
5. Prevention of disqualification for membership of Parliament in certain case s.—It is hereby 
declared that the office of member of the Council of Advisers associated with the Chief Commissioner of 
Manipur or with the Chief Commissioner of Tripura shall not disqualify the holder thereof for being 
chosen as, or for being, a member of  Parliament.  
 
--------------------------The River Boards Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE RIVER BOARDS ACT, 1956  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTION S 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Central Government.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF RIVER BOARDS  
4. Establishment of Boards.  
5. Composition of Board.  
6. Terms and conditions of service of members.  
7. Temporary absence of any member.  
8. Meetings of Board.  
9. Vacancy in Board, etc. , not to invalidate acts or proceedings.  
10. Appointment of advisory committee.  
11. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes.  
12. Staff of Board.  
CHAPTER III  
POWER S AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
13. Matters in respect of which a Board may be authorised to tender advice.  
14. Functions of Board.  
15. Preparation of schemes by Board and their execution.  
16. General Powers of Board.  
17. Payment to Board.  
18. Fund of Board.  
19. Budget.  
20. Annual report . 
21. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Arbitration.  
23. Returns and reports.  
24. Delegation of powers.  
  2 
  
SECTION S 
25. Members and officers of Board to be public servants.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Dissolution of Board and transfer of assets and liabilities.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to make regulations.  
  3 
 THE RIVER BOARDS ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 49 OF 1956  
[12th September, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of River Boards for the regulation and development of           
inter-State rivers and river valleys.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the River Boards Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by Central Government .—It is hereby declared that it is 
expedient in the public interest that the Central Government should take under its control the regulation 
and development of inter -State rivers and river valleys , to the extent hereinafter provided.  
3. Definitions .—In this Ac t, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means a River Board establishment under section 4;  
(b) “Governments interested ”, in relation to a Board, means the Governments of those States 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, are likely to be interested in, or affected by, the 
functions of the Board under this Act;  
(c) “member” means a member of a Board and includes its Chairman;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF RIVER BOARD S 
4. Establishment of Boards .—(1) The Central Government may, on a request received in this behalf 
from a State Government or otherwise, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a River Board for 
advising the Governments interested in relation   to such matters concerning the regulation or development 
of an inter -State river or river valley or any specified   part thereof and for performing such other functions 
as may be specified in the notification, and different Boards may be established for diff erent inter -State 
rivers or river valleys:  
Provided that no such notification shall be except after consultation with the Governments interested 
with respect to the proposal to establish the Board, the persons to be appointed as members thereof and 
the fun ctions which the Board may be empowered to perform.  
(2) A Board may be established under such name as may be specified in the notification under        
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Every Board so established shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common 
seal, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(4) Every Board shall exercise its jurisdiction within such limits of the river (including its tributaries, 
if any) or river valley   as may be specified in the notification under sub -section ( 1) and the area so 
specified shall be called the area of operation of the Board.  
                                                           
1. 15th May, 195 7, vide notification No. EL-I-452 (17)/57,  dated 11th May, 195 7, see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary, Part II,     
sec. 1. 
1st October, 1973,  vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule  in respect of Pondicherry . 
1st July 1965, vide Reg.  6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule e xtended to and brought into force in respect of the Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli.  
 4 
 5. Composition of Board .—(1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as 
the Central Government thinks fit to appoint.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified f or appointment as a member unless, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, he has special knowledge and experience in irrigation, electrical engineering flood control, 
navigation, water conservation, soil conservation administration or finance.  
6. Terms and conditions of service of members .—(1) A member shall, unless his appointment is 
terminated earlier by the Central Government, hold office for such period as may be notified in this behalf 
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette, and shall, on  the expiry of the term of his office be 
eligible for re -appointment.  
(2) A member may resign his office  by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, 
but he shall continue in office until the appointment of his successor is notified in th e Official Gazette.  
(3) A casual vacancy created by the resignation of a member under sub -section ( 2) or for any other 
reason shall be filled by fresh appointment.  
(4) A member may be appointed either as a whole -time or part -time member as the Central 
Gove rnment  thinks fit.  
(5) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
7. Temporary absence of any member .—If any member is by infirmity or otherwise rendered 
temporarily incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not 
involving the vacation of his appointment, the Central Government may appoint another person to act in 
his place.  
8. Meetings of Board .—The Board shall meet at such times and places and sha ll observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by regulations 
made under this Act.  
9. Vacancy in Board, etc. , not to invalidate acts or proceedings .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy in the Board or any 
defect in the appointment of a member thereof.  
10. Appointment of advisory committee .—The Board may, from time to time, appoint one or more 
advisory committee or commit tees for the purpose of enabling it to carry out of its functions under this 
Act. 
11. Temporary association of persons with Board for particular purposes .—(1) The Board may 
associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations made 
under this Act any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in performing any of its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) A person associated with t he Board under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a right to 
take part in the discu ssions of the Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a 
meeting of the Board, and shall not be a member for any other purpose.  
12. Staff of Board .—Subject to such rules as may by the Central Government in this behalf, the 
Board may, for the purpose of enabling it to efficiently perform its functions or exercise its powers under 
this Act,   appoint such officers as it may think fit and determine their functions and terms and conditions 
of service.  
CHAPTER III  
POWER S AND FUNCT IONS OF THE BOARD  
13. Matters in respect of which a Board may be authorised to tender advice .—A Board may be 
empowered under sub -section ( 1) of section 14 to perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely:— 
(a) advising the Governments interested on  any matter concerning the regulation or development 
of any specified inter -State river o r river valley within its area of operation and in particular, advising 5 
 them in relation to the co -ordination of their activities with a view to resolve conflicts amon g them 
and to achieve maximum results i n respect of the measures under taken by them in the inter -State river 
or river valley for the purpose of — 
(i) conservation, control and optimum utilisation of water resources of the inter -State river;  
(ii) promotion a nd operation of schemes for irrigation, water supply or drainage;  
(iii) promotion and operation of schemes for the development of hydro -electric power;  
(iv) promotion and operation of schemes for flood control;  
(v) promotion and control of navigation;  
(vi) promotion of afforestation and control of soil erosion;  
(vii) prevention of pollution of the waters of the inter -State river;  
(viii) such other matters as may be prescribed;  
(b)  preparing schemes, including multi -purpose schemes, for the purpose of regu lating or 
developing the inter -State river or river valley   and advising the Governments interested to undertake 
measures for executing the scheme prepared by the Board;  
(c) allocating among the Governments interested the costs of executing any scheme prep ared by 
the Board and of   works undertaken in the execution of the scheme;  
(d) watching the progress of the measures undertaken by the Governments interested;  
(e) any other matter which is supplemental, incidental or consequential to any of the above 
funct ions.  
14. Functions of Board .—(1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Governments 
interested, may , by notification in the Official Gazette, empower the Board to perform all or such of the 
functions under section 13 as may be specified in th e notification.  
(2) The Board shall exercise its powers and perform all the functions which it is empowered to do by 
or under this Act within its area of operation.  
(3) In performing its functions under this Act, the Board shall consult the Governments int erested at 
all stages and endeavour to secure, as far as may be practicable, agreement among such Governments.  
15. Preparation of schemes by Board and their execution .—(1) Where any Board has been 
empowered to perform functions under clause ( b) of section 13, the Board may, from time to time, 
prepare schemes, not inconsistent with its functions under this Act, for the purpose of regulating or 
developing any inter -State river or river valley within   its area of operation.  
(2) After preparing any such scheme,  the Board shall consult the Governments interested and the 
Central Government in respect of the scheme and after considering their suggestions, if any, the Board 
may confirm, modify or reject the scheme.  
(3) The scheme as confirmed or modified under sub -section ( 2) shall thereupon become final and 
shall be called the approved scheme.  
(4) Before any scheme is approved, the Board shall take into account the costs likely to be incurred in 
undertaking measures for executing the scheme and in maintaining any wo rks to be undertaken in the 
execution of the scheme and the costs shall be allocated among the Governments interested in such 
proportion as may be agreed or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by the Board having 
regard to the benefits which wil l be received from the scheme by them.  
(5) Every approved scheme shall be forwarded to the Governments interested and the Board may 
advise them to undertake measures for executing the scheme and a copy of the approved scheme shall 
also be forwarded to the Central Government.  6 
 (6) The Central Government may, on a request received in this behalf from any Government 
interested or otherwise, assist the Governments interested in taking such steps as may be necessary for the 
execution of the scheme.  
16. General Powers of Board .—For the purpose of efficiently performing its functions under this 
Act, every Board may, within its area of operation, — 
(a) acquire, hold and dispose of such property, both movable and immovable, as it deems 
necessary;  
(b) underta ke such preliminary investigation or surveys or other measures as it deems necessary;  
(c) inspect or cause to be inspected any works undertaken by any Government interested 
concerning the regulation or development of the inter -State river or river valley;  
(d) conduct and co -ordinate research or various aspects of the conservation, regulation or 
utilisation of water resources, such as water power generation, irrigation, navigation, flood control, 
soil conservation, land use and connected structural and desig n features;  
(e) collect such topographical, meteorological, hydrological and sub -soil  water data as it deems 
necessary;  
(f) publish statistics or other information relating to the various aspects of the regulation or 
development of the inter -State river o r river   valley;  
(g) require any Government interested to furnish such information as the Board may require in 
relation to — 
(i) the measures undertaken by that Government for the regulation or development of the 
inter-State river or river valley;  
(ii) the topographical, meteorological, hydrological and sub -soil water data;  
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
17. Payment to Board .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Board in each  financial year such sums as the Central Government may 
consider necessary for the performance of the functions of the Board under this Act.  
18. Fund of Board .—(1) The Board shall have its own fund, and all sums which may, from time to 
time, be paid to it by the Central Government or a State Government and all other receipts of the Board 
shall be carried to the fund of the Board and all payments by the Board shall be made therefrom.  
(2) The Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its func tions under this Act, and 
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the fund of the Board.  
19. Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, 
a budget in respect of the financial year next ensu ing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure, and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Governments interested.  
20. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and  at such time each year as may  be 
prescribed, an  annual report  giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Governments interested; and the 
Central Government shall cause every such report to be laid bef ore both Houses of Parliament.  
21. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall cause to be maintained such books of account and 
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be  audited at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Arbitration .—(1) Where any dispute or  difference arises between two  or more Government 
interested with respect to — 
(a) any  advice tendered by the Board under this Act;  7 
 (b) any measurers undertaken by any Government interested in pursuance of any advice tendered 
by the Board;  
(c) the refusal or neglect of any Government interested to undertake any measurers in pursuance 
of any  advice tendered by the Board;  
(d) the sharing of benefits or financial liabilities arising out of any advice tendered by the Board;  
(e) any other matter covered by this   Act or touching or arising out of it,  
any of the Governments interested may, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, refer the 
matter in dispute to arbitration.  
(2) The arbitrator shall be person to be appointed in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from 
among persons who are, or have been, Judges of the Supreme Court or are Judges of a High Court.  
(3) The arbitrator may appoint two or more persons as assessors to assist him in the proceeding before 
him. 
(4) The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to the dispute and shall be 
given effect  to by them.  
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), shall apply to arbitrations under this section.  
23. Returns and reports .—The Board shall furnish to the Central Government such returns, 
statistics, accounts and other information with res pect to its fund or activities as the Central Government 
may from time to time require.  
24. Delegation of powers .—The Board may,  by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
chairman or any other member of any officer of the Board, subject to su ch conditions and limitations, if 
any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem 
necessary for the efficient running of the day -to day administration of the Board.  
25. Members and officers of Board to be public servants .—All members and officers of a Board 
shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Ind ian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
member or officer of a Board in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this A ct. 
27. Dissolution of Board and transfer of assets and liabilities .—(1) When the Central Government 
is of opinion that a Board has performed its functions under this Act, the Central Government, after 
consultation with the Governments interested, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the 
Board shall be dissolved from such date as may be specified in this behalf in such notification; and the 
Board shall be deemed to have been dissolved accordingly.  
(2) On the dissolution of the  Board by  a notification under  sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or realisable by, the Board shall vest in, and 
be reliable by, such Government or authority as may be specified in the said notification; and  
(b) all liabilitie s which are enforceable against the Board shall be enforceable only against the 
Government or authority specified in the said notification.  
28. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of members of  the Board;  
(b) the matters in respect of which a Board may tender advice to the Governments interested 
under sub -clause ( viii) of clause ( a) of section 13;  8 
 (c) the  matters in respect of which the Board may require a Government interested to furnish 
information;  
(d) the manner in which the Central Government may assist the Governments interested to 
execute any scheme prepared by the Board;  
(e) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget and annual report of the Board may 
be prepared and forwarded to the Central Government and the Governments interested;  
(f) the form and manner in which the accounts of the Board may be maintained, and the time at 
which, an d the manner in which, such accounts may be audited;  
(g) the returns and information which the Board may be required to furnish to the Central 
Government;  
(h) the form and manner in which a dispute may be referred to arbitration under this Act;  
(i) the pro cedure to be followed in arbitration proceedings under this Act;  
(j) the manner of recruitment of the officers of a Board and the terms and conditions of service of 
such officers;  
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed;  
1[(3) Every rule  made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befo re the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
29. Power to make regulations .—2[(1)] The Board may,  with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Gazette of India, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act or 
the rules made thereunder — 
(a) regulating the meetings of the Board and the procedure for conducting busines s thereat;  
(b) regulating the manner in which, and the purposes for which, advisory committees may be 
appointed;  
(c) regulating the manner in which and the   purposes for which persons may be associated with 
the Board   under section 11;  
(d) determining the terms and conditions of service of the members of advisory committees, of 
persons associated with the Board under section 11 and of all officers appointed by the Board.  
3[(2) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after i t is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter   have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as t he case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. Section 29 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Sales-Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE SALES -TAX LAWS VALIDATION ACT,  1956  
ACT NO. 7 OF 1956  
[21st March,  1956 .] 
An Act to validate laws of States imposing, or authorising the imposition of, taxes on the sale or 
purchase of goods in the course of inter -State trade or commerce.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Sales -Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956.  
2. Validation of State laws imposing, or authori sing the imposition of, taxes on sale or purchase 
of goods in the course of inter -State trade or commerce .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court, no law of a State imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale or 
purchase o f any goods where such sale or purchase took place in the course of inter -State trade or 
commerce during the period between the  1st day of April,  1951  and the  6th day of Septem ber, 1955,  shall 
be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid  merely by  reason of the fact that such sale or 
purchase took place in the course of inter -State trade or commerce; and all such taxes levied or collected 
or purporting to have been levied or collected during the aforesaid period  shall be deemed always to have 
been validly levied or collected in accordance with law.  
Explanation .—In this section, ‘law of a State’ in relation to a State specified in Part C of the          
First Schedule to the Constitution,  means any law made by the Legislative Assembly, if any, of tha t      
State or extended to that State by a notification issued under section  2 of the Part C States (Laws)  
Act, 1950 (30 of 1950 ). 
3. [Repeal of Ordinance 3 of  1956.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 
and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
 
--------------------------The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1956  
_____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
2A. Interpretation of certain words and expressions.  
RECOGNISED  STOCK  EXCHANGE S 
3. Application for recognition of stock exchanges.  
4. Grant of recognition to stock exchanges.  
4A. Corporatisation and demutualisation of stock exchanges.  
4B. Procedure for corporatisation and demutuali sation.  
5. Withdrawal of recognition.  
6. Power of Central Government to call for p eriodical returns or direct inquiries to be                   
made.  
7. Annual reports to be furnished to Central Government by stock exchanges.  
7A. Power of recogni sed stock exchange to make rules restricting voting rights, etc . 
8. Power of Central Government to  direct rules to be made or to make rules.  
8A. Clearing corporation.  
9. Power of recognised stock exchanges to make bye -laws.  
10. Power of Securities and Exchange Board of India  to make or amend bye -laws of recognised stock 
exchanges.  
11. Power of Central Government to supersede governing body of a recognised stock exchange.  
12. Power to suspend business of recognised stock exchanges.  
12A. Power to issue directions.  
CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN SECURITIES  
13. Contracts in notified areas illegal in certain circumstances.  
13A. Additional trading floor.  
14. Contracts in notified areas to be void in certain circumstances.  
15. Members may not act as principals in certain circumstances.  
16. Power to prohibit contracts in certain cases.  
17. Licensing of dealers in securities in certain areas.  
17A. Public issue and listing of securities referred to in sub -clause ( ie) of clause ( h) of   section 2 . 
18. Exclusion of spot d elivery contracts from sections  13, 14, 15 and 17.  
18A. Contracts in derivative . 
19. Stock exchanges other than recognised stock exchanges prohibited.  
20. [Omitted .] 
LISTING OF SECURITIES BY PUBLIC  COMPANIES  
 
21. Conditions for listing.  
21A. Delisting of securities.  2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Right of appeal against refusal of stock exchanges to list securities of public companies . 
22A. Right of appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal against refusal of stock exchange to list 
securities of public companies.  
22B. Procedure and powers of Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
22C. Right to legal representation.  
22D. Limitation.  
22E. Civil court not to have jurisdicti on. 
22F.Appeal to  High  Court . 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
23. Penalties.  
23A. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.  
23B. Penalty for failure by any person to enter into an agreement with clients.  
23C. Penalty for failure to redress investors grievances.  
23D. Penalty for failure to segregate securities or moneys of client or clients.  
23E. Penalty for failure to comply with listing conditions or delisting conditions or grounds.  
23F. Penalty for excess dematerialisation or delivery of unlisted se curities.  
23G. Penalty for failure to furnish periodical returns, etc.  
23H. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided.  
23-I. Power to adjudicate.  
23J. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer.  
23JA. Settlement of  administrative and civil proceedings . 
23JB. Recovery of amounts.  
23K. Crediting sum realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India.  
23L. Appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
23M. Offences.  
23N. Composition of certain offences.  
23-O. Power to grant immunity.  
24. Offences by companies.  
25. Certain offences to be cognizable.  
26. Cognizance of offences by courts.  
26A. Establishment of Special Courts.  
26B. Offences triable by Special Courts.  
26C. Appeal and revision.  
26D. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court.  
26E. Transitional provisions.  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Title to dividends.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
27A. Right to receive income from collective investment scheme.  
27B. Right to receive income from mutual fund.  
28. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29A. power to delegate.  
30. Power to make rules.  
30A. Special provisions related to commodity derivatives.  
31. Power of Securities and Exchange Board of India to make regulations.  
32. Validation of certa in acts.  
  4 
 THE SECURITIES CONTRACTS (REGULATION) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1956  
[4th September , 1956 .] 
An Act to prevent undesirable transactions in securities by regulating the business of dealing 
therein, 1*** by providing for certain other matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956.  
(2) It exten ds to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “contract ” means a contract for or relating to the purchase or sale of securities;  
3[(aa) “corporatisation ” means the succession of a recognised stock exchange, being a body of 
individuals or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), by another 
stock exch ange, being a company incorporated for the purpose of assisting, regulating or controlling 
the business of buying, selling or dealing in securities carried on by such individuals or society;  
(ab) “demutualisation ” means the segregation of ownership and man agement from the trading 
rights of the members of a recognised stock exchange in accordance with a scheme approved by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India;]  
4[5[(ac)] “derivative ” includes — 
(A) a security derived from a debt instrument, share, loan, whether secured or unsecured, risk 
instrument or contract for differences or any other form of security;  
(B) a cont ract which derives its value from the prices, or index of prices, of underlying 
securities ;] 
6[(C) commodity derivatives; and  
(D) such other instruments as may be declared by the Central Government to be derivatives;]  
(b) “Government security ” means a security created and issued, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, by the Central Government or a State Government for the purpos e of 
raising a public loan and having one of the forms specified in clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public 
Debt Act, 1944 (1 8 of 1944);  
6[(bb) “goods ” mean every kind of movable property other than actionable claims, money and 
securities;  
(bc) “commodity derivative ” means a contract — 
(i) for the delivery of such goods, as may be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette, and which is not a ready delivery contract; or  
                                                             
1. The words “by prohibiting options  and” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 18 (w.e.f . 25-1-1995).  
2. 20th February, 1957, vide Notification No. S.R.O. 528, dated 16th February, 1957, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3.  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
4. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
5. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause  (ac) thereof by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
6. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 133 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  5 
 (ii) for differences, which derives its value from prices or indices of prices of such underlying 
goods or activities, services, rights, interests and events, as may be notified by the Central 
Government, in consultation with the Board, but does not include s ecurities as referred to in           
sub-clauses ( A) and ( B) of clause ( ac);] 
(c) “member ” means a member of a recognised stock exchange;  
1[(ca) “non-transfer able specific delivery contract ” means a specific delivery contract, the rights 
or liabilities un der which or under any delivery order, railway receipt, bill of lading, warehouse 
receipt or any other documents of title relating thereto are not transferable;]  
(d) “option in securities ” means a contract for the purchase or sale of a right to buy or sell , or a 
right to buy and sell, securities in future, and includes a teji, a mandi , a teji mandi , a galli, a put, a call 
or a put and call in securities;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
1[(ea) “ready delivery contract ” means a contract which provides for the delivery of goods and 
the payment of a price therefor , either immediately, or within such period not exceeding eleven days 
after the date of the contract and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may,  by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in respect of any goods, the period under such contract not 
being capable of extension by the mutual consent of the parties thereto or otherwise:  
Provided that where any such contract is performed either wh olly or in part;  
(I) by realisation of any sum of money being the difference between the contract rate and the 
settlement rate or clearing rate or the rate of any offsetting contract; or  
(II) by any other means whatsoever, and as a result of which the actu al tendering of the goods 
covered by the contract or pay ment of the full price therefor  is dispensed with, then such contract 
shall not be deemed to be a ready delivery contract;]  
(f) “recognised stock exchange ” means a stock exchange which is for the time  being recognised 
by the Central Government under section 4;  
(g) “rules ”, with reference to the rules relating in general to the constitution and management of a 
stock exchange, includes, in the case of a stock exchange which is an incorporated association , its 
memorandum and articles of association;  
2[(ga) “scheme ” means a scheme for corporatisation or demutualisation of a recognised stock  
exchange which may provide for — 
(i) the issue of shares for a lawful consideration and provision of trading rights in lieu of 
membership cards of members of a recognised stock exchange;  
(ii) the restrictions on voting rights;  
(iii) the transfer of property, business, assets, rights, liabilities, recognitions, contracts of the 
recognised stock exchange, l egal proceedings b y, or against  the recognised stock exchange, 
whether in the name of the recognised stock exchange or any trustee or otherwise and any 
permission given to or by, the recognised stock exchange;  
(iv) the transfer of employees of a recognised stock exchange to  another recognised stock 
exchange;  
(v) any other matter required for the purpose of, or in connection with, t he corporatisation or 
demutu alisation, as the case may be, of the recognised stock exchange;]  
3[ 4[(gb)] “Securities Appellate Tribunal ” means a Securities Appellate Tribunal established under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15K of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) ;] 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 133 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
4. Clause ( ga) re-lettered as clause ( gb) thereof by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f.12 -10-2004).  6 
 (h) “securities ” include — 
(i) shares, scrips , stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stock or other marketable securities of 
a like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate;  
1[(ia) derivative;  
(ib) units or any other instrument issued by any collective investment scheme to the i nvestors 
in such schemes ;] 
2[(ic) security receipt as defined in clause ( zg) of section 2 of the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002  (54 of 2002) ;] 
3[(id) units or any other such instrument issued to the investors under any mutual fund 
scheme;]  
4[Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that "securities" shall not 
include any unit linked insurance policy or scrips or any such instrument or unit, by whatever 
name called, which provides a combined benefit risk on the life of the persons and investment by 
such persons and issued by an insurer referred to in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 
1938  (4 of 1938).]  
5[(ie) any certificate or instrument (by whatever name  called), issued to an investor by any 
issuer being a special purpose distinct entity which possesses any debt or receivable, including 
mortgage debt, assigned to such entity, and acknowledging beneficial interest of such investor in 
such debt or receiv able, including mortgage debt, as the case may be;]  
6[(ii) Goverment  securities;  
 (iia) such other instruments as may be declared by the Central G overnment to be 
securities; and]  
7[(ha) “specific delivery contract ” means a commodity derivative which provides for the 
actual delivery of specific qualities or types of goods during a specified future period at a 
price fixed thereby or to be fixed in the manner thereby agreed and in which the names of 
both the buyer and the seller are mentioned;]  
8[(i) “spot delivery contract ” means  a contract which provides for, — 
(a) actual delivery of securities and the payment of a price therefor  either on the same day as 
the date of the contract or on the next day, the actual period s taken for the dispatch of the 
securitie s or t he remittance of money therefor  through the post being excluded from the 
computation of the period aforesaid if the parties to the contract do not resid e in the same town or 
locality;  
(b) transfer of the securities by the depository from the account of a beneficial owner to the 
account of another beneficial owner when such securities are dealt with by a depository;]  
9[(j) “stock exchange ” means — 
(a) any body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, constituted before corporati sation  
and demutualisation under sections 4A and 4B, or  
(b) a body corporate incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  whether under 
a scheme of corporatisation and demutualisation or otherwise,  
for the purpose of assisting, regulating or controlling the business of buying, sel ling or dealing in 
securities; ] 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 54 of 2002, s. 41 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2005).  
4. The Explanation  ins. by Act 26 of 2010, s. 4 (w.e.f. 9 -4-2010).  
5. Ins. by Act 27 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -5-2007).  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule , for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 21 -2-1992).  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 133 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
8. Subs. by Act 22 of 1996, s. 30 and the Schedule, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1995).  
9. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 2, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2005).  7 
  
1[(k) “transfer able specific delivery contract ” means a specific delivery contract which is not a 
non-transferable specific delivery contract and which is subject to such conditions re lating to its 
transferability as the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.]  
2[2A. Interpretation of certain words and expressions .—Words and expressions used herein and 
not defined in this Act but defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) or the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.]  
RECOGNISED  STOCK  EXCHANGE S 
3. Application for recognition of stock exchanges .—(1) Any stock exchange, which is desirous of 
being recognised for the purposes of this Act, may make an application in the prescribed manner to the 
Central Government.  
(2) Every application under sub -section (1) shall contain such p articulars as may be prescribed , and 
shall be accompanied by a copy of the bye -laws of the stock exchange for the regulation and control of 
contracts and also a copy of the rules relating in general to the constitution of the stock exchange, and in 
particular, to — 
(a) the governing body of such stock exchange, its constitution and powers of management and 
the manner in which its business is to be transacted;  
(b) the powers and duties of the office bearers of the stock exchange;  
(c) the admission into the stock exchange of various classes of members, the qualifications for 
membership, and the exclusion, suspension, expulsion and re -admission  of members therefrom or 
there into; 
(d) the procedure for the registration of partnerships as members of the stock exchange in cases 
where the rules provide for such membership; and the nomination and appointment of authorised 
representatives and clerks.  
4. Grant of recognition to stock exchanges .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied, after 
making such inquiry as may be necessary in this behalf and after obtaining such further information, if 
any, as it may require, — 
(a) that the rules and bye -laws of a stock exchange applying for registratio n are in conformity 
with such conditions as may be prescribed with a view to ensure fair dealing and to protect investors;  
(b) that the stock exchange is willing to comply with any other conditions (including conditions 
as to the number of members) which t he Central Government, after consultation with the governing 
body of the stock exchange and having regard to the area served by the stock exchange and its 
standing and the nature of the securities dealt with by it, may impose for the purpose of carrying ou t 
the objects of this Act; and  
(c) that it would be in the interest of the trade and also in the public interest to grant recognition to 
the stock exchange;  
it may grant recognition to the stock exchange subject to the conditions imposed upon it as aforesaid and 
in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) The conditions which the Central Government may prescribe under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) 
for the grant of recognition to the stock exchanges may include, among other matters, conditions relating 
to,— 
(i) the qualifications for membership of stock exchanges;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 133 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  8 
 (ii) the manner in which contracts shall be entered into and enforced as between members;  
(iii) the representation of the Central Government on each of the stock exchanges by such number 
of person s not exceeding three as the Central Government may nominate in this behalf; and  
(iv) the maintenance of accounts of members and their audit by Chartered accountants wherever 
such audit is required by the Central Government.  
(3) Every grant of recognition to a stock exchange under this section shall be published in the Gazette 
of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State in which the principal office of the stock exchange is 
situate, and such recognition shall have effect as from the date of its p ublication in the Gazette of India.  
(4) No application for the grant of recognition shall be refused except after giving an opportunity to 
the stock exchange concerned to be heard in the matter; and the reasons for such refusal shall be 
communicated to the  stock exchange in writing.  
(5) No rules of a recognised stock exchange relating to any of the matters specified in sub -section ( 2) 
of section 3 shall be amended except with the approval of the Central Government.  
1[4A. Corporatisation and demu tualisation of stock exchanges. —On and from the appointed date, 
all recognised stock exchanges (if not corporatised and demutualised before the appointed date) shall be 
corporatised and demutualised in accordance with the provisions contained in section 4B:  
Provided t hat the Securities and Exchange Board of India may, if it is satisfied that any recognised 
stock exchange was prevented by sufficient cause from being corporatised and demutualised on or after 
the appointed date, specify another appointed date in respect o f that recognised stock exchange and such 
recognised stock exchange may continue as such before such appointed date.  
Explanation .—For the purpos es of this section, “appointed date ” means the date which the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different appointed 
dates may be appointed for different recognised stock exchanges .] 
4B. Procedure for corporatisation and demutuali sation. —(1) All recognised stock exchanges 
referred to in section 4A shall, within such time as may be specified by the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India, submit a scheme  for corporatisation and demutu alisation for its approval:  
Provided that the Secu rities and Exchange Board of India, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify name of the recognised stock exchange, which had already been corporatised and 
demutualised, and such stock exchange shall not be required to submit the scheme under this section.  
(2) On receipt of the scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Securities and Exchange Board of 
India may, after making such enquiry as may be necessary in this behalf and obtaining such further 
information, if any, as it may require and if  it is satisfied that it would be in the interest of the trade and 
also in the public interest, approve the scheme with or without modification.  
(3) No scheme under sub -section ( 2) shall be approved by the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
if the issu e of shares for a lawful consideration or provision of trading rights in lieu of membership card 
of the members of a recognised stock exchange or payment of dividends to members have been proposed 
out of any reserves or assets of that stock exchange.  
(4) Where the scheme is approved under sub -section ( 2), the scheme so approved sha ll be published 
immediately by — 
(a) the Securities and Exchange Board of India in the Official Gazette;  
(b) the recognised stock exchange in such two daily newspapers circulating in India, as may be 
specified by the Securities and Exchange Board of India,  
and upon such publication, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force or any agreement, award, judgment, decree or  other instrument for the time 
being in force, the scheme shall have effect and be binding on all persons and authorities including all 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  9 
 members, creditors, depositors and employees of the recognised stock exchange and on all persons having 
any contract, ri ght, power, obligation or liability with, against, over, to, or in connection with, the 
recognised stock exchange or its members.  
(5) Where the Securities and Exchange Board of India is satisfied that it would not be in the interest 
of the trade and also i n the public interest to approve the scheme under sub -section ( 2), it may, by an 
order, reject the scheme and such order of rejection shall be published by it in the Official Gazette:  
Provided that the Securities and Exchange Board of India shall give a re asonable opportunity of being 
heard to all the persons concerned and the recognised stock exchange concerned before passing an order 
rejecting the scheme.  
(6) The Securities and Exchange Board of India may, while approving the scheme under                       
sub-section ( 2), by an order in writing, restrict — 
(a) the voting rights of the shareholders who are also stock brokers of the recognised stock 
exchange;  
(b) the right of shareholders or a stock broker of the recognised stock exchange to appoint the 
representatives on the governing board of the stock exchange;  
(c) the maximum number of representatives of the stock brokers of the recognised stock exchange 
to be appointed on the governing board of the recognised stock exchange, which shall not exceed on e-
fourth of the total strength of the governing board.  
(7) The order made under sub -section ( 6) shall be published in the Official Gazette and on the 
publication thereof, the order shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any other law for the time being in force, have full effect.  
(8) Every recognised stock exchange, in respect of which the scheme for corporatisation or 
demutualisation has been approved under sub -section ( 2), shall, either by fres h issue of equity share  to the 
public or in any other manner as may be specified by the regulations made by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India, ensure that at least fifty -one per cent. of its equity share capital is held, within 
twelve months from the date of publication of the order under sub -section ( 7), by the public other than 
shareholders having trading rights:  
Provided that the Securities and Exchange Board of India may, on sufficient cause being shown to it 
and in the public interest, extend the said period by anoth er twelve months. ] 
5. Withdrawal of recognition. —1[(1)] If the Central Government is of opinion that the recognition 
granted to a stock exchange under the provisions of this Act should, in the interest of the trade or in the 
public interest, be withdrawn, the Central Government may serve on the governing body of the stock 
exchange a written notice that the Central Government is considering the withdrawal of the recognition 
for the reasons stated in the notice, and after giving an opportunity to the governing body to be heard in 
the matter, the Central Governmen t may withdraw, by notification in the Official Gazette, the recognitio n 
granted to the stock exchange:  
Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect the validity of any contract entered into or made before 
the date of the notification, and the Central Gov ernment may, after consultation with the stock exchange, 
make such provision as it deems fit in the notification of withdrawal or in any subsequent notification 
similarly published for the due performance of any contracts outstanding on that date.  
2[(2) Wh ere the recognised stock exchange has not been corporatised or demutualised or it fails to 
submit the scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4B wit hin the specified time therefor  or the 
scheme has been rejected by the Securities and Exchange Board of India under  sub-section ( 5) of          
section 4B, the recognition granted to such stock exchange under section 4, shall, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in this Act, stand withdrawn and the Central Government shall publish, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, such withdrawal of recognition:  
                                                             
1. Section 5 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 1 of 2005, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  10 
 Provided that no such withdrawal shall affect the validity of any contract entered into or made before 
the date of the n otification, and the Securities and Exchange Board of India may, after consultation with 
the stock exchange, make such provisions as it deems fit in the order rejecting the scheme published in 
the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 5) of section 4B. ] 
6. Power of Central Government to call for periodical returns or direct inquiries to be                   
made .—(1) Every recognised stock exchange shall furnish to the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of 
India ] such periodical returns relating to its affairs as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every recognised stock exchange and every member thereof shall maintain and preserve for such 
periods not exceeding five years such books of account, and other documents as the Cent ral Government, 
after consultation with the stock exchange concerned, may prescribe in the interest of the trade or in the 
public interest, and such books of account, and other documents shall be subject to inspection at all 
reasonable times 2[by the Secur ities and Exchange Board of India] . 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section s (1) and ( 2), the 1[Securities and 
Exchange Board of India] , if it is satisfied that it is in the interest of the trade or in the public interest so to 
do, may, by order in writing, — 
(a) call upon a recognised stock exchange or any member thereof to furnish in writing such 
information or explanation relating to the affairs of the stock exchange or of the member in relation to 
the stock exchange as the 1[Secu rities and Exchange Board of India ] may require; or  
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in the prescribed manner in relation to the 
affairs of the governing body of a stock exchange or the affairs of any of the members of the stock 
exchange in relation to the stock exchange and submit a report of the result of such inquiry to the 
1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] within such time as may be specified in the order or, in the 
case of an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any of the members of a stock exchange, direct the 
governing body to make the inquiry and submit its report to the Central Government . 
(4) Where an inquiry in relation to the affairs of a recognised stock exchange or the affairs of any of 
its members in relation to the stock exchange has been undertaken under sub -section ( 3),— 
(a) every director, manager, secretary or other officer of such stock ex change;  
(b) every member of such stock exchange;  
(c) if the member of the stock exchange is a firm, every partner, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the firm; and  
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealing s in the course of business  with any 
of the persons mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c), whether directly or indirectly;  
shall be bound to produce before the authority making the inquiry all such books of account, and other 
documents in his custody or power relating to or having a  bearing on the subject -matter of such inquiry 
and also to furnish the authorities within such time as may be specified with any such statement or 
information relating thereto as may be required of him.  
7. Annual reports to be furnished to Central Government by stock exchanges .—Every 
recognised stock exchange shall furnish the Central Government with a copy of the annual report, and 
such annual report shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
3[7A. Power of recogni sed stock exchange to make rules restricting voting rights, etc. —(1) A 
recognised stock exchange may make rules or amend any rules made by it to provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely :— 
(a) the restriction of voting rights to members only in respect of any matt er placed before the 
stock exchange at any meeting;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule, for “Central Government ” (w.e.f. 30 -1-1992).  
2. Subs. by s. 33 and the Schedule, ibid., for “by the Central Government ” (w.e.f. 30 -1-1992).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -12-1959).  11 
 (b) the regulation of voting rights in respect of any matter placed before the stock exchange at any 
meeting so that each member may be entitled to have one vote only, irrespective of his share of the 
paid-up equity capital of the stock exchange;  
(c) the restriction on the right of a member to appoint another person as his proxy to attend and 
vote at a meeting of the stock e xchange;  
(d) such incidental , consequential and supplementary matters as may be necessary to give effect 
to any of the matters specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c). 
(2) No rules of a recognised stock exchange made or amended in relation to any matter refe rred to in 
clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall have effect until they have been approved by the Central 
Government and published by that Government in the Official Gazette and, in approving the rules so 
made or amended, the Central Government may m ake such modifications therein as it thinks fit, and on 
such publication, the rules as approved by the Central Government shall be deemed to have been validly 
made, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 19 56 (1 of 1956 ).] 
8. Power of Central Government to direct rules to be made or to make rules .—(1) Where, after 
consultation with the governing bodies of stock exchanges generally or with the governing body of any 
stock exchange in particular, the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to 
do, it may, by order in writing together with a statement of the reasons therefor, direct recognised stock 
exchanges generally or any recognised stock exchange in particular, as the case may be, to make any rules 
or to amend any rules already made in respect of all or any of the matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3 within a period of  1[two months ] from the date of the order .  
(2) If any recognised stock exchange fails or neglects to comply with any order made under                  
sub-section ( 1) within the period specified therein, the Central Government may make the rules for, or 
amend the rules made by, the recognised stock exchange, either in the form proposed in the order or with 
such modifications thereof as may be agreed to between the stock exch ange and the Central Go vernment . 
(3) Where in pursuance of this section any rules have been made or amended, the rules so made or 
amended shall be published in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette or Gazettes of the 
State or States in which the principal office or offices of the recognised stock exchange or exchanges is or 
are situate, and , on the publication thereof in the Gazette of India, the rules so made or amended shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contain ed in the Companies Act, 1956 (1  of 1956), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, have effect, as if they had been made or amended by the recognised 
stock exchange or stoc k exchanges, as the case may be . 
2[8A. Clearing corporation. —(1) A recognised stock exchange may, with the prior approval of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India, transfer the duties and functions of a clearing house to a clearing 
corporation, being a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956), for the purpose 
of— 
(a) the periodical se ttlement of contracts and differences thereunder;  
(b) the delivery of, an d payment for, securities ; 
(c) any other matter incidental to, or connected with, such transfer.  
(2) Every clearing corporation shall, for the purpose of transfer of the duties and functions of a 
clearing house to a clearing corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1), make bye -laws and submit the same 
to the Securities and Exchange Board of India for its approval.  
(3) The Securities and Exchange Board of India may, on being satisfied  that it is in the interest of the 
trade and also in the public interest to transfer the duties and functions of a clearing house to a clearing 
corporation, grant approval to the bye -laws submitted to it under sub -section ( 2) and approve the transfer 
of the duties and functions of a clearing house to a clearing corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 19, for “six months ” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  12 
 (4) The provisions of  sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 shall, as far as may be, apply to a clearing 
corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) as t hey apply in relation t o a recognised stock exchange. ] 
9. Power of recognised stock exchanges to make bye -laws.—(1) Any recogni sed stock exchange 
may, subject to the previous approval of the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ], make bye -laws 
for the regulation and control of contracts.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such bye -laws may 
provide for — 
(a) the opening and closing of markets and the regulation of the hours of trade;  
(b) a clearing house for  the periodical settlement of contracts and differences there under, the 
delivery of and payment for securities, the passing on of delivery orders and the regulation and 
maintenance of such clearing house;  
(c) the submission to the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] by the clearing house as soon 
as may be after each periodical settlement of all or any of the following particulars as the 1[Securities 
and Exchange Board of India ] may, from  time to time, require, namely: — 
(i) the total number of each category of security carried over from one settlement period to 
another;  
(ii) the total number of each category of security, contracts in respect of which have been 
squared up during the course of each settlement period;  
(iii) the total number of each  category of security actually delivered at each clearing;  
(d) the publication by the clearing house of all or any of the particulars submitted to the 
1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] under clause ( c) subject to the directions, if any, issued by 
the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] in this behalf;  
(e) the regulation or prohibition of blank transfers;  
(f) the number and classes of contracts in respect of which settlements shall be made or 
differences paid through the clearing house;  
(g) the regulation, or prohibition of  budlas  or carry -over facilities;  
(h) the fixing, altering or postponing of days for settlements;  
(i) the determination and declaration of market rates, including the opening, closing, highest and 
lowest rates for securities;  
(j) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts, including the prescription of margin 
requirements, if any, and conditions relating thereto, and the forms of contracts in writing;  
(k) the regulation of the entering into, making, performance, rescissio n and termination, of 
contracts, including contracts between members or between a member and his constituent or between 
a member and a person who is not a member, and the consequences of default or insolvency on the 
part of a seller or buyer or intermediar y, the consequences of a breach or omission by a seller or 
buyer, and the responsibility of members who are not parties to such contracts;  
(l) the regulation of  taravani  business including the placing of limitations thereon;  
(m) the listing of securities on the stock exchange, the inclusion of any security for the purpose of 
dealings and the suspension or withdrawal of any such securities, and the suspension or prohibition of 
trading in any specified securities;  
(n) the method and procedure for the settlem ent of claims or disputes, including settlement by 
arbitration;  
(o) the levy and recovery of fees, fines and penalties;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule, for “Central Government ” (w.e.f. 30 -1-1992).  13 
 (p) the regulation of the course of business between parties to contracts in any capacity;  
(q) the fixing of a scal e of brokerage and ot her charge s; 
(r) the making, comparing, settling and closing of bargains;  
(s) the emergencies in trade which may arise, whether as a result of pool or syndicated operations 
or cornering or otherwise, and the exercise of powers in such emergencies, includin g the power to fix 
maximum and minimum prices for securities;  
(t) the regulation of dealings by members for their own account;  
(u) the se paration of the functions of  jobbers and brokers;  
(v) the limitations on the volume of trade done by any individual me mber in exceptional 
circumstances;  
(w) the obligation of members to supply such information or explanation and to produce such 
documents relating to the business as the governing body may require.  
(3) The bye -laws made under this section may — 
(a) specify the bye -laws the contravention of which shall make a contract entered into otherwise 
than in accordance with the bye -laws void under sub -section ( 1) of section14;  
(b) provide that the contravention of any of the bye -laws shall render the member concerned 
liable to one or more of the  following punishments, namely: — 
(i) fine;  
(ii) expulsion from membership;  
(iii) suspension from membership for a specified period;  
(iv) any other penalty of a like nature not involving the payment of money.  
(4) Any bye -laws made  under this section shall be subject to such conditions in regard to previous 
publication as may be prescribed, and , when approved by the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ], 
shall be published in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette  of the State in which the 
principal office of the recogni sed stock exchange is situate, and shall have effect as from the date of its 
publication in the Gazette of India:  
Provided that if the 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] is satisfied in any c ase that in the 
interest of the trade or in the public interest any bye -laws should be made immediately, it may, by order in 
writing specifying the reasons therefor , dispense with the condition of previous publication.  
10. Power of 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] to make or am end bye -laws of 
recognised stock  exchanges .— (1) The 1[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] may, either on a 
request in writing received by it in this behalf from the governing body of a recognised stock exchange or 
on its own motion, if it is satisfied after consultation with the governing body of the stock exchange that it 
is necessary or expe dient so to do and after recording its reasons for so doing, make bye -laws for all or 
any of the matters specified in section 9 or amend any bye -laws made by such stock exchange under that 
section.  
(2) Where in pursuance of this section any bye -laws have b een made or amended, the bye-laws so 
made or amended shall be published in the Gazette of India and also in the Official Gazette of the State in 
which the principal office of the recognised stock exchange is situate, and on the publication thereof in 
the G azette of India, the bye -laws so made or amended shall have effect as if they had been made or 
amended by the recognised stock exchange concerned.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the governing body of a recognised 
stock exchan ge objects to any bye -laws made or amended under this section by the 1[Securities and 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule, for “Centra l Government ” (w.e.f. 30 -1-1992).  14 
 Exchange Board of India ] on its own motion, it may, within 1[two months ] of the publication thereof in 
the Gazette of India under sub -section ( 2), apply to the 2[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] for 
revision thereof, and the 2[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] may, after giving an opportunity to 
the governing body of the stock exchange to be heard in the matter, revise the bye -laws so made or 
amended, and where any bye -laws so made or amended are revised as a result of any action taken under 
this sub -section, the bye -laws so revised shall be published and shall become effective as provided in  
sub-section ( 2). 
(4) The making or the amendment or revision  of any bye -laws under this section shall in all cases be 
subject to the co ndition of previous publication:  
Provided that if the 2[Securities and Exchange Board of India ] is satisfied in any case that in the 
interest of the trade or in the public interest any bye -laws should be made, amended or revised 
immediately, it may, by order in writing specifying the reasons therefor , dispense with the condition of 
previous publication.  
11. Power of Central Government to supersede governing body of a recognised stock  
exchange .—(1) Without prejudice to any other powers vested in the Central Government under this Act, 
where the Central Government is of opinion that the governing body of any recognised stock exchange 
should be superseded, then, notwithstanding anything contained in a ny other law for the time being in 
force, the Central Government may serve on the governing body a written notice that the Central 
Government is considering the supersession of the governing body for the reasons specified in the notice 
and after giving an opportunity to the governing body to be heard in the matter it may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare the governing body of such stock exchange to be superseded, and may 
appoint any person or persons to exercise and perform all the powers an d duties of the governing body, 
and, where more persons than one are appointed, may appoint one of such persons to be the chairman and 
another to be the vice-chairman thereof.  
(2) On the publication of a notification in the Official Gazette under sub -section (1), the following 
consequences shall ensue, namely: — 
(a) the members of the governing body which has been superseded shall, as from the date of the 
notification of supersession, cease to hold office as such members;  
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub -section ( 1) may exercise and perform all the 
powers and duties of the governing body which has been superseded;  
(c) all such property of the recognised stock exchange as the person or persons appointed under            
sub-section  (1) may, by ord er in writing, specify in this behalf as being necessary for the purpose of 
enabling him or them to carry on the business of the stock exchange, shall vest in such person or 
persons.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or the rules or bye -laws of the 
recognised stock exchange the governing body of which is superseded under sub -section ( 1), the person 
or persons appointed under that sub -section shall hold office for such period as may be specified in the 
notification published u nder that sub -section , and the Central Government may from time to time, by like 
notification, vary such period.  
(4) The Central Government may at any time before the determination of the period of office of any 
person or persons appointed under this secti on call upon the recognised stock exchange to re -constitute 
the governing body in accordance with its rules and on such re -constitution all the property of the  
recognised  stock exchange which has vested in, or was in the possession of, the person or persons 
appointed under sub -section  (1) shall re -vest or vest, as the case may be, in the g overning body so          
re-constituted:  
Provided that until a governing body is so re-constituted, the person or persons appointed under            
sub-section  (1), shall continue to exercise and perform their powers and duties.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 20, for “six months ” (w,e,f, 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule, for “Central Government ” (w.e.f. 30 -1-1992).  15 
 12. Power to suspend business of recognised stock exchanges .—If in the opinion of the Central 
Government an emergency has risen and for the purpose of meeting the emergency the Central 
Government considers it expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, for reasons to 
be set out therein, direct a recognised stock exchange to suspend such of its business for such period not 
exceeding seven days and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, and, if, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, the interest of the trade or the public interest requires that the period 
should be extended, may, by like notification extend the said period from time to time:  
Provided that where the period of suspension is to be extended beyond the first period, no notification 
extending the period of suspension shall be issued unless the gove rning body of the 1[recognised stock 
exchange]  has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
2[12A. Power to issue directions .—If, after making or causing to be made an inquiry, the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India is satisfied it is necessary — 
(a) in the interest of investors, or orderly development of securities market;  
(b) to prevent the affairs of any recognised stock exchange or clearing corporation, or such other 
agency or person, providing trading or clearing or settlement facil ity in respect of securities, being 
conduct ed in a manner detrimental to the interests of investors or securities market; or  
(c) to secure the proper management of any such stock exchange or clearing corporation or 
agency or person, referred to in clause ( b), 
it may issue such directions,  — 
(i) to any stock exchange or clearing corporation or agency or person referred to in clause ( b) 
or any person or class of persons associated with the securities market; or  
(ii) to any company whose securities are listed or proposed to be listed in a recognised  stock 
exchange,  
as may be appropriate in the interests of investors in securities and the securities market.]  
3[Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that power to issue directions under 
this section shall include and always be deemed to have been included the power to direct any person, 
who made profit or averted loss by indulging in any transaction or activity in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or regulations made thereunder, to disgorge an amount equivalent to the wrongful 
gain made or loss averted by such contravention.]  
CONTRACTS AND OPTIONS IN SECURITIES  
13. Contracts in notified areas illegal in certain circumstances .—If the Central Government is 
satisfied, having regard to the nature or the volume of transactions in securities in any  4[State or States or 
area], that  it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, declare this section to 
apply to such  4[State or States or area], and thereupon every contract in such  4[State or States or area] 
which is entered into after the date of the notification otherwise than  5[between members of a recognised 
stock exchange or recogni sed stock exchanges] in such  4[State or States or area] or though or with such 
member shall be illegal.  
6[Provided that any contract entered into between members of two or more recognised stoc k 
exchanges in such  State or States or area, shall — 
(i) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be stipulated by the respective stock exchanges 
with prior approval of Securities and Exchange Board of India;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3  and the  Second  Schedu le, for “recogni sed association ” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
2 Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e..f 12 -10-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 24 (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 7, for “State or area ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “between members of a recognised stock exchange ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
6. The proviso ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  16 
 (ii) require prior permission from the res pective stock exchanges if so stipulated by the stock 
exchanges with prior approval of the Securiti es and Exchange Board of India. ] 
1[13A. Additional trading floor .—A stock exchange may establish additional trading floor with the 
prior approval of the Securities and Exchange Board of India in accordance with the terms and conditions 
stipulated by the said Board.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “additional trading floor ” means a trading ring or 
trading facility offered by a recognised stock exchange outside its area of operation to enable the investors 
to buy and sell securities through such trading floor under the regulatory framework of that stock 
exchange .] 
 14. Contra cts in notified areas to be void in certain circumstances .—(1) Any contract entered 
into in any State or area specified in the notification under section 13 which is in contravention of any of 
the bye -laws specified in that behalf under clause ( a) of  sub-section ( 3) of section 9 shall be void — 
(i) as respects the rights of any member of the recognised stock exchange who has entered into 
such contract in contravention of any such bye -law, and also  
(ii) as respects the rights of any other person who has knowingly participated in the transaction 
entailing such contravention.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed to affect the right of any person other than a member 
of the recognised stock exchange to enforce any such contract or to recover any sum under or in respect 
of such contract if such person had no knowledge that the transaction was in contravention of any of the 
bye-laws specified in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 9.  
15. Members may not act as principals in certain circumstance s.—No member of a recognised 
stock exchange shall in respect of any securities enter into any contract as a principal with any person 
other than a member of a recognised stock exchange, unless he has secured the consent or authority of 
such person and discloses in the note, memorandum or agreement of sale or purchase t hat he is acting as a 
principal:  
Provided that where the member has secured the consent or authority of such person otherwise than in 
writing he shall secure written confirmation by such p ersons of such consent or authority within three 
days from the date of the contract:  
Provided further that no such written consent or authority of such person shall be necessary for 
closing out any outstanding contract entered into by such person in accord ance with the bye -laws, if the 
member discloses in the note, memorandum or agreement of sale or purc hase in respect of such closing 
out that he is acting as a principal.  
16. Power to prohibit contracts in certain cases .—(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that 
it is necessary to prevent undesirable speculation s in specified securities in any State or area, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that no person in the State or area specified in the notification 
shall, save with the pe rmission of the Central Government, enter into any contract for the sale or purchase 
of any security specified in the notification except to the extent and in the manner, if any, specified 
therein.  
(2) All contracts in contravention of the provisions of su b-section ( 1) entered into after the date of the 
notification issued thereunder shall be illegal.  
17. Licensing of dealers in securities in certain areas .—(1) Subject to the provisions of                     
sub-section ( 3) and to the other provisions contained in this Act, no person shall carry on or purport to 
carry on, whether on his own behalf  or on behalf of  any other person, the business of dealing in securities 
in any State or area to which section 13 has not been d eclared to apply and to which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare this section to apply, except under the 
authority of a 2[licence granted by the Securities and Exchange Board of India]  in this behalf.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 21 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1992, s. 33 and the Schedule, for “licence granted b y the Central Government ” (w.e.f 30 -1-1992).  17 
 (2) No notifi cation under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued with respect to any State or area unless the 
Central Government is satisfied, having regard to the manner in which securities are being dealt with in 
such State or area, that it is desirable or expedient in the interest of the trade or in the public interest that 
such dealings should be regulated by a system of licensing.  
(3) The restrictions imposed by sub -section ( 1) in relation to dealing s in securities shall not apply to 
the doing of anything by or on behalf of a member of any recognised stock exchange.  
1[17A. Public issue and listing of securities referred to in sub -clause ( ie) of clause ( h) of               
section 2. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act or any other law for the time  
being in force, no securities of the nature referred to in sub -clause ( ie) of clause ( h) of section 2 shall be 
offered to the public or listed on any recognised stock exchange unless the issuer fulfils such eligibility 
criteria and complies with such othe r requirements as may be specified by regulations made by the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India.  
(2) Every issuer referred to in sub -clause ( ie) of clause ( h) of section 2 intending to offer the 
certificates or instruments referred therein to the publ ic shall make an application, before issuing the offer 
document to the public, to one or more recognised stock exchanges for permission for such certificates or 
instruments to be listed on the stock exchange or each such stock exchange.  
(3) Where the permi ssion applied for under sub -section ( 2) for listing has not been granted or refused 
by the recognised stock exchanges or any of them, the issuer shall forthwith repay all moneys, if any, 
received from applicants in pursuance of the offer document, and if a ny such money is not repaid within 
eight days after the issuer becomes liable to repay it, the issuer and every director or trustee thereof, as the 
case may be, who is in default shall, on and from the expiry of the eighth day, be jointly and severally 
liable to repay that money with interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum.  
Explanation .—In reckoning the eighth day after another day, any intervening day which is a public 
holiday under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881(26 of 1881), shall be dis regarded, and if the eighth 
day (as so reckoned) is itself such a public holiday, there shall for the said purposes be substituted the first 
day thereafter which is not a holiday.  
(4) All the provisions of this Act relating to listing of securities of a pu blic company on a recognised 
stock exchange shall, mutatis mutandis,  apply to the listing of the securities of the nature referred to in 
sub-clause ( ie) of clause ( h) of section 2 by the issuer, being a special purpose distinct entity.  
18. Exclusion of spot delivery contracts from sections  13, 14, 15 and 17 .—(1) Nothing contained 
in sections 13, 14,  15 and 17 shall apply to spot delivery contracts.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is of opinion 
that in the interest of the trade or in the public interest it is expedient to regulate and control the business 
of delaying in spot delivery contracts also in any State or area (whether section 13 has been declared to 
apply to th at State or area o r not), it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the 
provisions of section 17 shall also apply to such State or area in respect of spot delivery contracts 
generally or in respect of spot delivery contracts for the sale or purchase of s uch securities as may be 
specified in the notification, and may also specify the manner in which, and the extent to which, the 
provisions of that section shall so apply.  
2[18A. Contracts in derivative .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, contracts in derivative shall be legal a nd valid if such contracts are — 
(a) traded on a recognised stock exchange;  
(b) settled on the clearing house of the recognised  3[stock exchange; or] in accordance with the 
rules and bye -laws of such stock exchange.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 28 -5-2007).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 134, for “stock exchange  ,” (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  18 
 1[(c) between such parties and on such terms as the Central Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, specify. ] 
19. Stock exchanges other than recognised stock exchanges prohibited .—(1) No person shall, 
except with the permission of the Central Government, organise or assist in organising or be a member of 
any stock exchange (other t han a recognised stock exchange ) for the purpose of assisting in, entering into 
or performing any contracts in securities.  
(2) This section shall come into force in any State or area on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
20. [Prohibition of options in securities .] Omitted by the Securities Laws  (Amendment ) Act, 1995              
(9 of 1995), s. 22 ( w.e.f. 25-1-1995).   
2[21. Conditions for listing .—Where securities are listed on the application of any person in any 
recognised stock exchange, such person shall comply with the conditions of the listing agreement with 
that stock exchange .] 
3[21A. Delisting of securities .— (1) A recognised stock exchange may delist the securities, after  
recording the reasons therefo r, from any recognised stock exchange on any of the ground or grounds as 
may be prescribed under this Act:  
Provided that the securities of a company shall not be delisted unless the company concerned has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) A listed company or an aggrieved investor may file an appeal before the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal against the decision of the recognised stock exchange delisting the securities within fifteen days 
from the date of the decision of the recognised sto ck exchange delisting the securities and the provisions 
of sections 22B to 22E of this Act, shall apply, as far as may be, to such appeals:  
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the company was prevented 
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period 
not exceeding one month. ] 
4[22. Right of appeal against refusal of stock exchanges to list securities of public              
companies .—Where a recognised stock exchange acting in pursuance of any power given to it by its  
bye-laws, refuses to list the securities of any public company  5[or collective investment scheme], the 
company  5[or scheme] shall be entitled to be furnished with rea sons for such refusal, and may, — 
(a) within fifteen days from the date on which the reasons for such refusal are furnished to it, or  
(b) where the stock exchange has omitted or failed to dispose of, within the time specified in                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 73 of the Companies Act,1956 (1  of 1956) (hereafter in this section referred 
to as the “specified time ”), the applicat ion for permission for the shares or debentures to be dealt with 
on the stock exchange, within fifteen days from the date of expiry of  the specified time or within such 
further period, not exceeding one month, as the Central Government may, on sufficient c ause being 
shown, allow,  
appeal to the Central Government against such refusal, omission of failure, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the Central Government may, after giving the stock exchange  an opportunity of being heard, — 
(i) vary or set aside the decision of the stock exchange, or  
(ii) where the stock exchange has omitted or failed to dispose of the application within the 
specified time, grant or refuse the permission,  
                                                             
1.  Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 134  (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 23, for section 21 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 8 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 1974, s. 42, for section 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1975).  
5. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f.  22-2-2000) . 19 
 and where the Central Government sets aside the decision of the recognised stock  exchange or grants the 
permission, the stock exchange shall act in conformity with the orders of the Central Government: ] 
1[Provided  that no appeal shall be preferred against refusal, omission or failure, as the case may be, 
under this section on and afte r the commencement of the Securities Laws  (Second Amendment) Act, 1999  
(32 of 1999) .] 
2[22A. Right of appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal against refusal of stock exchange to list 
securities of public companies .—(1) Where a recognised stock exchange, acting in pursuance of any 
power given to it by its bye -laws, refuses to list the securities of any company, the company shall be 
entitled to be furnished with reas ons for such refusal, and may, — 
(a) within fifteen days from the date on which the reasons for such refusal are furnished to it, or  
(b) where the stock exchange has omitted or failed to dispose of, within the time specified in                 
sub-section ( 1A) of section 73 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (hereafter in this section 
referre d to as the “specified time ”), the application for permission for the shares or debentures to be 
dealt with on the stock exchange, within fifteen days from the date of expiry of the specified time or 
within such f urther period, not exceeding one month, as the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, on 
sufficient cause being shown, allow,  
appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter against such refusal, omission 
or failure, as the case may be, and thereupon the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the stock 
exchange, an opportunity of being heard ,— 
(i) vary or set aside the decision of the stock exchange; or  
(ii) where the stock exchange has omitted or failed to dispose of the application within the 
specified time, grant or refuse the permission,  
and where the Securities Appellate Tribunal sets aside  the decision of the recognised  stock exchange or 
grants the permission, the stock exchange shall act in conformity with the orders of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied b y such fee as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the Board and 
parties to the appeal.  
(4) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt wi th 
by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within 
six months from the date of receipt of the appeal.  
 22B. Procedure and powers of Securities Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Securities Appellate 
Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and 
of any rules, the Securities Appellate Tribu nal shall ha ve powers to regulate their own  procedure 
including the places at which they shall have their sittings.  
(2) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging their functions under 
this Act, the same powers as are vest ed in a civil court under th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                  
(5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the  examination of witnesses or documents;  
                                                             
1. The proviso ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  20 
 (e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it            
ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a jud icial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all 
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter  XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
22C. Right to legal representation .—The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or 
more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or any  of its 
officers to present his or its case before the Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of                   
sub-section ( 1) of s ection 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company secretary ” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980) and who has obtained 
a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost accountant as defined i n clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959 ) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil  or an att orney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
22D. Limitation .—The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, 
apply to an appeal made to a Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
22E. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which a Securities Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or 
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of 
any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power c onferred by or under this Act.  
22F. Appeal to High  Court. —Any person  aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Securities Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of 
fact or law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the High  Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant wa s prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further pe riod not exceeding 
sixty days. ] 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
23. Penalties .—(1) Any person who — 
(a) without reasonable excuse (the burden of proving which shall be on him) fails to comply with 
any requisition made under sub -section ( 4) of section 6; or  
(b) enters into any contract in contravention of any of the provisions contained in section 13 or 
section 16; or  
(c) contravenes the provisions contained in  1[section 17 or section 17A], or section 19;  or 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2007, s. 4, for “section 17 ” (w.e.f. 28 -5-2007).  21 
 1[(d) enters into any contract in derivative in contravention of section 18A or the rules made 
under section 30. ] 
(e) owns or keeps a place other than that of a recognised stock exchange which is  used for the 
purpose of entering into or performing any contracts in contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Act and knowingly permits such place to be used for such purposes; or  
(f) manages, controls, or assists in keeping any place other than tha t of a recognised stock 
exchange which is used for the purpose of entering into or performing any contracts in contravention 
of any of the provisions of this Act or at which contracts are recorded or adjusted or rights or 
liabilities arising out of contrac ts are adjusted, regulated or enforced in any manner whatsoever; or  
(g) not being a member of a recognised stock exchange or his agent authorised as such under the 
rules or bye -laws of such stock exchange or  not being a dealer in securitie s licensed under section 17 
wilfully represents to or induces any person to believe that contracts can be entered into or performed 
under this Act through him; or  
(h) not being a member of a recognised stock exchange or his agent authorised as such under the 
rules or bye -laws of such stock exchange or not being a dealer in securities licensed under section 17, 
canvasses, advertises or touts in any manner either for himself or on behalf of any other persons for 
any business connected with contracts in contravention of any of  the provisions of this Act; or  
(i) joins, gathers or assists in gathering at any place other than the place of business specified in 
the bye -laws of a recognised stock exchange any person or persons for making bids or offers or for 
entering into or perfor ming any contracts in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act;  
2[shall, without prejudice to any award of penalty by the Adjudicating Officer under this Act, on 
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years  or with fine, 
which may extend to twenty -five crore rupees or with both .] 
(2) Any person who enters into any contract in contravention of the provisions contained in section 15  
3[or who fails to comply with the provisions of  4[section 21 or section 21A] or with the orders of] or 
section 22  5[or with the orders of the Securities Appellate Tribunal] shall, on conviction, be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
6[23A. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc. —Any person, who is required under 
this Act  or any rules made thereunder, — 
(a) to furnish any information, document, books, returns or report to a recognised stock exchange, 
fails to furnish the same wit hin the time specified therefor  in the listing agreement o r conditions or 
bye-laws of the recognised stock exchange, shall be liable to a penalty  7[which shall not be less than 
one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure 
continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees] for each such failure;  
(b) to maintain books of account or records, as per the listing agreement or conditions, or               
bye-laws of a recognised stock exchange, fails to maintain the same, shall be liable to a 
penalty  7[which shall n ot be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for 
each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees] .] 
23B. Penalty for failure by any person to enter into an agreement with clients .—If any pers on, 
who is required under this Act or any bye -laws of a recognised stock exchange made thereunder, to enter 
into an agreement with his client, fails to enter into such an agreement, he shall be liable to a 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
2. Subs. by  Act 1 of 2005, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 24, for “or who fails to comply with the orders of the Securities and Exchange Board of India under 
section 21 ” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 10 , for “section 21 ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
5. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 6 (w.e.f. 16 -10-1999).  
6. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 25, for “of one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues or  one crore rupees, 
whichever is less ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  22 
 penalty  1[which shall not be less than one lakh ru pees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each 
day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees] for every such failure.  
23C. Penalty for failure to redress investors grievances .—If any stock broker or sub -broker or a  
company whose securities are listed or proposed to be listed in a recognised stock exchange, after having 
been called upon by the Securities and Exchange Board of India or a recognised stock exchange in 
writing, to redress the grievances of the investors,  fails to redress such grievances within the time 
stipulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India or a recognised stock exchange, he or it shall be 
liable to a penalty  2[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh  rupees 
for each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees].]  
23D. Penalty for failure to segregate securities or moneys of client or clients .—If any person, who 
is registered under section 12 of the Securities and Ex change Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) as a 
stock broker or sub -broker, fails to segregate securities or moneys of the client or clients or uses the 
securities or moneys of a client or clients for self or for any other client, he shall be  3[liable to  a penalty 
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which m ay extend to one crore rupees].  
23E. Penalty for failure to comply with listing conditions or delisting conditions or grounds .—If 
a company or any person managing collective investment sche me or mutual fund, fails to comply with the 
listing conditions or delisting conditions or grounds or commits a breach thereof, it or he shall be  4[liable 
to a penalty which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may exten d to twenty -five crore  
rupees] . 
23F. Penalty for excess dematerialisation or delivery of unlisted securities .—If any issuer 
dematerialises securities more than the issued securities of a company or delivers in the stock exchanges 
the securities which are not listed in the recognised st ock exchange or delivers securities where no trading 
permission has been given by the recognised stock exchange, he shall be  5[liable to a penalty which shall 
not be less than five lakh rupees but which may exten d to twenty -five crore rupees].  
23G. Penalty  for failure to furnish periodical returns, etc. —If a recognised stock exchange fails or 
neglects to furnish periodical returns to the Securities and Exchange Board of India or fails or neglects to 
make or amend its rules or bye -laws as directed by the Sec urities and Exchange Board of India or fails to 
comply with directions issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, such recognised stock 
exchange shall be  6[liable to a penalty which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may extend 
to twent y-five crore rupees].  
23H. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided .—Whoever fails to 
comply with any provision of this Act, the rules or articles or bye -laws or the regulations of the 
recognised stock exchange or directi ons issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India for which 
no separate penalty has been provided, shall be  7[liable to a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which m ay extend to one crore rupees].  
23-I. Power to adjudicate .—(1) For the purpose of adjudging under sections 23A, 23B, 23C, 23D, 
23E, 23F, 23G and 23H, the Securities and Exchange Board of India shall appoint any officer not below 
the rank of a Division Chief of the Securities and Exchange Board of India to be an adju dicating officer 
for holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner after giving any person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any penalty.  
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to s ummon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document, which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 26, for “of one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues or one crore rupee s, 
whichever is less ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “of one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues or one crore rupees, whichever is 
less” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 28,  ibid., for “liable to a penalty not exceeding one crore rupees ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty -five crore rupees ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for  “liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty -five crore rupees ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
6. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for “liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty -five crore rupees ” (w.ef. 8 -9-2014).  
7. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees ” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  23 
 the subject -matter of the  inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to 
comply with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub -section ( 1), he may impose such 
penalty as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of any of those sections.  
1[(3) The Board may call for and examine the record of any proceedings under this section and if it 
considers that the order passed by the adjudicating officer is erroneous to the extent it is not in the 
interests of the securities market, it may, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as it deems 
necessary, pass an order enhancing the quantum of penalty, if the circumstances of the case so justify:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the person concerned has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be applicable after an expiry of a 
period of three months from the date of the order passed by the adjudicating officer or disposal of the 
appeal unde r section 23L, whichever is earlier.]  
23J. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer .—While adjudging the quantum of 
penalty under section 23 -I, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors,  
namely: — 
(a) the amount  of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to an investor or group of inves tors as a result of the default ; 
(c) the re petitive nature of the default.  
 2[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the power of an  adjudicating officer to 
adjudge the quantum of penalty under sections 23A to 23C shall  be and shall always be deemed to have 
exercised under the provisions of this section. ] 
3[23JA. Settleme nt of adminis trative and civil proceedings. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, any person, against whom any proceedings have 
been initiated or may be initiated under section 12A or  section 23 -1, may file an  application in writing to 
the Board proposing for settlement of the proceedings initiated or to be initiated for the alleged defaults.  
(2) The Board may, after taking into consideration the nature, gravity and impact of defaults, agree to 
the proposal for  settlement, on payment of such sum by the defaulter or on such other terms as may be 
determined by the Board in accordance with the regulations made under the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 1992).  
(3) For the purposes of settlemen t under this section, the procedure as specified by the Board under 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 1992) shall apply.  
(4) No appeal shall lie under section 23L against any order passed by the Board or the adjudicating 
officer, as the case may be, under this section.]  
4[23JB. Recovery of amounts. —(1) If a person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer or fails to comply with a direction of disgorgement order issued under section 12A or fails to pay 
any fees d ue to the Board, the Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a statement in the 
specified form specifying the amount due from the person (such statement being hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as certificate) and shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified in the 
certificate by one or more o f the following modes, namely: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the person ’s movable property;  
(b) attachment of the person ’s bank accounts;  
(c) attachment and sale of the person ’s immovable property;  
(d) arrest of the person and his detention in prison;  
(e) appointing a receiver for the management of the person ’s movable and immovable properties,   
and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 220 to 227, 228A, 229, 232, the Second and Thir d 
Schedules to the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) 
                                                             
1.  Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 33 (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
2.  Ins. by Act 7 of 2017 , s. 138 (w.e.f. 31-3-2017). 
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 34 ( w.e.f. 20 -4-2007).  
4. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  24 
 Rules, 1962, as in force from time to time, in so far as may be, apply with necessary modifications as 
if the said provisions and the rules thereunder were th e provisions of this Act and referred to the 
amount due under this Act instead of to income -tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub -section, the persons movable or immovable property or 
monies held in bank accounts s hall include any property or monies held in bank accounts which has been 
transferred, directly or indirectly on or after the date when the amount specified in certificate had become 
due, by the person to his spouse or minor child or son ’s wife or sons mino r child, otherwise than for 
adequate consideration, and which is held by, or stands in the name of, any of the persons aforesaid; and 
so far as the movable or immovable property or monies held in bank accounts so transferred to his minor 
child or his son ’s minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the date of attainment of majority by such 
minor child or son ’s minor child, as the case may be, continue to be included in the person ’s movable or 
immovable property or monies held in bank accounts for recov ering any amount due from the person 
under this Act.  
Explanation 2.—Any reference under the provisions of the Second and Third Schedules to the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the 
assessee shall  be construed as a reference to the person specified in the certificate.  
Explanation 3.—Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the Second Schedule to the            
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961), shall be construed as a reference to appeal before  the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal under section 23L of this Act.  
(2) The Recovery Officer shall be empowered to seek the assistance of the local district 
administration while exercising the powers under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in any other law for the time being in force, the recovery of 
amounts by a Recovery Officer under sub -section ( 1), pursuant to non -compliance with any direction 
issued by the Board under section 12A, shall have precedence over any other claim against s uch person.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the expression "Recovery Officer" means any 
officer of the Board who may be authorised, by general or special order in writing to exercise the powers 
of a Recovery Officer.]  
23K. Crediting sum realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India .—All sums 
realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
23L. Appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved, by the order or decision 
of the recognised stock exchange or the adjudicating officer or any order made by the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India under section 4B  1[or sub -section ( 3) of section 23 -I], may prefer an appeal 
befor e the Securities Appellate Tribunal and the provisions of sections 22B, 22C, 22D and 22E of this 
Act, shall apply, as far as may be, to such appeals.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order or decision is received by the appellant and it shall be in such form and be 
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period  of forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, after giving 
the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of  being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(4) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the 
appeal and to the concerned adjudicating officer.  
(5) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with 
by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within 
six months from the  date of receipt of the appeal.  
23M . Offences .—(1) Without prejudice to any award of penalty by the adjudicating officer under this 
Act, if any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or of any rules or regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, for which no punishment is provided 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 36 (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  25 
 elsewhere in this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, 
or with fine, which may extend to twenty -five crore rupees or wi th both.  
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer or fails to comply with 
any of his directions or orders, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one month but which may extend  to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty -five 
crore rupees, or with both.  
23N. Composition of certain offences .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act, no t being an offence 
punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may either before or after 
the institution of any proceeding, be compounded by a Securities Appellate Tribunal or a court before 
whic h such proceedings are pendi ng. 
23-O. Power to grant immunity .—(1) The Central Government may, on recommendation by the 
Securities and Exchange Board  of India , if the Central Government is satisfied, that any person, who is 
alleged to have violated any of the provisions of this Act o r the rules or the regulations made thereunder, 
has made a full and true disclosure in respect of alleged violation, grant to such person, subject to such 
conditions as it may think fit to impose, immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act, o r the 
rules or the regulations made thereunder or also from the imposition of any penalty under this Act with 
respect to the alleged violation:  
Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Central Government in cases where the 
proceedings for the  prosecution for any such offence have been instituted  before the date of receipt of 
application for grant of such immunity:  
Provided  futher that the recommendation  of the Securities and Exchange Board of India under this 
sub-section shall not be binding u pon the Central Government.  
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub -section ( 1) may, at any time, be withdrawn by the 
Central Government, if it is satisfied that such person had, in the course of the proceedings, not complied 
with the condition on wh ich the immunity was granted or had given f alse evidence, and thereupon su ch 
person may be tried for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the contrave ntion and shall also 
become liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Act to which such person would have been 
liable, had not such immunity been granted. ] 
24. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time when the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of 
the offence, and shall be liable to be pro ceeded a gainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent  the commission of such offence . 
(2) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any gross negligence on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, shall also 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and  shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly . 
1[(3) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the provisions of 
section 22A .] 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, 
and 
2[(b) “director ”, in relation to — 
(i) a firm, me ans a partner in the firm;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17 -1-1986).  
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  26 
 (ii) any association of perso ns or a body of individuals, me ans any member controlling the 
affairs thereof.]  
25. Certain offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), any offence punishable under  1*** section 23 shall be deemed to 
be cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code.  
2[26. Cognizance of offences by courts .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act or any rules or regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, save on a complaint 
made by the Central Government or State Government or the  Securities and Exchange Board of India or a 
recognised stock exchange or by any person. ] 
3*    *   *   *  *] 
4[26A. Es tablishment of Special Courts. —(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of 
providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, by notification, establish or designate as many Special 
Courts as may be necessary.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single judge who shall be appointed by the Central Government 
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the judge to be 
appointed is working.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, holding the office of a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sess ions 
Judge, as the case may be.  
26B. Offen ces triable by Special Courts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), all offences under this Act committed prior to the date of 
commencement of the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2014  (27 of 2014)  or on or after the date of 
such commencement, shall be taken cognizance of and tried by the Special Court established for the area 
in which the offence is committed or where there are more Special Courts than one for such area, by such 
one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the High Court concerned.]  
26C. Appeal and revision. —The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the 
powers conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) on a 
High Co urt, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
26D. Application of Code to pro ceedings before Special Court. —(1) Save as otherwise provided 
in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) shall apply to the 
proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  
(2) The person conducting prosecution referred to in sub -section ( 1) should have been in practice as 
an advocate for not less than seven years or should have held a post, for a period of not less than seven 
years, under the Union or a State, requ iring special knowledge of law.  
26E. Transitional provisions. —Any offence committed under this Act, which is triable by a Special 
Court shall, until a Special Court is established, be taken cognizance of and tried by a Court of Session 
exercising jurisdiction over the area, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974):  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the powers of the High Court under  
section 407 of the Code to transfer any case or class of cases taken cognizance by a court of session under 
this secti on.] 
                                                             
1. The words , brackets and figure  “sub-section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 1 of 2005, s. 12 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 26 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).   
3. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 27 of 2014, s. 3 7 (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
4. Ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  27 
 MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Title to dividends .—(1) It shall be lawful for the holder of any security whose name appears on 
the books of the company issuing the said security to receive and retain any dividend declared by the 
company in respect thereof for any year, notwithstanding that the said security has already been 
transferred by him for consideration, unless the transferee who claims the dividend from the transferor has 
lodged the security and all other documents relating to the transfer which may be requ ired by the 
company with the company for being registered in his name within fifteen days of the date on which the 
dividend became due.  
Explanation .—The period specified in this section shall be extended — 
(i) in case of death of the transferee, by the actu al period taken by his legal representative to 
establish his claim to the dividend;  
(ii) in case of loss of  the transfer deed by theft or any other cause beyond the control of 
the  transferee, by the actual period taken for the replacement thereof; and  
(iii) in case of delay in the lodging of any security and other documents relating to the transfer 
due to causes connected with the post, by the actual period of the delay.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect — 
(a) the right of a company to pay any dividend which has become due to any person whose 
name is for the time being registered in the books of the company as the holder of the security in 
respect of which the dividend has become due; or  
(b) the right of the transferee of any security to enforce against the transferor or any other 
person his rights, if any, in relat ion to the transfer in any case  where the company has refused to 
register the transfer of the security in the name of the transferee.  
1[27A. Right to receive income from collective investment scheme .—(1) It shall be lawful for the 
holder of any securities, being units or other instruments issued by the collective investment scheme, 
whose name appears on the books of the collective investment scheme issuing the said securit y to receive 
and retain any income in respect of units or other instruments issued by the collective investment scheme 
declared by the collective investment scheme in respect thereof for any year, notwithstanding that the said 
security, being units or othe r instruments issued by the collective investment scheme, has already been 
transferred by  him for consideration, unless the transferee who claims the income in respect of units or 
other instruments issued by the collective investment scheme from the transf er or has lodged the security 
and all other documents relating to the transfer which may be required by the collective investment 
scheme with the collective investment scheme for being registered in  his name within fifteen days of the 
date on which the inc ome in respect of units or other instruments issued by the collective investment 
scheme became due.  
Explanation. —The period specified in this section shall be extended — 
(i) in case of death of the transferee, by the actual period taken by  his legal represe ntative to 
establish  his claim to the income in respect of units or other instrument issued by the collective 
investment scheme;  
(ii) in case of loss of the transfer deed by theft or any other cause beyond the control of the 
transferee, by the actual perio d taken for the replacement thereof; and  
(iii) in case of delay in the lodging of any security, being units or other instruments issued by the 
collective investment scheme, and other documents relating to the transfer due to causes connected 
with the post,  by the actual period of the delay.  
(2) Nothing contained in  sub-section ( 1) shall affect — 
(a) the right of a collective investment scheme to pay any income from units or other instruments 
issued by the collective investment scheme which has become due to any person whose name is for 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 8 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  28 
 the time being registered in the books of the collective investm ent scheme as the holder of the 
security being units or other instruments issued by the collective investment scheme in respect of 
which the income in respect of units or other instruments issued by the collective scheme has become 
due; or  
(b) the right of  transferee of any security, being units or other instruments issued by the collective 
investment scheme, to enforce against the transferor or any other person  his rights, if any, in relation 
to the transfer in any case where the company has refused to reg ister the transfer of the security being 
units or other instruments issued by the collective investment scheme in the name of the transferee.]  
1[27B. Right to receive income from mutual fund .—(1) It shall be lawful for the holder of any  
securities, being units or other instruments issued by any mutual fund, whose name appears on the books 
of the mutual fund issuing the said security to receive and retain any income in respect of units or other 
instruments issued by the mutual fund declar ed by the mutual fund in respect thereof for any year, 
notwithstanding that the said security, being units or other instruments issued by the mutual fund, has 
already been transferred by him for consideration, unless the transferee who claims the income in  respect 
of units or other instruments issued by the mutual fund from the transferor has lodged the security and all 
other documents relating to the transfer which may be required by the mutual fund with the mutual fund 
for being registered in his name wit hin fifteen days of the date on which the income in respect of units or 
other instruments issued by the mutual fund became due.  
Explanation .—The period specified in this section shall be extended — 
(i) in case of death of the transferee, by the actual perio d taken by his legal representative to 
establish his claim to the income in respect of units or other instrument issued by the mutual fund;  
(ii) in case of loss of the transfer deed by theft or any other cause beyond the control of transferee, 
by the actua l period taken for the replacement thereof;  and 
(iii) in case of delay in the lodging of any security, being units or other instruments issued by the 
mutual fund, and other documents relating to the transfer due to causes connected with the post, by 
the ac tual period of the delay.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect — 
(a) the right of a mutual fund to pay any income from units or other instruments issued by the 
mutual fund which has become due to any person , whose name is for the time being registered in the 
books of the mutual fund as the holder of the security being units or other instruments issued by the 
mutual fund in respect of which the income in respect of units or other instruments issued by the 
mutu al fund has become due; or  
(b) the right of  a transferee of any security, being units or other instruments issued by the mutual 
fund, to enforce against the transferor or any other person , his rights, if any, in relation to the transfer 
in any case where the mutual fund has refused to register the transfer of the security being units or 
other instruments issued by the mutual fund  in the name of the transferee. ] 
2[28. Act not to apply in certain cases .—(1) The provisions o f this Act shall not apply to — 
(a) the Government, the Reserve Bank of India, any local authority or any corporation set up by a 
special law or any person who has effected any transaction with or through the agency of any  such 
authority as is referred to in this clause;  
(b) any convertible bond or share warrant or any option or right in relation thereto, in so far as it 
entitles the person in whose favour any of the foregoing has been issued to obtain at his option from 
the company or other body corporate issuing the same or from any of its shareholders or duly 
appointed agents shares of the company or other body corporate , whether by conversion of the bond 
or warrant or otherwise, on the basis of the price agreed upon when  the same was issued.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1959, s. 3, for section 28 (w.e .f. 8-12-1959).  29 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is 
satisfied that in the interests of trade and commerce or the economic development of the country it is 
necessary or expedient so to do,  it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify any class of 
contracts as contracts to which this Act or any provision contained therein shall not apply, and also the 
conditions, limitations or restrictions, if any, subject to which it shall not so apply.]  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
whatsoever shall lie in any court against the governing body or any member, office bearer or servant of 
any recognised stock exchange or against any per son or persons appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 11 for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of 
any rules or bye -laws made thereunder.  
1[29A. Power to delegate .—The Central  Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the powers (except the power under section  30) exercisable by it under any provision 
of this Act shall, in relation to such matters and  subject  to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the orde r, be exercisable also by the Securities and Exchange  Board of India or the Reserve Bank of India 
constituted under section  3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,  1934  (2 of 1 934).] 
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for, — 
(a) the manner in which applications may be ma de, the particulars which they should contain and 
the levy of a fee in respect of such applications;  
(b) the manner in which any inquiry for the purpose of recogni sing any stock exchange may be 
made, the conditions which may be imposed for the grant of suc h recognition, including conditions as 
to the admission of members if the stock exchange concerned is to be the only recognised stock 
exchange in the area; and the form in which such recognition shall be granted;  
(c) the particulars which should be contain ed in the periodical returns and annual reports to be 
furnished to the Central Government;  
(d) the documents which should be maintained and preserved under section 6 and the periods for 
which they should be preserved;  
(e) the manner in which any inquiry by  the governing body of a stock exchange shall be made 
under section 6;  
(f) the manner in which the bye -laws to be made or amended under this Act shall before being so 
made or amended be published for criticism;  
(g) the manner in which applications may be made by dealers in securities for licen ces under 
section 17, the fee payable in respect thereof and the period of such licences, the condition s subject to 
which licences may be granted, including condition s relating to the forms which may be used in 
making  contracts, the documents to be maintained by licensed dealers and the furnishing of periodical 
information to such authority as may be specified and the revocation of licences for breach of 
conditions;  
2[(h) the requirements which shall be compli ed with — 
(A) by public companies for the purpose of getting their securities listed on any stock 
exchange;  
(B) by collective investment scheme for the purpose of getting their units listed on any stock 
exchange .] 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 9, for section 29A (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  30 
 1[(ha) the grounds on which the securities of a comp any may be delisted from any recognised 
stock exchange under sub -section ( 1) of section 21A;  
(hb) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 21A and the fees payable in respect of such appeal;  
(hc) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under 
section 22A and the fees payable in respect of such appeal;  
(hd) the manner of inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 23 -I; 
(he) the form in which a n appeal may be filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under 
section 23L and the fees pay able in respect of such appeal; ] 
(i) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
2[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may b e after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the s ession or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case ma y be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule. ] 
3[30A. Special provisions related to commodity deriv atives. —(1) Nothing contained in this Act 
shall apply to  non-transferable specific delivery contracts:  
Provided that no person shall organise or assist in organising or be a member of any association in 
any area to which the provisions of section 13 have been made applicable (other than a stock exchange) 
which provides facilities for the performance of any non -transferable specific delivery contract by any 
party thereto without having to make or receive actual delivery to or from the other party to the contract 
or to or from any other party named in the contract . 
(2) Where in respect of any area, the provisions of section 13 have been made applicable in relation to 
commodity derivatives for the sale or purchase of any goods or class of goods, the Central Government 
may, by notification, declare that in the said a rea or any part thereof as may be specified in the 
notification all or any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to transferable specific delivery 
contracts for the sale or purchase of the said goods or class of goods either generally, or to any cl ass of 
such contracts in particular.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is of the 
opinion that in the interest of the trade or in the public interest it is expedient to regulate and control non -
transferable  specific delivery contracts in any area, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall apply to such class or classes of non -transferable specific 
delivery contracts in such area in respect of  such goods or class of goods as may be specified in the 
notification, and may also specify the manner in which and the extent to which all or any of the said 
provisions shall so apply.]  
4[31. Power of Securities and Exchange Board of India to make regulat ions. —(1) Without 
prejudice to the provisions contained in section 30 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 
1992  (15 of 1992) , the Securit ies and Exchange Board of India  may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
5[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 15, for clause ( ha) (w.e.f.12 -10-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 13 5 (w.e.f. 14 -5-2015).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 16 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 2007, s. 5, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -5-2007).  31 
 (a) the manner, in wh ich at least fifty -one per cent.  of equity share capital of a recognised stock 
exchange is held within twelve months from the date of publication of th e order under sub -section ( 7) 
of section 4B by the public other than the shareholders having trading rights under sub -section ( 8) of 
that section;  
(b) the eligibility criteria and other requirements under section 17A.]  
1[(c) the terms determined by the Board for settlement of proceedings under sub -section ( 2) of         
section 23JA;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by regulations.]  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expi ry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effec t only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly done 
under that regulation. ] 
2[32. Validation of certain acts. —Any a ct or thing done or purporting to have been done under the 
principal Act, in respect of settlement of administrative and civil proceedings, shall, for all purposes, be 
deemed to be valid and effective as if the amendments made to the principal Act had been  in force at all 
material times.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 39 (w.e. f. 8-9-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
--------------------------The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE SLUM AREAS (IMPROVEMENT AND CLEARANCE) ACT, 1956  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
SLUM AREAS  
3. Declaration of slum areas.  
 
CHAPTER III  
SLUM IMPROVEMENT  
4. Power of competent authority to require improvement of buildings unfit for human habitation.  
5. Inforcement of notice requiring execution of works of improvement.  
6. Expenses of maint enance of works of improvement etc., to be recoverable from the occ upiers of 
buildings.  
6A. Restriction on building, etc., in slum areas.  
7. Power of competent authority to order demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation.  
8. Procedure to be followed where demolition order has been made.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
SLUM CLEARANCE AND RE-DEVELOPMENT  
9. Power to declare any slum area to be a clearance area.  
10. Slum clearance order.  
11. Power of competent authority to re -develop clearance area.  
 
CHAPTER V  
ACQUISITION OF LAND  
12. Power of Central Government to acquire land.  
13. Land acquired by Central Gove rnment to be made available to the competent authority.  
14. Right to receive compensation.  
15. Basis for determination of compensation.  
16. Apportionment of compensation.  
17. Payment of compensation or deposit of the same in court.  
18. Powers of competent authority in relatio n to determination of compensation, etc.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
PROTECTION OF TENANTS IN SLUM AREAS FROM EVICTION  
19. Proceedings for eviction of tenants not to be taken without permission of the competent authority.  
20. Appeals.  
20A. Restoration of possession of premises vacated by a tenant.  
20B. Rent of buildings in slum areas . 2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Chapter not to apply to eviction of tenants from certain buildings . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Powers of entry . 
23. Powers of inspection . 
24.  Power to enter land adjoining land where work is in progress . 
25. Breaking into buildings . 
26. Entry to be made in the day time . 
27. Owner's consent ordinarily to be obtained . 
28. Power of eviction to be exercised only by the competent authority . 
29. Power to remove offensiv e or dangerous trades from slum areas . 
30. Appeals . 
31. Service of notices, etc . 
32. Penalties . 
33. Order of demolition of buildings in certain cases . 
34. Jurisdiction of courts . 
35. Previous sanction of the competent authority or officer s authorised by it, for prosecution . 
36. Power  to delegate . 
37. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
37A. Bar of jurisdiction . 
38. Competent authority, etc., to be public servants . 
39. Act to over -ride other laws . 
40. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE SLUM AREAS (IMPROVEMENT AND CLEARANCE) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 96 OF 1956  
[29th December , 1956.]  
An Act to provide for the improvement and clearance of slum areas in certain Union territories 
and for the protection of tenan ts in such areas from eviction.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Repub lic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be  called the Slum Areas 
(Improveme nt and Clearance) Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to all Union territories except the Union territories of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands 
and the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands.  
(3) It shall come into force in a Union territory on such date1 as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different Union 
territories.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “Administrator”  means the Adm inistrator of a Union territory;  
(b) “building” includes any structure or erection or any part of a building as so defined but does 
not include plant or mac hinery comprised in a building;  
(c) “competent authority” means such officer or authority as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent authori ty for the purposes of this Act;  
 (d) “erection” in relation to a building includes extensi on, alteration or re -erection;  
2[(e) “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything att ached to the earth;  
(f) “occupier” includes ― 
(a) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the owner the rent or any 
portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable;  
(b) an owner in occupation of, or otherw ise using his land o r building;  
(c) a rent -free tenant of any land or building ; 
(d) a licensee in occupati on of any land or building; and  
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and occupation of any 
land or building;]  
(g) “owner” includes any person who is recei ving or is entitled to receive the rent of any building 
or land whether on his own account or on behalf of himself and others or as agent or trustee, or who 
would so receive the rent or be entitled to receive it if the buildin g or land w ere let to a tenant;  
(h) “prescribed” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act ; and  
                                                           
1. 8th February, 1957 in respect of the Union territory of Delhi, vide Notification No. S.R. O. 421 , dated 4th February, 1957, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st April, 1958 in respect of the Union territory of Tripura, vide Notifi cation No. S.R. O. 414, dated 31st March, 1958, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
Extended to Pondicherry Act 26 of 1968.  
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 2, for clauses ( e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  4 
 [(i) “slum clearance ” means the clearance of any slum area by the demolition and removal of 
buildings therefrom;  
1[(j) “work of improvement ” includes in relation to any building in a slum area the execution of 
any one or more o f the following works, namely: ― 
(i) necessary repairs;  
(ii) structural alterations ; 
(iii) provision of light points , water taps and bathing places ; 
(iv) construct ion of drains, open or covered;  
(v) provision of latrines, including conversion of dry lat rines into water -borne latrines ; 
(vi) provision of additional o r improved fixtures or fittings;  
(vii) ope ning up or paving of courtyards;  
(viii) removal of rubbish; and  
(ix) any other work including the demolition of any building or any part thereof which in the 
opinion of the competent authority is necessary for executing any of the works specified above.]  
CHAPTER II  
SLUM AREAS  
3. Declaration of slum areas .―(1) Where the  competent authority upon report from any of its 
officers or other information in its possession is satisfied as respects any area t hat the buildings in that 
area― 
(a) are in any respect  unfit for human habitation; or  
(b) are by reason of dilapidation, ove rcrowding, faulty arrangement and design of such buildings, 
narrowness or faulty arrangement of streets, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or any 
combination of these factors, are detriment al to safety, health or morals,  
it may, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, decla re such area to be a slum area.  
(2) In determining whether a buil ding is unfit for human habita tion for the purposes of this Act, 
regard shall be had to its condition in respect of the fol lowing matters, that is to say ― 
(a) repair;  
(b) stability;  
(c) freedom from damp;  
(d) natural light and air;  
(e) water supply;  
(f) drai nage and sanitary conveniences;  
(g) facilities for storage, preparation and cooking of food and f or the disposal of waste water;  
and the building shall  be deemed to be unfit as aforesaid if and only if it is so far defective in one or more 
of the said matters that it is not reasonably suitable fo r occupation in that condition.  
CHAPTER II I 
SLUM IMPROVEMENT  
4. Power of competent authority to require improvement of buildi ngs unfit for human 
habitation .―(1) Where the competent authority upon report from any of its officers or other information 
in its possession is satisfied that any building in a slum area is in any respect unfit for human habitation, i t 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  5 
 may, unless in its opinion the building is not capable at a reasonable expense of being rendered so fit, 
serve upon the owner of the building a notice requiring him within such time not being less than thirty 
days as may be specified in the notice to exe cute the works of improvement specified therein and stating 
that in the opinion of the authority those works will render the building fit for human habitation:  
1[Provided that where the owner of the building is different from the owner of the land on which  the 
building stands and the works of improvement required to be executed relate to provision of water taps, 
bathing places construction of drains, open or covered, as the case may be, provision of water -borne 
latrines or removal of rubbish and such works are to be executed outside the building, the notice shall be 
served upon the owner of the land.]  
(2) In addition to serving a notice under this section on the owner, the competent authority may serve 
a copy of the notice on any other person havin g an inter est in the building 1[or the land on which the 
building stands] whether as lessee, mortgagee or ot herwise.  
(3) In determining, for the purposes of this Act, whether a building can be rendered fit for human 
habitation at a reasonable expense, regard shall be had to the estimated cost of the works necessary to 
render it so fit and the value which it is estimated that the building will hav e when the works are 
completed.  
5. Inforcement of notice requiring exe cution of works of improvement .―(1) If a notice unde r 
section 4 requiring the owne r of the building 2[or of the land on which the building stands, as the case 
may be,] to execute works of improvement is not complied with, then, after the expiration of the time 
specified in the notice the competent authority  may itself do the works required to be done by the notice.  
(2) All expenses incurred by the competent authority under this section, together with interest, at such 
rate as the Central Government may by order fix, from the date when a demand for the expens es is made 
until payment, may be recov ered by the competent authority from the owner of the building 2[or of the 
land on which the building stands, as the case may b e,] as arrears of land revenue:  
Provided th at if the owner proves that he ― 
(a) is receiving the rent merely as agent or trustee for some  other person; and  
(b) has not in his hands on behalf of that other person sufficient money to satisfy the  whole 
demand of the authority,  his liability shall be limited to the total amount of the money  which he  has in 
his hands as aforesaid.  
3*    *    *    *    *  
6. Expenses of maintenance of works of improvement, etc., to be recoverable f rom the occupiers 
of buildings .―Where works of improvement have been executed in relation to any building in a slum 
area in pursuance of the provisions of sections 4 and 5, the expenses incurred by the competent authority 
or, as the case may be, any local authority in connection with the maintenance of such works of 
improvement or the enjoyment of amenities and con veniences rendered possible by such works shall be 
recoverable from the occupier or occupiers of the build ing as arrears of land revenue.  
4[6A. Restriction on  building, etc., in slum areas .―(1) The competent authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that no person shall erect any building in a slum area except 
with the previous permission in writ ing of the competent authority.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of two 
years from the date thereof except as respects things done or omitted  to be done before such cesser.  
(3) Every person desiring to obtain the permission referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall make an 
applicat ion in writing to the competent authority in such form an d containing such information in respect 
of the erection of the building to which the applicatio n relates as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Omitted by, s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  6 
 (4) On receipt of such application, the competent authority, after making such inquiry as it considers 
necessar y, shall, by orde r in writing, ― 
(a) either grant the permission subject to such terms and conditions, if any, as ma y be specified in 
the order; or  
(b) refuse to grant such permission:  
Provided that before making an order refusing such p ermission, the applicant shall be giv en a 
reasonable opportunity to show cause why the pe rmission should not be refused.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to ― 
(a) any works of improvement required to be executed by a notice under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4 or in pursuance  of an undertaking given und er sub -section ( 2) of section 7; or  
(b) the erection of any building in any area in respect of which a slum clearance order has been 
made under s ection 10.]  
7. Power of competent authority to order demolit ion of buildi ngs unfit for human 
habitation .―Where a competent authority upon a report from any of its officers or other information in 
its possession is satisfied that any building within a slum area is unfit for human habitation and is not 
capable at a reasonable expense of being rendered so fit, it shall serve upon the owner of the building, and 
upon any other person having an interest in the building, whether as lessee, mortgagee or otherwise, a 
notice to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice as to w hy an order of demolition 
of the building should not be made.  
(2) If any of the persons upon whom a notice has been served under sub -section ( 1), appears in 
pursuance thereof before the competent authority and gives an undertaking to the authority that suc h 
person shall within a period specified by the authority execute such works of improvement in relation to 
the building as will in the opinion of the authority render the building fit for human habitation, or that it 
shall not be used for human habitation until the authority on being satisfied that it has been rendered fit 
for that purpose cancels the undertaking, the authority shall not make any order  of demolition of the 
building.  
(3) If no such undertaking as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) is given, or if in a case where any such 
undertaking has been given any work of improvement to which the undertaking relates is not carried out 
within the specified period or the building is at any time used in contravention of the terms of the 
undertaking, the compete nt authority shall forth with make an order of demolition of the building 
requiring that the building shall be vacated within a period to be specified in the order not being less than 
thirty days from the date of the order, and that it shall be demolished w ithin six weeks after the  expiration 
of that period.  
8. Procedure to be followed where demolition order has been made .―(1) Where an order for 
demolition of a building under section 7 has been made the owner of the building or any other person 
having an interest therein shall demolish that building within the time speci fied in that behalf by the 
order; and if the building is no t demolished within that time the competent authority shall enter and 
demolish the building and sell the materials thereof.  
(2) Any expenses incurred by the  competent authority under sub -section ( 1), if not satisfied out of the 
proceeds of sale of material s of the building shall be recoverable from the owner of the building or any 
other person having an interest ther ein as arrears of land revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
SLUM CLEARANCE AND RE -DEVELOPMENT  
9. Power to declare any sl um area to be a clearance area .―(1) Where the competent authority 
upon a report from any of its officers or other information in its possession is satisfied as respects any 
slum area that the most satisfactory method of dealing with the conditions in the area is the demolition of 
all the bui ldings in the area, the authority shall by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare the area 7 
 to be a clearance area, that is to say, an area to be cleared of all buildings in accordance w ith the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided that any building i n the area which is not unfit for human habitation or dangerous or 
injurious to health may be excluded from the declaration if the au thority considers it necessary.  
(2) The competent authority shal l forthwith transmit to the Ad ministrator a copy of the dec laration 
under this section together with a statement of the number of persons who on a date specified in the 
statement were occupying buildings c omprised in the clearance area.  
10. Slum clearance order .―(1) As soon as may be after the competent authority has declared any 
slum area to be a clearance area, it shall make a slum clearance order in relation to that area ordering the 
demolition of each of the buildings specified therein and requiring each such bu ilding to be vacated 
within such time as may be specified in the order and submit the order to the Administrator for 
confirmation.  
(2) The Administrator may ei ther confirm the order in to or subject to such variations as he considers 
necessary or reject th e order.  
(3) If the Administrator confirms  the order, the order shall be come operative from  the date of such 
confirmation.  
(4) When a slum clearance order has become operative, the owners of buildings to which the order 
applies shall demolish the buildings  before the expiration of six weeks from the date on which the 
buildings are required by the order to be vacated or before the expiration of such longer period as in the 
circumstances of the case the competent  authority may deem reasonable.  
(5) If the buildings are not demolished before the expiration of the period mentioned in sub -section 
(4) the competent authority shall enter and demolish the buildings and sell the materials thereof.  
(6) Any expenses incurred by t he competent authority in de molishing any building shall, if not 
satisfied out of the proceeds of sale of materials thereof, be recoverable by the competent author ity as 
arrears of land revenue.  
1[(7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, where a slum clearance order has become oper ative, the 
owner of the land to which the order applies may re -develop the land in accordance with plans approved 
by the competent authority and subject to such restrictions and conditions (including a condition with 
regard to the time within which the re -development shall be completed), if any, as that authority may 
think fit to impose : 
Provided that an owner who is agg rieved by a restriction or con dition so imposed on the user of his 
land or by a subsequent refusal of the competent authority to cancel or modify any such restriction or 
condition may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the Administrator and the Administrator 
shall make such order in the matter as he thinks proper an d his decision shall be final.]  
(8) No person shall commence or  cause to be commenced any work in contravention of a plan 
approved or a restriction or condition imposed under sub -section (7). 
2[11. Power of competent authorit y to re -develop clearance area .―(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 7) of section 10, the competent authority may at any time after the land has been 
cleared of the buildings in accordance with a slum clearance order but before the work of re -development 
of that land has been commenced by the owner, by order, determine to re -develop the land if that 
authority is satisfied that it is necessary i n the public interest to do so.  
(2) Where land has been cleared of the buildings in accordance with a slum clearance order, the 
competent authority, if it is satisfied that the land has bee n, or is being, re -developed by the owner thereof 
in contravention of plans approved by the authority or any restrictions or conditions imposed under  
sub-section ( 7) of section 10 or has not been re -developed within the time, if any, specified under such 
conditions , may, by order, de termine to re -develop the land:  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 6, for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f.  27-2-1965).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  8 
 Provided that before passing such order, the owner shall be given a reasonable opportunity to show 
cause why t he order should not be passed.]  
CHAPTER V  
ACQUISITION OF LAND  
12. Power of Cent ral Government to acquire land .―(1) Where on any representation from the 
competent authority it appears to the Central Government that, in order to enable the authority to execute 
any work of improvement in relation to any bu ilding in a slum area or to re -develop any clearance area, it 
is necessary that land within, adjoining or surrounded by any such area should be acquired, the Central 
Government may acquire the land by publishing in the Official Gazette a notice to the effect that the 
Central Government has decided to acquire the lan d in pursuance of this section:  
Provided that, before publishing s uch notice, the Central Govern ment may call upon the owner of, or 
any other person who, in the opinion of the Central Government, may be interested in, such lan d to show 
cause why it should not be acquired ; and after considering the cause, if any , shown by the owner or any 
other person interested in the land, the Central Government may pass such o rder as it deems fit.  
(2) When a notice as aforesaid is published i n the Official Gazette, the land shall, on and from the 
date on which the notice is so published, vest  absolutely in the Central Governm ent free from all 
encumbrances.  
13. Land acquired by Central Government to be made availa ble to the competent 
authority .―Where any land in a slum area or clearance area has been acquired under this Act the Central 
Government shall make the land available to the competent authority for the purpose of executing any 
work of improvement or carrying out any order of demolition o r for the purpose of re -development:  
1[Provided that where on any representation from the competent authority, the Central Government is 
satisfied that any such land or any portion thereof is unsuitable for the purposes mentioned in this section, 
the Centr al Government may use the land or allow it to be used for such other public purpose or purposes 
as it may deem fit. ] 
14. Right to receive compensation .―Every person having any interest in any land acquired under 
this Act shall be entitled to receive from t he Central Government compensation as provided hereafter in 
this Act.  
15. Basis for  determination of compensation .―(1) The amount payable as compensation in respect 
of any land acquired under this Act shall be an amount equal to sixty times the net average  monthly 
income actually derived from such land during the period of five consecutive years immediately 
preceding the date of publication of the no tice referred to in section 12.  
(2) The net average monthly income referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be ca lculated in the manner 
and in accordance with the prin ciples set out in the Sched ule. 
(3) The competent authority shall, after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, determine in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) the net average month ly income actually der ived from 
the land and publish a notice in the Official Gazette specifying the amount so determined and calling 
upon the owner of the land and every person interested therein to intimate to it before a date specified in 
the notice whether such owner or person agrees to the amount so det ermined and if he does not so agree, 
what amount he claims to be the net average monthly income actually derived from the land.  
(4) Any person who does not agree to the amount of the net average monthly income determined by 
the competent authority under su b-section ( 3) and claims a sum in excess of that amount may prefer an 
appeal to the Administrator within thirty days from the date specified in the notice referred to in that  
sub-section.  
(5) On appeal the Administrator shall, after hearing the appel lant, determine the, net average monthly 
income and his determination shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 43 of 1964, s. 8 ( w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  9 
 (6) Where there is any building on the land in respect of which the net average monthly income has 
been determined, no separate  compensation shall be pai d in respect of such building:  
Provided that where the owner of the land and the owner of the building on such land are different, 
the competent authority shall apportion the amount of compensation between the owner of the land and 
the owner of the building 1[in the same proportion as the market price of the land bears to the market price 
of the building o n the date of the acquisition].  
2*    *    *    *    *  
16. Apportionment of compensation .―(1) Where several persons claim to be  interested in the 
amount of compensation determined under section 15, the competent authority shall determine the 
persons who in its opinion are entitled to receive compensation and the amount payable to each of them.  
(2) If any dispute arises as to the apportionment of compensation or any part thereof, or as to the 
persons to whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authority may refer the dispute to 
the decision of the Administrator ; and the Administrator in deciding any such dispute shall follow, as far 
as may be, the provisions of Part III of  the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
17. Payment of compensation o r deposit of the same in court .―(1) After the amount of 
compensation has been determined, the competent authority shall o n behalf of the Central Government 
tender payment of, and pay, the compensation t o the persons entitled thereto.  
(2) If the persons entitled to compensation do not consent to receive it, or if there be any dispute as to 
the title to receive com pensation or  as to the apportionment of it, the competent authority shall deposit the 
amount of the compensation in the court of the District Judge and that court shall deal with the amount so 
deposited in the manner laid down in sections 32 and 33 of t he Land Acquisi tion Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
18. Powers of competent authority in relation to determi nation of compensation, etc .―(1) The 
competent authority may, for the purposes of determining the amount of compensation or apportionment 
thereof, require, by order, any person to furni sh such information in his pos session as  may be specified in 
the order.  
(2) The competent authority shall, while holding inquiry under section 15, have all the powers of a 
civil court while trying a suit under th e Code of Civil Procedure, 19 08 (5 of 1908), in respect of t he 
following matters, namely: ― 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) rece ption of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public r ecord from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for ex amination of witnesses.  
CHAPTER VI  
PROTECTION OF TENA NTS IN SLUM AREAS FROM EVICTION  
3[19. Proceedings for eviction of tenants not to be taken without permission  of the competent 
authority .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no 
person shall, except with the previous permission in writing of the competent  authority ,― 
(a) institute, after the commencement of the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) 
Amendment Act, 1964, any suit or proceeding for obtaining any decree or order for the eviction of a 
tenant from any building or land in a slum area; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 9, for  “in such proportion  as he considers reasonable” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Second proviso omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 19 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  10 
 (b) where any decree o r order is obtained in any suit or proceeding instituted before such 
commencement for the eviction of a tenant from any building or land in such area , execute such 
decree or order.  
(2) Every person desiring to obtain the permission referred to in sub -section (1) shall make an 
application in writing to the competent authority in such form and containing such pa rticulars as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of such application, the competent authority, after giving an opportunity to the parties 
of being heard  and after making such summary inquiry into the circumstances of th e case as it thinks fit, 
shall by order in writing, either grant or r efuse to grant such permission.  
(4) In granting or refusing to grant the permission under sub -section ( 3), the competent  authority shall 
take into account  the following factors, namely: ― 
(a) whether alternative accommodation within the means of the tenant would be avail able to him 
if he were evicted;  
(b) whether the eviction is in the interest of improvement and clearance o f the slum areas;  
(c) such other factors , if any, as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where the competent authori ty refuses to grant the permis sion, it shall record a brief statement of 
the reasons for such refusal and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant.]  
1[20. Appeals .―Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent authority refusing to grant the 
permission referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6A or referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 19 may, 
within such time as may be prescribed, prefer an app eal to the Administrator and the Administrator may, 
after hearing the appellant, decide such appeal an d his decision shall be final.]  
2[20A. Restoration of possession o f premises vacated by a tenant .―(1) Where a tenant in 
occupation of any building in a slum area vacates any building or is evicted therefrom on the ground that 
it was required for the purpose of executing any work of improvement or for the purpose of re -election of 
the building, the tenant may, with in such time as may be prescribed, file a declaration with the competent 
authority that he desires to be replaced in occupation of the building after the completion of the work of 
improvement or re -erection of th e building, as the case may be.  
(2) On receipt of such declaration, the competent auth ority,  shall by order require the owner of the 
building to furnish to it, within such time as may be prescribed, the plans of the work of improvement or 
re-erection of the building and estimates of the cost thereof and such other particulars as may be 
necessary and shall, on the basis of such plans and estimates and particulars, if any, furnished and having 
regard to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 20B and after holding such inquiry as it may think 
fit, provisionally determine the rent that would be payable by the tenant if he were t o be replaced in 
occupation of the building in pursuance of the declaration made by him under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) The rent provisionally determined under sub -section ( 2) shall be communicated in the prescribed 
manner to the tenant and the owner.  
(4) If the tenant after the rece ipt of such communication inti mates in writing to the competent 
authority within such time as may be prescribed that when he is replaced in o ccupation of the building in 
pursuance of the de claration made by him under sub -section ( 1), he would pay to the owner until the rent 
is finally determined under section 20B the rent provisionally determined under sub -section ( 2), the 
competent authority shall direct the owner to place the tenant in occ upation of the building after the 
completion of the work of improvement or re -erection of the building, as the case may be, and the owner 
shall be bound  to comply with such direction.  
20B. Rent of buildings in slu m areas .―(1) Where any building in a slum area is let to a tenant after 
the execution of any work of improvement or after it has been re -erected, the rent of the building shall be 
determined in accordance with the prov isions of this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 11, for section 20 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  11 
 (2) Where any such building is let to a tenant other tha n a tenant who is placed in possession of the 
building in pursuance of a direction issued under sub -section ( 4) of section 20A, the tenant shal l be liable 
to pay to the owner ― 
(a) if there is a general law relating to the control of rents in force in the a rea in which the 
building is si tuated and applicable to that building, the rent determined in accordance w ith the 
provisions of that law;  
(b) if there is no such law in force in such area, such rent as may be agreed upon be tween the 
owner and the tenant.  
(3) Where any such building is let to a tenant in pursuance of a direction issued under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 20A, the tenant shall, notwithstanding any law relating to the control of rents in force in the 
area be liable to pay to the owner ― 
(a) if any work of improvement has been executed in relation to the building, an annual rent of a 
sum equivalent to the aggregate of the following amounts, namely: ― 
(i) the annual rent the tenant was paying immediately before he vacated the building for the 
purpose of execut ion of the work of improvement;  
(ii) six per cent. of the cost of the work of improvement; and  
(iii) six per cent . of a sum equivalent to the compensation payable in respect of any land 
which may have been acquired for the purpose of effecting such improvement as if such land 
were acquired under section 12 on the date of the commencement of the work of improvement;  
(b) if the building has been re -erected, an annual rent of a sum equivalent to four per cent. of the 
aggregate cost of reconstruction of the building and the cost of the land on wh ich the building is  
re-erected.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this clause, the cost of the land shall be deemed to be a sum 
equivalent to the compensation payable in respect of the land if it were acquired under section 12 on 
the date of commencement of the reconstruction of the building.  
(4) The rent payable by a tenant in respect of any building under sub -section ( 3) shall, on an 
application made by the tenant or the owner, be determined by the authority referred to in sub -section ( 5): 
Provided that an application for determination of such rent b y the owner or the tenant shall not, 
except for sufficient cause, be en tertained by such authority after the expiry of ninety days from the 
completion of the work of improvement or re -erection of th e building, as the case may be.  
(5) The authority to which  the application referred to in sub -section (4) shall be made, shall be ― 
(a) where there is a gener al law relating to the control of rents in force in the area in which the 
building is situate, the authority to whom applications may be made for fixing of rents of  buildings 
situate in that area ; and for the purpose of determining the rent under this section that authority may 
exercise all or any of the powers it  has under the said general law ; and the provisions of such law 
including provisions relating to appeals shall apply accordingly;  
(b) if there is no such law in force in that area, such authority as may be specified by rules made 
in this behalf by the Central Government and such rules may provide the procedure that will be 
followed by that authority i n determining the rent and also for appeals against the decision of such 
authority.  
(6) Where the rent is finally determined under this section, then the amount of rent paid by the tenant 
shall be adjusted against the rent so finally determined and if the amount so paid falls short of, or is in 
excess of, the rent finally determined, the tenant shall pay the deficiency, or be entitled to a r efund, as the 
case may be.]  12 
 21. Chapter not to apply to eviction of tenants from certain buildings .―Nothing in this Chapter 
shall a pply to or in relation to the 1[eviction under any law] of a tenant from any building in a slum area  
belonging to the Government, 2[the Delhi Development Aut hority] or any local authority.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Powers of entry .―It shall be lawful for any person authorised by the competent authority in this 
behalf to enter into or upon any building or land in a slum area with or without assistants or workmen in 
order to make any inquiry, inspection, measurement, valuation or survey, or  to execute any work which is 
authorised by or under this Act or which it is necessary to execute for any of the purposes or in pursuance 
of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder . 
23. Powers of inspection .―(1) The competent authority may, by general or speci al order, authorise 
any person ― 
(a) to inspect any drain, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel in or on any building or 
land in a slum area, and in his discretion to cause the ground to be opened for  the purpose of 
preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the drain, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer o r 
channel, as the case may be;  
(b) to examine works under construction in the slum area, to take levels or to remove, test, 
exam ine, replace  or read any meter.  
(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of the ground is found to be necessary for the prevention or  
removal of a nuisance, the ex penses thereby incurred shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the land or 
building, but if it is found  that no nuisance exists or but for such opening would have arisen, the ground 
or portion of any building, drain, or other work opened, injured or removed for the purpose of such 
inspection shall be filled in, reinstated , or made good, as the case may be, by the competent authority.  
24. Power to enter land adjoining land  where work is in progress .―(1) Any person authorised by 
the competent authority in this behalf may, with or without assi stants or workmen, enter on any land 
within fifty yards of any work authorised by or under this Act for the purpose of depositing thereon any 
soil, gravel, stone or other materials, or for obtaining access to such work or for any other pur poses 
connected wi th the carrying on of the same.  
(2) The person so authorised shall, before entering on any land under sub -section ( 1), state the 
purpos e thereof, and shall, if so re quired by the occupier, or owner, fence off so much of the land as ma y 
be required for such purpose.  
(3) The person so authorised shal l, in exercising any power con ferred by this section, do as little 
damage, as may be, and compensa tion shall be payable by the competent authority to the owner or 
occupier of such land or to both for any such damage whether permanent or temp orary.  
25. Breaking into buildings .―It shall be lawful for any person authorised by the competent 
authority in this behalf to make any entry into any place, to open or cause to be opened a ny door, gate or 
other barrier ― 
(a) if he considers the opening ther eof necessar y for the purpose of such entry ; and  
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent, or being present refuses to open such door, gate or barrier.  
26. En try to be made in the day time .―No entry authorised  by or under this Act shall be made 
except between th e hours of sunrise and sunset.  
27. Owner's con sent ordinarily to be obtained .―3[Save as provided in this Act, no building or 
land] shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no occupier, of the owner thereof, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 13, for “execution of any decree or order under any law for the eviction” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for “the Delhi Improvement Trust” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 14, for “No building or land” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  13 
 and no such entry shall be made without giving the said occupier or owner, as the case may be, not less 
than twenty four hours ’ written notice of th e intention to make such entry:  
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be inspected is a shed for cattle or a 
latrine, urinal or a work und er construction.  
28. Power of eviction to be exercised o nly by the competent authority .―Where the competent 
authority is satisfied either upon a representation fr om the owner of a building or upon other information 
in its possession that the occupants of the building have not vacated it in pursuance of any notice, order or 
direction issued or given by the authority, the authority shall, by order, direct the evictio n of the occupants 
from the bui lding in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the order 1[and for the 
purpose of such eviction may use or cause to be u sed such force as may be necessary]:  
Provided that before making any order under this s ection the competent authority shall give a 
reaso nable opportunity to the occu pants of the building to show cause why they s hould not be evicted 
therefrom.  
29. Power to remove offensive or da ngerous trades from slum areas .―The competent authority 
may, by order in writing, direct any person carrying on any dangerous or offensive trade in a slum area to 
remove the trade from that area within such time as  may be specified in the order:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be made unless the person carrying on the trade has 
been afforded a reasonable oppor tunity of showing cause as to wh y the order should not be made.  
30. Appeals .―(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any person aggrieved by any 
notice, order or direction issued or given by the competent authority may appeal to the Administrator 
within a period of thirty days from the date of issue of s uch notice, order or direction.  
(2) Every appeal under this Act shall be made by petition in writing accompanied by a copy of the 
notice, order  or directi on appealed against.  
(3) On the admission of an appeal, all proceedings to enforce the notice, order or direction and all 
prosecutions for any contravention thereof shall be held in abeyance pending the decision of the appeal, 
and i f the notice, order or direction is set aside on appeal, disobe dience thereto shall not be deemed to be 
an offence.  
(4) No appeal shall be decided under this section unless the appellant has been heard or has had a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in person  or through legal practitioner.  
(5) The decision of the Administrator on appeal shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
31. Service of notices, etc .―(1) Every notice, order or direction issued under this Act shall, save as 
otherwise expressly p rovided in this Act, be served ― 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or direction, or by sending it by post to the person for 
whom it is intended; or  
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the notice, order or direction on some  conspicuous 
part of his last known place of abode or business, or by giving or tendering the notice, order or 
direction to some adult male member or servant of his family or by causing it to be affixed on some 
conspicuous part of the building or land, i f any, to which it relates.  
(2) Where the person on whom a notice, order or direction is to be served is a minor, service upon his 
guardian or upon any adult male member or servant of his family shall be deemed to  be the service upon 
the minor.  
(3) Every not ice, order or direction which by or under this Act is to be served as a public notice, order 
or direction or as a notice, order or direction which is not required to be served to any individual therein 
specified shall, save as otherwise expressly provided,  be deemed to be sufficiently served if a copy 
thereof is affixed in such conspicuous part of the office of the competent authority or in such other public 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 15 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  14 
 place during such period, or is published in such local newspaper or in such other manner, as the 
competent authority may direct.  
32. Penalties .―(1) Whoever 1[fails to comply with] any notice, order or direction issued or given 
under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever commences or causes to be commenced any work in contravention of any restriction or 
condition imposed under sub -section ( 7) of section 10 or any plan for the re -development of a clearance 
area shall be puni shable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(3) Whoever obstructs the entry of any person authorised  under this Act to enter into or upon any 
building or land or molests such person after such entry shall be punishable with fine which may  extend 
to one thousand rupees.  
(4) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, every person who at the time the 
offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded ag ainst and p unished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or  
connivance of, or is  attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sect ion― 
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or o ther association of individuals ; 
and 
(b) “director”  in relation to a fi rm means a partner in the firm.  
33. Order of demolition of buildings in certain cases .―2[(1)] Where the erection of any building 
has been commenced, or is being carried out, or has been completed, in contravention of any restriction or 
condition imposed under sub -section ( 7) of section 10 or a plan for the re -development o f any clearance 
area or in con travention of any notice, order or direction issued or given under this Act the competent 
authority may, in addition to any other remedy that may be resorted to under this Act or under any other 
law, make an order directing that such erection shall be demolished by the owner thereof within such time 
not exceeding two months as may be specified in the order, and on the failure of the owner to comply 
with the order, the competent authority may  itself cause the erection to be demolished and the expenses of 
such demolition shall be recoverable from the ow ner as arrears of land revenue:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner has been given a reasona ble opportunity 
of being hear d. 
3[(2) For the purpose of causing any building to be demolished under sub -section ( 1), the competent 
authority may use or cause to be used s uch force as may be necessary.]  
34. Jurisdiction of courts .―No court inferior to that of a magistrate of the first  class shall try an 
offence punishable under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 16 for “does any act in contravention  of” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Section 33 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  15 
 35. Previous sanction of the competent authority or officer s authorised by  it for prosecution. ― 
No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous 
sanction of the competent authority or an officer authorised by the comp etent authority in this behalf.  
36. Po wer to delegate .―1[(1)] The competent authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised, in such cases and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, by such officer or the local authori ty as 
may be mentioned therein.  
2[(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gaze tte, direct that any power 
exercisable by the Administrator under sub -section ( 7) of section 10, section 15, section 20 and section 30 
may, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised also by the 
Chief Secretar y or by such other office r as may be mentioned therein.]  
37. Protection  of action taken in good faith .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the competent authority or against any person for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act or the rules made ther eunder.  
3[37A. Bar of jurisdiction .―Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil court shall 
have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the competent authority or any other per son is 
empowered by or under this Act, to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power c onferred by or under 
this Act.]  
38. Competent authorit y, etc., t o be public servants .―The competent authority  and any person 
authorised by 4[it] under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).  
39. Act to over ride other laws .―The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therew ith contained in any other law.  
40. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the manner, of authentication of notices, orders and other instrum ents o f the competent 
authority;  
(b) the preparation of plans for the re -development of any slum area, and matter s to be included in 
such plans;  
5[(bb) the form in which an application under sub -section ( 3) of section 6A shall be made and the 
information to be furnished and the fees to be levied in res pect of such application;  
(bbb) the manner in which inquiries may be h eld under sections 15 and 19;]  
(c) the form and manner in which applications for permission under sub -section ( 2) of section 19 
shall be made an d the fees to be levied in respect of such applications;  
(d) the procedure to be followed 5[and the factors to be taken into consideration] by the competent 
authority before granting or refusing to gr ant permission under section 19;  
                                                           
1. Section 36 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 43 of 1964, s. 18 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “him”  (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 20 (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  16 
 (e) the  time within which an appeal may be preferred unde r 1[sub-section ( 7) of section 10 or 
section 20] ; 
2[(ee) the time within which a declaration may be filed under sub -section ( 1) or an in timation may 
be sent under sub -section ( 4) of section 20A and the fees , if any, to be levied in respect of such 
declarat ion; 
(eee) the time within which plans, estimates and other particulars referred to in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 20A may be furnished;  
(eeee) the procedure to be followed by the competent authority for fixing the provisional rent 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 20A;  
(eeeee ) the manner in which the rent provisionally determined under section 20A shall be 
communica ted to the tenants and owners ; 
(eeeeee ) the matters in respect of which provision may be mad e under  sub-section ( 5) of section 
20B;] 
(f) the officers and local authorities to whom powers ma y be delegated under section 36 ; and  
(g) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may b e comprised in one 
session or 4[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See SECTION  15) 
Principles for determination of the net average monthly income  
1. The competent authority shall first determine the gross rent actually derived by the owner of the 
land acquired including any building on such land during the perio d of five consecutive years re ferred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 15.  
2. For such determination the competent authority may hold any local inquiry and obtain, if 
necessary, certified copies of extracts from the property tax assessment books of the municipal or other 
local authority concerned showing the rental value of  such land.  
3. The  net average monthly income referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 15 shall be sixty per cent . 
of the average monthly gross rent which shall be one -sixtieth of the gross rent during the five consecutive 
years as determined by the compet ent authority und er paragraph  1. 
4. Forty per cent. of the gross monthly rental referred to above shall not be taken into consideration  in 
determining the net average monthly income but shall be deducted in lieu of the expenditure which the 
owner of the land would normally  incur for payment of any property tax to the municipal or other local 
authority, for collection charges, income -tax or bad debts as well as for works of repair and maintenance 
of the buildings, if any, on the land.  
5.Where the land or any portion thereof has been unoccupied or the owner has not been in receipt of 
any rent for the occupation of the land during the whole or any part of the said period of five years, the 
gross rent shall be taken to be the income which the owner would in fact have derived if the land had been 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1964, s. 20, for “section 20” (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -2-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 52, for “in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or 
the session immediately following,” (w.e.f. 15 -2-1986).  17 
 leased out for rent during the said period, and for this purpose the rent actually derived from the land 
during a period prior or subsequent to the period during which it remained vacant or from similar land in 
the vicinity shall be taken  into account.  
--------------------------The State Bank of Hyderabad Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE BANK OF HYDERABAD ACT, 1956  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and Commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
RE-NAMING OF THE HYDERABAD  STATE  BANK AND TRANSFER OF ITS SHARE CAPITAL TO THE RESERVE 
BANK 
3. Change of Name of Hyderabad State Bank.  
4. Head Office and Branches of Hyderabad Bank.  
5. Transfer of Share Capital of Hyderabad State Bank to Reserve Bank.  
6. Compensation to Shareholders of Hyderabad State Bank.  
7. Certain officers of the Hyderabad State Bank to vacate office.  
8. Special provisions regarding existing officers and employees.  
CHAPTER III  
CAPTIAL OF THE HYDERABAD  BANK 
9. Authorised Capital.  
10. Issued Capital.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF THE HYDERABAD  BANK 
11. [Omitted .] 
12. [Omitted .] 
13. [Omitted .] 
14. [Omitted .] 
15. [Omitted .] 
16. [Omitted .] 
17. [Omitted .] 
18. [Omitted .] 
19. [Omitted .] 
20. [Omitted .] 
21. [Omitted .] 
22. [Omitted .] 
23. [Omitted .] 
 
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
BUSINESS TO BE CARRIED ON BY THE HYDERABAD  BANK 
SECTIONS  
24.  [Omitted .] 
25. [Omitted .] 
26. [Omitted .] 
CHAPTER VI  
RESERVE  FUND ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Reserve Fund.  
28. [Omitted .] 
29. [Omitted .] 
30. [Omitted .]  
31. [Omitted .] 
32. [Omitted .] 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. [Omitted .] 
34. [Omitted .] 
35. [Omitted .] 
36. [Omitted .] 
37. [Omitted .] 
38. [Omitted .] 
39. [Omitted .] 
40. [Omitted .] 
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
42. [Omitted .] 
43. [Omitted .] 
44. [Omitted .] 
45. [Omitted .] 
46. [Omitted .] 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . [Omitted ] 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . [Omitted ] 
 
  3 
 THE STATE BANK OF HYDERABAD ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 79 OF 1956  
[22nd December , 1956 .] 
An Act to transfer the share capital of the Hyderabad State Bank to the Reserve Bank of India 
and to provide for its proper management and other matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto . 
WHEREAS in view of the reorganisation  of States, it is necessary to provide for the devolution of 
functions of the State Government of Hyderabad in relation to the Hyderabad State Bank on one single 
authority;  
AND WHEREA S in order to secure the more efficient performance of banking and treasu ry functions by 
the Hyderabad State Bank as agent to the Reserve Bank of India and to enable the Reserve Bank of India 
to assist the Hyderabad State Bank, by the grant of subsidies or otherwise, to extend banking facilities to 
the public on a larger scale,  it is expedient and necessary to provide for the transfer of the share capital of 
the Hyderabad State Bank to the Reserve Bank of India and for its proper manage ment and for other 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto : 
BE it enacted by Parlia ment in the Seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short Title and Commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the State Bank of 
Hyderabad  Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into f orce on the  22nd day of October,  1956.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the  22nd day of October,  1956;  
(b) “Hyderabad  Bank ” means the Hyderabad State  Bank renamed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section  3, as the State  Bank of Hyderabad;  
(c) “Hyderabad State  Bank ” means the Hyderabad State  Bank constituted and incorporated under 
the Hyderabad State  Bank Act,  1350 F.; 
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(e) “Reserve  Bank ” means the Reserve flank of India constituted under the Reserve  Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) . 
1[(f) “State  Bank ” means the State  Bank of India constituted under the State  Bank of India 
Act, 1955  (23 of 195 5).] 
CHAPTER II  
RE-NAMING OF THE HYDERABAD  STATE  BANK AND TRANSFER OF ITS SHARE CAPITAL TO THE R ESERVE 
BANK 
3. Change of Name of Hyderabad State Bank .—(1) On  the appointed day. the body corporate 
constituted by the Hyderabad State Bank Act, 1350F, and known as the Hyderabad State Bank shall be 
renamed as the State Bank of Hyderabad  2***. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1959).  
2. The words “and shall, as from that day, carry on the business of banking and other business in accordance with the provisi ons 
of this Act and shall have power to acquire and hold property, whether movable or immovable for the purposes of this Act and 
to dispose of the same” omitted by s. 64 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1959).  4 
 1[(2) The said body corporate shall consist of the State Bank and other  shareholders, if any, for the 
time being, of the Hyderabad Bank . 
(2A) The Hyderabad Bank shall carry on the business of banking and other business in accordance 
with the provisions of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) , and shall have 
power to acquire and hold properly, whether movable or immovable, for the purpose s of its busi ness and 
to dispose of the same ]. 
(3) The change of name of the Hyderabad State Bank by sub -section ( 1) shall not affect any rights or 
obligations of t hat Bank, or render defective any legal proceedings by or against it; and any legal 
proceedings which might have been continued or commenced by or against the Hyderabad State Bank by 
its former name may be continued by or against it by its new name . 
4. Head Office And Branches of Hyderabad Bank .—(1) Unless other wise directed by the Cen tral 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, the  Head Office of the Hyderabad Bank sh all be at 
Hyderabad.  
(2) The Hyderabad Bank sh all continue to maintain eve ry branch and agency of the Hyderabad State 
Bank in existence immediately before the appointed day  2[and sh all not discontinue any branch or 
establish any new branch except i n consultation with the State B ank and with  the approval of the Re serve 
Bank.]  
5. Transfer of Share Capital of Hyderabad State Bank to Reserve Bank .—On the appointed day, 
all shares in the capital of the Hyderabad State  Bank  shall be transferred to, and  shall vest in, the 
Reserve  Bank free of all trusts, liabilities and encumbrances.  
6. Compensation to shareholders of Hyderabad State Bank .—(1) The Reserve  Bank  shall pay to 
the State Government of Hyderabad and every  other  person who immediately before the ap pointed day, is 
registered as a holder of  shares in the Hyderabad State  Bank,  as compensation for the  transfer of such  
shares to the Reserve  Bank under section  5, an amount calculated at the rate of ninety -four rupees four 
annas and six pie s in Indian currency for each  share of the face value of one hundred Osmania Sicca 
rupees.  
(2) Notwithstanding the transfer of the  shares in the capital of the Hyderabad State  Bank to the 
Reserve  Bank, any  shareholder who, immediately before the appointed day, was entitled to payment of 
dividend on the  shares of the Hyderabad State  Bank held by  him shall be entitled to receive from the 
Hyderabad  Bank all dividends declared by the Hyderabad State  Bank in respect of  his shares for any year 
which ended before the appointed day and remaining unpaid . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Hyderabad State  Bank Act,  1350F., no such                
share holder  shall be entitled as of right to any dividend on the  shares of the Hyderabad State  Bank held 
by him in respect of any period before the appointed day for which the  Bank had not declared a  dividend : 
Provided  that the Central Government may, in respect of any such period, authorise the payment of 
dividend at such rate as it may specify if it is satisfied that there is sufficient balance of profit avail able 
after such provisions and contribu tions for the purposes referred to in section  28 as the Reserve  Bank 
considers necessary have been made . 
(4) Nothing contained in  sub-section ( 1) shall affect the rights inter se  between the holder of any 
share in the Hyderabad State  Bank and any  other  person who may have an interest in such  share and 
such other  person  shall be entitled to enforce  his interest against the compensation awarded to the holder 
of such  share but not against the Reserve  Bank . 
7. Certain officers of the Hyderabad State Bank to vacate office.—(1) Every person holding office 
as director (including the President and the managing director) or as deputy managing director, in the 
Hyderabad State  Bank immediately before the appointed day,  shall be deemed to have vacated that office 
on the appointed day, and notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any  other  law for the time 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959 , s. 64 and the Third Schedule,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1-10-1959).  
2. Subs. by s. 64 and the Third Schedule, ibid., for “and shall not discontinue any such branch or agency or establish any new 
branch or agency except with the previous approval of the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1959).  5 
 being in force or in any agreement or contract, such person  shall not be entitled to any compensation for 
the loss of office or for the premature terminat ion of any agreement or contract relating to  his 
employment, except such pension, compensation or  other  benefit, as the Hyderabad  Bank may, with the 
previous approval of the Reserve  Bank, grant to  him having regard to what he would have received, if this 
Act had not been passed and if  his employment had ceased on the appointed day in the  ordinary course.  
(2) Nothing in  sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to prevent the Hyderabad  Bank from reappointing or 
re-employing with the previous permission in writing of t he Reserve  Bank, the managing director or the 
deputy managing director of the Hyderabad State  Bank on such terms and conditions as are agreed upon 
between  him and the Hyderabad  Bank and are approved by the Reserve  Bank.  
 8. Special Provisions Regarding Existing officers and Employees .—(1) Notwithstanding             
anything contained in any law or contract of service or  other  document, no appointment made or 
promotion, increment in salary, pension or allowance or any  other  benefit granted to any person by the 
Hyderabad State  Bank after the  19th day of December,  1954, and before the appointed day which would 
not ordinarily have been made or granted or which would not  ordinarily have been admissible under the 
rules or authoris ations of the Hyderabad State  Bank, or of any provident, pension, or  other  fund in force 
before the  19th day of December,  1954,  shall have effect or be payable or claimable from the 
Hyderabad  Bank, or from any provident, pension or  other  fund or from any a uthority administering any 
such fund, unless the Reserve  Bank has, by general or special  order, confirmed the appointment, 
promotion or increment or has directed the grant of the pension, allowance or  other  benefit, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Where any office r or other  employee of the Hyderabad State  Bank has, whether before or after the 
appointed day, received any amount by reason of any such appointment, promotion or increment or the 
grant of any such pension, allowance or  other  benefit, as is referred to in  sub-section ( 1), which has not 
been confirmed or sanctioned by the Reserve  Bank in pursuance of the powers conferred on it by 
that  sub-section, such officer or  other  employee  shall be bound to refund such amount to the 
Hyderabad  Bank and that bank  shall be entitled to take all such steps us may be necessary for recovering 
such amount.  
(3) Where any managing director, deputy managing director or  other  employee of the Hyderabad 
State  Bank  has, after the19th day of December 1954, and before the appointed day, been paid any sum by 
way of compensation or gratuity, the Hyderabad  Bank  shall be entitled to claim refund of any sum so paid 
if the payment is not confirmed by the Reserve  Bank by general or special  order . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in an y law for the time being in force, the renaming of the 
Hyderabad State Bank or the transfer of its share capital to the Reserve Bank shall not entitle any officer 
or other employees of that bank to any compensation to which he may be entitled under any suc h law, and 
no such claim shall be entertained by any Court, tribunal or other authority.  
CHAPTER III  
CAPTIAL OF THE HYDERABAD  BANK 
1[ 2[9. Authorised Capital .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the authorised  capital of the 
Hyderabad Bank shall be rupees five hundred crores.  
(2) The authorised capital of the Hyderabad Bank shall be divided into shares of one hundred rupees 
each or of such denomination as the Hyderabad Bank may, with the approval of the State B ank, decide.  
(3) The Hyderabad Bank may issue the certificates of shares of equivalent values of such 
denomination as the Hyderabad Bank may decide with the approval of the State Bank, in accordance with 
the procedure as may  be specified by regulations mad e under section 63 of the State Bank of India 
(Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959) and every shareholder of the Hyderabad Bank shall be entitled 
to have the certificate of shares of equivalent value of such denomination.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the Third Schedule, for sections 9 to 10 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 4, for section 9 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  6 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub -section ( 1), the State Bank may,  1[in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central Government] authorise the Hyderabad Bank to 
increase or reduce its authorised capital ]. 
10. Issued Capital. —(1) The issued capital of the Hyderabad Bank shall, on the day on which the 
amendments to this Act made by the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, take effect  , be of 
such amount as the State Bank, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, may fix  in this behalf, so however 
that the amount shall be so fixed as to consist only of fully paid -up shares of one hundred rupees each.  
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the issued capital of the Hyderabad 
Bank, shall consist of su ch amount as the State Bank may,  3[in consultation with the Reserve Bank and 
with the approval of the Central Government], fix, and shall be divided into fully paid -up shares of such 
denomination in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of section 9.]  
(2) All sh ares in the issued capital of the Hyderabad Bank shall, on that day, vest in the State Bank.  
4[(3) The Hyderabad Bank may, from time to time,  3[with the approval of the State Bank and the 
Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank], increase,  whether by  5[public issue or rights 
issue] or by preferential allotment or private placement in accordance with the procedure as may be 
specified by regulations made under section 63 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 
(38 of 1959), it s issued capital by issue of equity or preference shares.  
(3A) The issued capital of the Hyderabad Bank shall consist of equity shares or equity and preference 
shares:  
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in accordance with the guidelines framed by the 
Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each class of such 
preference shares (whether perpetual or irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions subject 
to which, each class of preference shar es may be issued.  
(3B) The Hyderabad Bank may,  3[with the approval of the State Bank and the Central Government in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank], increase from time to time by way of issuing bonus shares to 
existing equity shareholders, its issued ca pital in such manner as the State Bank,  6[in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central Government], direct.  
(3C) No increase or reduction in the issued capital of the Hyderabad Bank shall be made in such a 
manner that the State Bank holds at any time less than fifty -one per cent. of the issued capital consisting 
of equity shares of the Hyderabad Bank.  
(3D) The Hyde rabad Bank may accept the money in respect of shares issued towards incre ase in 
issued capital in instal ments, make calls and forfeit unpaid shares and re -issue them, in the manner as may 
be specified by regulations made under section 63 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959 (38 of 1959) .] 
 (4) The State Bank shall, as soon as may be after the determination, if any, of the amount of 
compensation, by the Tribunal under the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) , 
consi der whether any increase or reduction of the issued capital of the Hyderabad Bank as fixed under               
sub-section ( 1) by way of adjustment by transfer from, or to, the reserves of the Hyderabad Bank or in 
any other manner, is necessary, expedient or appropriate and may, thereafter, with the approval of the 
Reserve Bank, direct the Hyderabad Bank to increase or reduce its issued capital.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 2, for “with the approval of the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 5 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 3, for “wit h the approval of the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 5, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 3, for “public issue” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011).  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “with the approval of the  Reserve bank” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011).  7 
 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF THE HYDERABAD  BANK 
11. [Sections  11 to 26.] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Subsidiary Bank ) Act, 1959                     
(38 of 1959 ), s.64 and the Third Schedule  (w.e.f . 1-10-1959).  
CHAPTER VI  
RESERVE  FUND ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
1[27. Reserve Fund.—(1) The reserve fund of the Hyderabad Bank shall, subject to the provi sions of 
sub-section ( 4) of section 10, and sub -section ( 2) of this section, consist of — 
 (a) on the day on which the amendments to this Act made by the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) , take effect, such sum as the State Bank, with the  approval of the 
Reserve Bank, may determine, and  
(b) after that day, the sum aforesaid together with such further sums as may be transferred to the 
reserve fund by the Hyderabad Bank out of its annual net profits before declaring a dividend.  
(2) The State  Bank shall, as soon as may be after the determination, if any, of the amount of 
compensation by the Tribunal, under the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959) , 
consider whether any increase or reduction of the reserve fund of the Hy derabad Bank is necessary by 
way of adjustment by transfer from or to any account or towards provision for bad and doubtful debts, 
deprecia tion in assets, or contingencies or for any other purpose and may thereafter, with the approval of 
the Reserve Bank,  direct the Hyderabad Bank to so increase or reduce, its reserv e fund. ] 
28. [Sections  28 to 40] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Subsidiary Banks ) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), 
s. 64 and the Third Schedule  (w.e.f.  1-10-1959).  
41. Power of Central Government to Make Rules .—(1) The Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to give effect to 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoi ng pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of, and the procedure for payment of, compensation under this Act, including the 
requirements subject to which the payment shall be made;  
(b) the determination of persons to whom the said compensation shall be payable in all cases 
including cases where shares have been held by more than one person, or where they have been 
transferred before the appointed day, but the transfer has not been registered or where the shareholder 
is dead;  
(c) the circumstance s under which claims for payment of the said compensation from persons 
claiming through or under a shareholder may be entertained;  
(d) the requirements to be complied with before receipt of the said compensation by a 
shareholder, whose share certificate ha s been lost, destroyed, mutilated or stolen;  
(e) the requirements, subject to which information regarding the payment of the said 
compensation may be granted or refused and the conditions subject to which such information may be 
given.  
2[(3) Every rule mad e by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session o r in two or more successive sess ions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the Third Schedule, for section 27 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  8 
 thereafte r have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
42. [Sections  42 to 46] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Subsidiary Banks ) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), 
s. 64 and the Third Schedule  (w.e.f . 1-10-1959).  
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] Omitted by the State Bank of India  (Subsidiary Banks ) Act, 1959                    
(38 of 1959), s. 64 and the Third  Schedule  (w.e.f . 1-10-1959).  
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ] Omitted  by s. 64 and the Third Schedule , ibid., (w.e.f . 1-10-1959).  
 
 
--------------------------The States Reorganisation Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE STATES REORGANISATION ACT, 1956  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions.  
 
PART II  
TERRITORIAL  CHANGES  AND FORMATION OF NEW  STATES  
3. Transfer of territory from Hyderabad to Andhra and alteration of name . 
4. Transfer of territory from Travancore -Cochin to Madras . 
5. Formation of Kerala State . 
6. Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands . 
7. Formation of a new Mysore State . 
8. Formation of a new Bombay State . 
9. Formation of a new Madhya Pradesh State . 
10. Formation of a new Rajasthan State . 
11. Formation of a new Punjab State . 
12. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution . 
13. Saving powers of State Governments . 
PART III  
ZONES AND ZONAL  COUNCILS  
14. [Repealed .] 
15. Establishment of Zonal Councils . 
16. Composition of the Councils . 
17. Meetings of the Councils . 
18. Power to appoint Committees . 
19. Staff of the Council . 
20. Office of the Council . 
21. Functions of the Councils . 
22. Joint meetings of Zonal Councils . 
PART IV  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
23. Amendment of the Fou rth Schedule to the Constitution . 
24. Allocation of sitting members in the Council of States . 
25. By-elections to fill vacancies . 
26. Term of office of members . 2 
 The House of the People  
SECTIONS  
27. Provision as to existing House . 
The Legislative Assembly  
28. Changes in composition and allocation of sitting members . 
29. Special provision for elections to the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.  
30. Duration of Legislative Assemblies . 
31. Speakers and Deputy Speakers . 
32. Rules of procedure . 
The Legislative Councils  
33. Madhya Pradesh Legislative Council . 
34. Bombay Legislative Council . 
35. Madras Legislative Council . 
36. Mysore Legislative Council . 
37. Punjab Legislative Council . 
38. Chairman and Deputy Chairman . 
39. Rules of procedure . 
Delimitation of Constituencies  
40. Allocation of seats in the House of the Pe ople and assignment of seats to State Legislative 
Assemblies . 
41. Modification of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders . 
42. Determination of population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes . 
43. Constitution of Delimitation Commission . 
44. Duties of the Com mission . 
45. Associate members . 
46. Casual vacancies . 
47. Procedure as to delimitation . 
48. Special provision as to certain elections . 
PART V  
HIGH COURTS  
49. High Courts for the new States . 
50. Abolition of certain Courts . 
51. Principal seat and other places of sitting of High Courts  for new States . 
52. Jurisdiction of High Courts for new States . 
53. Power to enrol advocates, etc . 
54. Practice and procedure . 
55. Custody of seal of the High Court . 
56. Form of writs and other processes . 
57. Powers of Judges . 
58. Procedure as to appeals to the Supreme Court . 
59. Transfer of proceedings to Bombay High Court . 3 
 SECTIONS  
60. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Kerala High Court . 
61. Transfer of proceedings to Madhya Pradesh High Court . 
62. Transfer of proceedings to Mysore High Court . 
63. Transfer of proceedi ngs to Punjab High Court . 
64. Transfer of proceedings to Rajasthan High Court . 
65. High Court of Andhra Pradesh . 
66. High Court for the areas added to Madras . 
67. Right to appear or act in proceedings transferred to other High Courts . 
68. Interpretation . 
69. Savings . 
PART VI  
AUTHORI SATION OF EXPENDITURE  
70. Authori sation of expenditure of new States . 
71. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing Appropriation 
Acts.  
72. Reports relating to the accounts of certain States.  
73. Allowances and privileges of Governors of certain States . 
74. Distribution of revenues . 
PART VII  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF CERTAIN PART A AND PART B STATES  
75. Application of Part . 
76. Land and goods . 
77. Treasury and bank balances . 
78. Arrears of taxes . 
79. Right to recover loans and advances . 
80. Credits in certain funds . 
81. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings . 
82. Public debt . 
83. Refund of taxes collected in excess . 
84. Deposits.  
85. Provident funds . 
86. Pensions . 
87. Contracts . 
88. Liability in respect of actionable wrong . 
89. Liability as guarantor of co-operative society . 
90. Items in suspense . 
91. Residuary provision . 
92. Power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases . 
93. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund . 
  4 
 PART VIII  
APPORTIONMENT OF CERTAIN ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF THE UNION  
SECTIONS  
94. Definitions . 
95. Passing of certain assets and liabilities of the Union to successor States . 
96. Arrears of taxes . 
97. Loans and advances . 
98. Debts due to Central Government . 
99. Provident fund . 
100. Pensions . 
101. Contracts . 
 
PART IX  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS AND INTER -STATE   
AGREEMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS  
102. Provision as to certain State Financial Corporations . 
103. Provisions as to the Madras Industrial Investment Corporation . 
104. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934 . 
105. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 . 
106. Provision as to certain State Electricity Boards and apportionment of their assets and liabilities . 
107. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water . 
108. Continuance of agreements and arrangements relating to certain irrigation, power or multi -
purpose projects . 
109. General provision as to statutory corporations . 
110. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
111. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases . 
112. Provision as to the Devaswom Surplus Fund of Travancore . 
113. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions . 
 
PART X  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
114. Provisions relating to All -India Services . 
115. Provisions relating to other services . 
116. Provision as to con tinuance of officers in the same posts . 
117. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
118. Provisions as to State Public Service Commissions . 
 
PART XI  
LEGAL AND MISCE LLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
119. Territorial extent of laws . 
120. Power to adapt laws . 5 
 SECTIONS  
121. Power to construe laws . 
122. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions . 
123. Legal proceedings . 
124. Right of pleaders to practise in certain Courts . 
125. Provisions as to certain pending proceedings . 
126. [Repealed .] 
127. Effect of the provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws . 
128. Power to remove difficulties . 
129. Power to make rules . 
130. Repeal of Act 49 of 1951 . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
  6 
 THE STATES REORGANISATI ON ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1956  
[31st August , 1956.]  
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the States of India and for matters connected 
therewith.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as fol lows: ― 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the S tates Reorganisation Act, 1956.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of November, 1956;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the  People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(d) “corresponding new State ” means, in relation to the existing State of Bombay, Madhya 
Pradesh, Mysore, Punjab or Rajasthan, the new State with the same name, and in relation to th e 
existing State of Travancore -Cochin, the new State of Kerala;  
(e) “corresponding State ” means, in rel ation to the new State of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, 
Mysore, Punjab or Rajasthan, the existing State with the same name, and in relation to the new State 
of Kerala, the exist ing State of Travancore -Cochin;  
(f) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commissi on appointed by t he President under 
article 324;  
(g) “existing State ” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution a t the 
commencement of this Act;  
(h) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part  of the territory of 
India;  
(i) “new State ” means a 1*** State forme d by the provisions of Pa rt II; 
(j) “notified order ” means an order published in  the Official Gazette;  
(k) “population ratio ”, in relation to the successor States of an existing State, means such ratio as 
the Central Government may by notified order specify to be the ratio in whic h the population of that 
existing State as ascertained at the last census is distributed territorially among the several successor 
States by virtu e of the provisions of Part II;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “principal  successor State ” means — 
(i) in relation to the existing State of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Madras or Rajasthan, th e 
State with the same name; and  
(ii) in relation to the existing States of Hyderabad, Madhya Bharat and Travancore -Cochin, 
the States of Andhra  Pradesh, Madhya Pr adesh and Kerala, respectively;  
                                                           
1. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adap tation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  7 
 (n) “sitting member ” in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State 
means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(o) “successor State ”, in relation to an existing State, means any State to which the whole or any 
part of the territories of that existing State is transferred by the provisions of Part II, and includes in 
relation to the existing State of Madras, also that State as territoriall y altered by the  said provisions 
and the Union;  
(p) “transferred territory ” means any territory transferred from an existing State to another 
existing State or to a new Stat e by the provisions of Part II;  
(q) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury; and  
(r) any  reference to a district, taluk, tahsil or other territorial division of a State shall be construed 
as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial divisio n on the 1st day of July, 1956.  
PART II  
TERRITORIAL CHAN GES AND FORMATION OF NEW STATES  
3. Transfer of territory from Hyderabad to  Andhra and alteration of name .―(1) As from the 
appointed day, there shall be added to the State of Andhra  the territories comprised in — 
(a) the districts of Hyderabad, Medak, Nizamabad, Karimnagar, Warangal, Khammam, Nalgonda 
and Mahb ubnagar;  
(b) Alampur and Gadwal taluks of Raichur district and Kodan gal taluk of Gulbarga district;  
(c) Tan dur taluk of Gulbarga district;  
(d) Zahirabad taluk (except Nirna circle), Nyalkal circle of Bidar taluk and Naray ankhed ta luk of 
Bidar district;  
(e) Bichkonda and Jukkal circles of Deglu r taluk of Nanded district; and  
(f) Mudhol, Bhiansa and Kuber circles of Mudho l taluk of Nanded district; and  
(g) Adilabad district except Islapur circle of Boath taluk, Kinwat taluk and Rajur a taluk; and 
thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of Hyderabad and the State 
of Andhra shall be known as the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(2) The territories referred to in clauses ( b), (c), (d), (e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included in, 
and become part of, Mahbubnagar, Hyderabad, Medak, Nizamabad and Adilabad districts, respectively, 
in the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
4. Transfer of territory fr om Travancore -Cochin to Madras .―As from the appointed day, there 
shall be added to the State of Madras the territories comprised in the Agastheeswaram, Thovala, 
Kalkulam and Vilavancode taluks of Trivandrum district and the Shencottah taluk of Q uilon district; and 
thereupon — 
(a) the said territories shall cease to form part of the exist ing State of Travancore -Cochin;  
(b) the territories comprised in the Agastheeswaram, Thovala, Kalkulam and Vilavancode taluks 
shall form a separate district to be known as Kanya Kumari district in the State of Madras; and  
(c) the territories comprised in the Shencottah taluk shall be included in, and become part of, 
Tirunelveli d istrict in the State of Madras.  
  8 
 5. Formation of Kerala State .―(1) As from the appointed da y, there shall be formed a new 1*** 
State to be known as the State of Kerala comprising the f ollowing territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories of th e existing State of Travancore Cochin, excluding the territories transferred 
to the State of Madras by section 4; and 
(b) the territories comprised in — 
(i) Malabar district, excluding the island s of Laccadive and Minicoy, and  
(ii) Kasaragod taluk of South Kanara district;  
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the States of Travancore -Cochin a nd Madras, 
respectively.  
(2) The territories specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall form a separate district to be known 
as Malabar d istrict in the State of Kerala.  
6. Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Is lands .―As from the appointed  day, there shall be formed  a 
2[Union territory] to be known as the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands comprising the Laccadive 
and Minicoy Islands in the Malabar district and the Amindivi Islands in the South Kanara  district; and 
thereupon the said Islands shall cease to form part o f the existing State of Madras.  
7. Formation of a new Mysore State .―(1) As from the appointed da y, there shall be formed a new 
1*** State to be known as the State of Mysore comprising the following territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories o f the existing State of Mysore;  
(b) Belgaum district except Chandgad taluka and Bijapur, Dharwar and Kanara districts, i n the 
existing State of Bombay;  
(c) Gulbarga district except Kodangal and Tandur taluks, Raichur district except Alampur and 
Gadwal taluks, and Bidar district except Ahm adpur, Nilanga and Udgir taluks and the portions 
specified in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, in t he existing State of Hyderabad;  
(d) South Kanara district except Kasaragod taluk and Amindivi Islands, and Kollegal taluk of 
Coimbatore distri ct, in the State of Madras; and  
(e) the territories of the existing State of Coorg ; and thereupon the said territories shall cease to 
form part of the said existing States of Mysore, Bombay, Hyderabad, Madras and Coorg, respectively.  
(2) The territory comprised in the existing State of Coorg shall form a separate district to be known as  
Coorg district, and the said Kollegal taluk shall be included in, and become part of, Mysore district, in the 
new State of Mysore.  
8. Formation of a new Bombay State .―(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
1*** State to be known as the  State of Bombay comprising the f ollowing territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories of the existi ng State of Bombay, excluding — 
(i) Bijapur, Dharwar and Kanara districts and Belgaum district except Chandgad taluka, and  
(ii) Abu Road taluka of Banaskantha d istrict;  
(b) Aurangabad, Parbhani, Bhir and Osmanabad districts, Ahmadpur, Nilanga and Udgir taluks of 
Bidar district, Nanded district (except Bichkonda and Jukkal circles of Deglur taluk and Mudhol, 
                                                           
1. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  
2. Subs., ibid., for “New Part C State”.  9 
 Bhiansa and Kuber circles of Mudhol taluk) and Islapur c ircle of Boath taluk, Kinwat taluk and 
Rajura taluk of Adilabad district, in t he existing State of Hyderabad;  
(c) Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda districts in the 
existing State of Madhya Pradesh;  
(d) the territories of the ex isting State of Saurashtra; and  
(e) the territories of the existing State of Kutch; and thereupon the said territories shall cease to 
form part of the existing States of Bombay, Hyderabad, Madhya Pradesh, Saur ashtra and Kutch, 
respectively.  
(2) The said Chandgad taluka shall be included in, and become part of, Kolhapur district, the s aid 
Ahmadpur, Nilanga and Udgir taluks shall be included in, and become part of, Osmanabad district, the 
said Islapur circle of Boath taluk, Kinwat taluk and Rajura ta luk shall be included in, and become part of, 
Nanded district and the territories comprised in the existing State of Kutch shall form a separate district to 
be known as Kutch distri ct, in the new State of Bombay.  
9. Formation  of a new Madhya Pradesh State .―(1) As from the appointed da y, there shall be 
formed a new 1*** State to be known as the State of Madhya Pradesh comprising the following 
territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh, except the districts mentioned in  
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the territories of the existing State of Madhya Bharat, except Sunel tappa of Bhanpu ra tahsil 
of Mandsaur district;  
(c) Sironj sub -division of Kotah district in t he existing State of Rajasthan;  
(d) the terri tories of th e existing State of Bhopal; and  
(e) the territories of the existing State of Vindhya Pradesh; and thereupon the said territories shall 
cease to form part of the existing States of Madhya Pradesh, Madhya Bharat, Rajasthan, Bhopal and  
Vindhya Pradesh, respectively.  
(2) The said Sironj sub -division shall be included in, and become part of, Bhilsa district in the new 
State of Madhya Pradesh.  
10. Form ation of a new Rajasthan State .―(1) As from the appointed da y, there shall be formed a 
new 1*** State to be known as the State of Rajasthan comprising the f ollowing territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories of the existing State of Rajasthan, except Sironj sub -division of Kotah district;  
(b) the territories of the existing State of Ajmer;  
(c) Abu Road taluka of Banaskantha district in th e existing State of Bombay; and  
(d) Sunel tappa of Bhanpura tahsil of Mandsaur district in the existing State of Madhya Bharat; 
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the said States of  Rajasthan, Ajmer, Bombay 
and Madhya Bharat, respectively.  
(2) The territories comprised in the existing State of Ajmer shall form a separate district to be known 
as Ajmer district, and the territories referred to in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be included 
in, and become part of, Sirohi and Jhalawar districts, respectively,  in the new State of Rajasthan.  
11. F ormation of a new Punjab State .―As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
1*** State to be known as the State of Punjab comprising the f ollowing territories, namely: ― 
(a) the territories of th e existing State of Punjab; and  
                                                           
1. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  10 
 (b) the territories of the existing State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union; and thereupon the 
said territories shall cease to form part of the sa id existing States of Punjab and Patiala and East 
Punjab States Union, respectively.  
12. Amendment of the Firs t Schedule to the Constitution .―As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, for Part A, Part B and Part C, the following Parts shall be substituted, 
namely: ― 
“PART A  
Name  Territories  
1. Andhra Pradesh . . .  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 3 of the 
Andhra State Act, 1953, and the territories specified in  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956.  
2. Assam . . . . . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the 
Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal 
Areas, but excluding the terri tories specified in the Schedule 
to the Assam (Alteration of Boundar ies) Act, 1951.  
3. Bihar . . . . . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if 
they formed part of that Province.  
4. Bombay . . . . .  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of s ection 8 of the 
States Reorgan isation Act, 1956.  
5. Kerala . . . . .  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of s ection 5 of the 
States Reorgan isation Act, 1956.  
6. Madhya Pradesh. . .  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of s ection 9 of the 
States Reorgan isation Act, 1956.  
7. Madras . . . . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of Madras or were being administered  as if 
they formed part of that Province and the territories specified 
in section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but 
excluding the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3 and sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Andhra 
State Act, 1953, and the territo ries specified in clause ( b) of 
sub- section ( 1) of section 5, section 6 and clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956.  
8. Mysore . . . . .  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of s ection 7 of the 
States Reogani sation Act, 1956.  
9. Orissa . . . . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if 
they formed part of that Provin ce. 11 
 Name  Territories  
10. Punjab . . . . .  The territories specified in section 11 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956.  
11. Rajasthan . . . .  The territories specified in section 10 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956.  
12. Uttar Pradesh . . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province known as the United Provinces or were 
being administered as if they formed part of that Province.  
13. West Bengal . . . .  The territories whic h immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered 
as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of 
Chandernagore as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of t he 
Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954.  
PART B  
Name  Territory  
1. Jammu and Kashmir . .  The territory which immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution was comprised in the Indian State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
PAR T C 
Name  Territory  
1. Delhi . . . . . .  The territory which immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief 
Commissioner's Province of Delhi.  
2. Himachal Pradesh . .  The territories which immediately before the 
commencement of the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New 
State) Act, 1954, were comprised in the States of Himachal 
Pradesh and Bilaspur.  
3. Manipur . . . . .  The territory which immediately before the commenceme nt 
of this Constitution was bei ng administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner's Province under the name of Manipur.  
4. Tripura . . . . .  The territory which immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a 
Chief Commissioner ’s Province under the name of Tripura.  
5. The Laccadive Minicoy and Amindivi 
Islands.  The territory specified in section 6 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956.”  
13. Savi ng powers of State Governments .―Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be 
deemed to affect the power of a State Government to alter after the appointed day the name, extent and 
boundaries of any dis trict or division in the State.  
  12 
 PART III  
ZONES AND ZONAL  COUNCILS  
14. [Definitions .]―Rep. by the Adaptati on of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956 . 
15. E stablishment of Zonal Councils .―As from the appointed day, there shall be a Zonal Council 
for each of the following five zones, namely: ― 
(a) the Northern Z one, comprising the States of 1[Haryana ], 2[Punjab, Himachal Pradesh], 
Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir and the 3[Union territories]  of Delhi, 4[and Chandigarh] ; 
(b) the Central Zone, comprising the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh;  
5[(c) the Eastern Zone, comprising the  States of Bihar, West Bengal 6[Orissa and Sikkim];]  
7[(d) the Western Zone, comprising the States of Goa, Gujarat and Maharashtra and the Union 
territories of Dadra and Nagar  Haveli and Daman and Diu; and]  
(e) the Southern Zone, comprising the States of A ndhra Pradesh, 8[ 9[Tamil Nadu], 10[Karnataka]  
and Kerala] 11[and the U nion territory of Pondicherry].  
16. Composition o f the Councils .―(1) The Zonal Council for each zone shall consist of t he 
following members, namely: ― 
(a) a Union Minister to be  nominated by the President;  
(b) the Chief Minister of each of the States included in the zone and two other Ministers of each 
such State to be nominated by the Sadar -i-Riyasat, in the case of Jammu and Kashmir, and by the 
Governor, in any other case, and if there is no Council of Ministers in any such State, three members 
from that State to  be nominated by the President;  
(c) where any 3[Union territory] is included in the zone, not mo re than two members from each 
12[such territory] to be nominated by the Pr esident;  
13*   *    *    *   *  
(2) The Union Minister nominated under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) to a Zonal  Council shall be its 
Chairman.  
(3) The Chief Ministers of the States included in each zone shall act as Vice -Chairman of the Zonal 
Council for that zone by rotation, each holding office for a period of one year at a time:  
Provided that if during that period there is no Council of Minister s in the State concerned, such 
member from that State as the President may nominate in this behalf shall act as Vice -Chairman of the 
Zonal Council.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  31 of 1966, s. 86, for “Punjab” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1970, s. 47, for “Punjab” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1971).  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956, for “Part C States”.  
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1970, s. 47, for “Himachal Pradesh and Chandigarh ” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 81 of 1971, s. 74, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).  
6. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 778(E), dated 8 -12-1976, Gazette of India, Pt. II, Sec. 3(ii).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 64, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).  
8. Subs. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 86, for “Madras and Kerala” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  
9. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1970, for “Madras”  
(w.e.f. 14 -1-1969).  
10. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974, for “Mysore”  
(w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
11. Ins. by Act 20 of 1963, s. 57 and Second Schedule (w.e.f. 13 -5-1963).  
12. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956, for “such State”.  
13. Omitted by Act 81 of 1971, s. 74 (w.e.f. 21 -1-1972).  13 
 (4) The Zonal Council for each zone shall have the following persons as Advisers to assist the 
Council in th e perfo rmance of its duties, namely: ― 
(a) one person nomina ted by the Planning Commission;  
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of each of the States included in the Zone; and  
(c) the Development Commissioner or any other officer nominated by the Gove rnment of each of 
the States included in the Zone.  
(5) Every Adviser to a Zonal Council shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Council 
or of any Committee thereof of which he may be named a member but shall not have a right to vote at a 
meeting of the Co uncil or of any such Committee.  
17. Meetings of the Councils .―(1) Each Zonal Council shall meet at such time as the Chairman of 
the Council may appoint in this behalf and shall, subject to the other provisions of this section, observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as it may, with the approval of 
the Central Governme nt, lay down from time to time.  
(2) The Zonal Council for each zone shall, unless otherwise determined by it, meet in the State s 
included in that zone by rotation.  
(3) The Chairman or in his absence the Vice -Chairman or in the absence of both the Chairman and 
the Vice -Chairman, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves shall 
presi de at a meeting of the  Council.  
(4) All questions at a meeting of a Zonal Council shall be decided by a majority of votes of the 
members present and in the case of an equality of votes the Chairman or, in his absence any other person 
presiding shall  have a second or casting vot e. 
(5) The proceedings of every meeting of a Zonal Council shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government and also to e ach State Government concerned.  
18. Power to appoint Committees .―(1) A Zonal Council may from time to time by resolution 
passed at a meetin g appoint Committees of its members and Advisers for performing such functions as 
may be specified in the resolution and may associate with any such Committee, such Ministers either for 
the Union or for the States and such officers serving either in connec tion with the affairs of the Union or 
of the States as may be nominated  in that behalf by the Council.  
(2) A person associated with a Committee of a Zonal Council under sub -section ( 1) shall have the 
right to take part in the discussions of the Committee, but shall not have a right to vote  at a meeting 
thereof.  
(3) A Committee appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to 
transaction of business at its meetings as the Zonal Council may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, lay down from time to t ime. 
19. Staff of the Council .―(1) Each Zonal Council shall have a se cretarial staff consisting of a 
Secretary, a Joint Secretary and such other officers as the Chairman may consider necessary to appoint.  
(2) The Chief Secretaries of the States represented in such Council shall each be the Secretary of the 
Council by rotati on and hold office for a period of one year at a time.  
(3) The Joint Secretary of the Council shall be chosen from amongst officers not in the service of any 
of the States represented in the Council and shall be  appointed by the Chairman.  
20. Office of the  Council .―(1) The office of the Zonal Council for each zone shall be located at such 
place within the zone as may be determined by  the Council.  14 
 (2) The administrative expenses of the said office, including the salaries and allowances payable to or 
in respe ct of members of the secretarial staff of the Council other than the Secretary, shall be borne by the 
Central Government out of monies provided  by Parliament for the purpose.  
21. Functions of the Councils .―(1) Each Zonal Council shall be an advisory body and may discuss 
any matter in which some or all of the States represented in that Council, or the Union and one or more of 
the States represented in that Council, have a common interest and advise the Central Government and the 
Government of each State concerned as to the action to be taken on any such matter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a Zonal 
Council may discuss, and make re commendations wi th regard to, ― 
(a) any matter of common interest in the field o f economic and social planning;  
(b) any matter concerning border disputes, linguistic minoritie s or inter -State transport; and  
(c) any matter connected with, or arising out of, the reorganisati on of the States under this Act.  
22. Jo int meetings of Zonal Councils .―(1) Where it is represented to the Zonal Council for any 
zone that a matter in which a State included in that zone and one or more States included in any other 
zone or zones have a common interest should be discussed at a joint meeting, it shall be lawful for  the 
Zonal Councils concerned — 
(a) to meet at such time and place as the Chairman thereof may, in consultation with each oth er, 
appoint in this behalf; and  
(b) to discuss the said matter at such joint meeting and make recommendations to the 
Governments concerned as to the action to be tak en on that matter.  
(2) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the procedure at joint meetings of the 
Zonal Councils . 
PART IV  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
23. Amendment of the Fourt h Schedule to the Constitution .―As from the appointed day, in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, for the Table of Seats, the following Table shall be substituted, 
namely: ― 
“Table of  Seats  
1. Andhra Pradesh  18 
2. Assam  6 
3. Bihar  21 
4. Bombay  27 
5. Ker ala 9 
6. Madhya Pradesh  16 
7. Madras  17 
8. Mysore  12 
9. Orissa 9 
10. Pu njab 11 
11. Raj asthan  10 15 
 12. Uttar  Pradesh  31 
13. West Bengal  14 
14. Jammu and Kashmir  4 
15. De lhi 1 
16. Himac hal Pradesh  1 
17. Man ipur| 
18. Tripura  1 
 208”.  
24. Allocation of sitting me mbers in the Council of States .―(1) The twelve sitting members 
representing the State of Andhra and such six of the eleven sitting members representing the State of 
Hyderabad as the Chairman shall by order specify shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have 
been duly elected to fil l the eighteen seats allotted to the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(2) Such five of the six sitting members representing the State of Travancore -Cochin and such three 
of the eighteen sitting members representing the State of Madras as the Chairman shall by orde r specify 
shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill eight of the nine seats 
allotted to the State of Kerala.  
(3) The eleven sitting members representing the States of Bhopal, Madhya Bharat and Vindhya 
Pradesh and such  five of the twelve sitting members representing the State of Madhya Pradesh as the 
Chairman shall by order specify shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to 
fill the sixteen seats allotted to t he new State of Madhya Pradesh.  
(4) Such one of the six sitting members representing the State of Travancore -Cochin as the Chairman 
shall by order specify shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill one of 
the seats a llotted to the State of Madras.  
(5) The  six sitting members representing the State of Mysore, and such four of the seventeen sitting 
members representing the State of Bombay, and such two of the eleven sitting members representing the 
State of Hyderabad, as the Chairman shall by order specify s hall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to 
have been duly elected to fill the twelve seats allot ted to the new State of Mysore.  
(6) The eleven sitting members representing the existing States of Punjab and Patiala and East Punjab 
States Union shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill the eleven seats 
allotted to the new State of Punjab.  
(7) The nine sitting members representing the State of Rajasthan and the sitting members representing 
the States of Ajmer and Coorg sh all, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to 
fill the ten seats allotted  to the new State of Rajasthan:  
Provided that if the number of sitting members representing the State of Rajasthan is less than nine, 
such one of the sitting members representing the existing State of Bombay as the Chairman shall by order 
specify shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill one of the seats 
allotted to the new State of Rajasthan.  
(8) The five sitting members rep resenting the State of Saurashtra and Kutch and the sitting members 
representing the existing States of Bombay, Hyderabad and Madhya Pradesh who have not been allocated 
under sub -sections ( 1), (3), (5) and ( 7) to Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore or R ajasthan shall, as 
from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill the twenty -seven seats allot ted to the 
new State of Bombay.  16 
 (9) In this section, “Chairman ” means the Chai rman of the Council of States.  
25. By-elections to fill vacancies .―As soon as may be after the appointed day, by -elections shall be 
held to fill the vacancies existing on the appointed day in the seats allotted to the St ates of Kerala and 
Madras.  
26. Term of office of members .―In order that, as nearly as may be , one -third of the members may 
retire on the 2nd day of April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the President 
shall, after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in 
regard to th e terms of office of the members elected under section 25 and such modifications as he thinks 
fit in the terms of office of any o f the sitting members.  
The House of the People  
27. Provision as to existing House .―Nothing in Part II shall be deemed to affect  the constitution or 
duration of the existing House of the People or the extent of the constituency of an y sitting member of 
that House.  
The Legislative Assembly  
28. Changes in composition and  allocation of sitting members .―(1) Where by virtue of the 
provi sions of Part II the whole area of any Assembly constituency in an existing State is transferred to any 
other existing State or becomes part of a  new State other than Kerala, ― 
(a) that area shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to form a constituency  provided by law 
for the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly of such other existing State or of such new  
State, as the case may be; and  
(b) the sitting member representing that constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed 
to have b een elected to the said Legislative Assembly by that constituency and shall cease to be a 
member of the Legislative Assembly of which he was a memb er immediately before that day.  
(2) The sitting members representing the assembly constituencies in the State of Madras falling 
wholly or partly within the territories of that State which, on the appointed day, become part of the new 
State of Kerala shall, as from that day, cease to be mem bers of the Legislative Assembly of Madras.  
(3) The provisions of the First Schedule shall apply in relation to the sitting members representing the 
Assembly constituencies specified therein, parts of which are by virtue of the provisions of Part II 
transf erred from an existing State to another ex isting State or to a new State.  
(4) The members of the electoral college for Kutch constituted under section 27A of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) shall, as soon as may be after the comm encement of 
this Act, elect eight persons from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote and in such manner as may be prescribed; and the 
persons so elected shall, as from the appoin ted day, be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative 
Assembly of Bombay by a constituency comprisi ng the whole of Kutch district.  
(5) The office of member of the Council of Advisers constituted for the State of Kutch under  
section 42 of the Governme nt of Part C States Act, 1951 (49 of 1951), is hereby declared to be an office 
of profit under the Government of India which shall not disqualify its holder for being elected under  
sub-section ( 4) or for becoming a member of the Legislative Assembly of Bo mbay as provided in that 
sub- section.  
(6) The sitting members nominated under article 333 to represent the Anglo -Indian community in the 
Legislative Assemblies of Madhya Pradesh and Mysore shall, as from the appointed day, cease to be 
members of those Ass emblies and shall be deemed to have been nominated under the said article by the 
respective Governors to the Legislative Assemblies o f the corresponding new States.  17 
 29. Special provision for elections to the Andhr a Pradesh Legislative Assembly .―When a 
general election is next held in the State of Andhra Pradesh for electing members to the House of the 
People, elections shall also be held to fill the seats allotted to the assembly constituencies into which the 
transferred territory in that State is divid ed in the order referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 47, as if 
those seats had become vacant; and as from the date appointed under the Representation of the People 
Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) as the date before which the said elections shall be completed, all the persons who, 
having been sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Hyderabad, become on the appointed day 
members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 28 of this Act shall cease to b e such members.  
30. Dura tion of Legislative Assemblies .―The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of article 
172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of each new State except Kerala, as constituted by the 
provisions of section 28, be deemed to have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in 
the case of the Legislative Assembly of the correspondi ng State.  
31. Speakers and Deputy Speakers .―(1) As from the appointed day and until the first meeting of 
the Legislative Assembly of a new State other than Kerala, the persons who immediately before the 
appointed day are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding 
State shall, if they are members of the Legislative Assembly of the new State, be the  Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker, respectively, of that Assembly.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh shall choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
there of and until they are so chosen, the persons who immediately before the appointed day are the 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Andhra shall be the 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker, respectively, of the Legislative A ssembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
32. Rules of procedure .―Until rules are made under clause ( 1) of article 208 by the Legislative 
Assembly of a new State, the rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force immediately before 
the appointed day  with respect to the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding State shall have effect in 
relation to the Legislative Assembly of the new State subject to such modifications and adaptations as 
may be made therein by the Speaker.  
The Legislative Councils  
33. Madh ya Pradesh Legislative Council .―(1) As from such date as the President may b y order 
appoint, there shall be a Legislative Council for th e new State of Madhya Pradesh.  
(2) In the said Council there s hall be 1[90] seats of which — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shall be 2[31, 8 and 8] respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of the s aid clause shall be 3[31]; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor in accorda nce with the 
provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that clause shall be 12 . 
(3) As soon as may  be after  the commencement of 4[the Legislative Councils Act, 1957 (37 of 1957)], 
1957)], the President, after consultation with the Election Commiss ion, shall by order determine — 
(a) the constituencies into which the said new State shall be divided for the purpose of elections 
to the Council under each of the sub -clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 6, for “72” (w.e.f . 18-9-1957 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “24, 6 and 6” (w.e.f.  18-9-1957 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “24” (w.e.f . 18-9-1957 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “this Act” (w.e.f.  18-9-1957 ). 18 
 (b) the e xtent of each constituency; and  
(c) the number of seats  allotted to each constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after 1[such commencement], steps shall be taken to constitute the said Council 
in accordance with the provisions of this section and the provisions of the Representation of the People 
Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and the Representation of the  People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).  
2*    *    *    *    * 
34. Bombay Legislative Council .―(1) As from such date as the President may by order appoint, 
there shall be a Legislative Counc il for the new State of Bombay.  
(2) 3[Until otherwise provided by law], the said Council shall consist of — 
(a) all the sitting members of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bombay, except 
those representing the Belgaum (Local Authorities), Bijapur (Local Authorities) and Dharwar  (Local 
Authorities) constitutencies; and  
(b) 25 members to represent the territories specified in clauses ( b), (c), (d) and ( e) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 8 who shall be chosen in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
4*    *    *    *   * 
35. Madras Legislative Council .―(1) In the Legislative Council of Madras, as from the appointed 
day, there s hall be 5[50] seats of which — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shall b e 6[16, 6 and 4] respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 16; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor in accorda nce with the 
provisions of sub -clause  (e) of that clause shall be 8.  
(2) As from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951 shall 
have effect subject to the modifications directed by the Second Sche dule, and in the said Order, ― 
(a) any reference to the State of Madras shall be construed as including the territory added to that 
State by section 4 and as excluding the territory which ceases to be part of that State by virtue of 
section 5, section 6 or section 7;  
(b) any reference to Tirunelveli district shall be construed as including the territory added to tha t 
district by section 4; and  
(c) any reference to Coimbatore district shall be constru ed as excluding Kollegal taluk.  
(3) The two sitting members of the said Council representing the West Coast (L ocal Authorities) 
Constituency 7***, and such two of the eighteen sitting members elected by the members of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 6, for “the appointed day” (w.e.f.18 -9-1957).  
2. Proviso omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “Until the said Council has been reconstituted in acco rdance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and 
(5) of this section and summoned to meet for the first time” (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
4. Omitted by s . 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957) . 
5. Subs. by Act 67 of 1956, s. 2, for “48” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “16, 4 and 4” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
7. The words and brackets “and such two of the six sitting members representing the Madras (Graduates) Constituency” omitted 
by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  19 
 Legislative Assembly, as the Chairman of the said Council shall by order specify, shall, on the appointed 
day, cease to be members of the said Council.  
(4) If, immediately before the appointed day, the total number of sitting members nominated by the 
Governor is nine, such one of them as the Governor shall by order specify shall, on the appointed day, 
cease to b e a member of the said Council.  
(5) Save as provided by sub -section ( 3), every sitting member of the said Council representing a 
council constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of sub-section ( 2) shall, as from the appointed 
day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by that constitutency as so altered . 
(6) As soon as may be after the appointed day, by -elections shall be held in all the local authorities 
constituencies to fill the vacancies existing o n that day in the said Council.  
(7) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
20th April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor sha ll after 
consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the 
terms of office of the members elected under sub -section ( 6) and such modifications as he thinks fit in the 
terms of office  of any of the si tting members.  
36. Mysore Legislative Council .―(1) As from the appointed day there shall be a Legislative Counc il 
for the new State of Mysore.  
(2) 1[Until otherwise provided by law] , the said Council shall consist of — 
(a) all the sitting members of the Legislative Council of th e existing State of Mysore, and  
(b) 12 members to represent the territories specified in clauses ( b), (c), (d) and ( e) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 who shall be chosen in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
2*    *    *    *    * 
37. Punjab Legislative Council .―(1) As from the appointed day there shall be a Legislative Counc il 
for the new State of Punjab.  
(2) 3[Until otherwise provided by law] the said Council shall consist of — 
(a) all the sitting members of the Legislative Council of th e existing State of Punjab; and  
(b) six persons to be elected in such manner as may be prescribed by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union from amongst 
persons who ar e not members of that Assembly.  
4*   *    *    *    * 
38. Chairman and Deputy Chairman .―As from the appointed day until the first meeting of the 
Legislative Council of the new State of Bombay, Mysore or Punjab, as the case may be, the persons who 
immediately before the appointed day are the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council 
of the corresponding State shall be the Chairman and Deputy Chairman,  respectively, of that Council.  
39. Rules of procedure .―Until rule s are made under clause ( 1) of article 208 by the Legislative 
Council of the new State of Bombay, Mysore or Punjab, the rules as to procedure and conduct of business 
in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative Council of t he 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1957, s. 8, for “Until the  said Council has been reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of sub -
sections ( 3) and ( 4) of this section and summoned to meet for the first time” (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
2. Omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certa in words (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  
4. Omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -9-1957).  20 
 corresponding State shall have effect in relation to the Legislative Council of the new State subject to 
such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Chairman.  
Delimitation of Constituencies  
40. Allocation of seats in the House of th e People and assignment of seats t o State Legislative 
Assemblies .―The number of seats in the House of the People allotted to each of the States and the 
number of seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each Part A State and of each Part B State other 
than Jammu and Kashmir by order of the Delimitation Commission un der the Delimitation Commission 
Act, 1952 (81 of 1952) (hereinafter in this Part referred to as “the former Commission ” and “the former 
Act”, respectively) shall be modified as shown in the Third Schedule.  
41. Modification of the Scheduled Castes and Sched uled T ribes Orders .―As soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, the President shall by order make such modifications in the 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order, 
1951, the Constitu tion (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Part C 
States) Order, 1951, as he thinks fit having regard to the territorial changes and formation of new States 
under the provisions of Part II.  
42. Determination of population of Schedul ed Castes and Scheduled Tribes .―(1) After the said 
Orders have been so modified, the population as at the last census of the scheduled castes and of the 
scheduled tribes in the territory which, as from the appointed day, will be comprised in each  of the States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Mysore, Punjab and Rajasthan, shall be 
ascertained or estimated by the census authority in such manner as may be prescribed and shall be 
notified by that aut hority in the Gazette of India.  
(2) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the relevant population figures as 
ascertained at the last census and shall supersede any figures previously published.  
43. Constitut ion of Delimitation Commission .―(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of 
this Act, the Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission 
which shall consist  of three members as follows: ― 
(a) two members each of whom shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court, to be appointed  by the Central Government; and  
(b) the Chief Ele ction Commissioner, ex officio . 
(2) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members appointed under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) to be the Chairman of the Commission.  
44. Duties of the Commission .―It shall be the duty of the Commission — 
(a) to determine on the basis of the population figures notified under section 42 the number of 
seats, if any, to be reserved for the scheduled castes and sch eduled tribes of each of the States 
mentioned in that section in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assembly of the State, 
having regard to the relevant provisions of th e Constitution and of this Act;  
(b) to determine the parliamentary and asse mbly constituencies into which each new State shall 
be divided, the extent of, and the number of seats to be allotted to each such constituency, and the 
number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes of the State  in 
each such constituency; and  
(c) to revise or cancel any of the orders of the former Commission made under section 8 of the 
former Act so as to provide, having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and of this Act, for a 
proper delimitation of all  parliamenta ry and assembly constituencies.  21 
 45. Associate members .―(1) For the purpose of assisting the Commission in the performance of its 
functions under clause ( b) of section 44, the Commission shall associate with itself in respect of each new 
State s uch five persons as the Central Government shall by order specify, being persons who are members 
either of the House of the People or of the Legislative  Assembly of an existing State:  
Provided that such persons shall be chosen, so far as practicable, from among those members who 
were  associated with the former Commission in delimiting constituencies in any part of th e territories of 
the new State.  
(2) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Commission.  
46. Casual vacancies .―If, owing to death or resignation, the office of the Chairman or of a member 
or of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the Central 
Government in accordance with the provisions of section 4 3 or, as the case may be, of section 45.  
47. Procedure as to delimitation .―(1) The provisions of section 7 of the former Act shall apply in 
relation to the Commission as it applied in relation to the former Commission; and in determining the 
matters referr ed to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 44, the Commission shall have regard to the provisions 
contained in clauses ( a) to ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 of the former Act.  
(2) After determining all the matters referred to in section 44, the Commission shall prepare an order, 
to be known as the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956 and send 
authenticated copies thereof to the Central Government and to each of the State Governments; and 
thereupon, that Order shal l supersede all the orders made by the former Commission and have the full 
force of law and shall not be c alled in question in any Court.  
(3) As soon as may be after the said Order is received by the Central Government or a State 
Government, it shall be la id before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the readjustment of the representation of the several 
constituencies in the House of the People or in the Leg islative Assembly of a State and the delimitation of 
those constituencies provided for in the said Order shall apply in relation to every election to the House of 
the People or to the Legislative Assembly of a State, as the case may be, held after the appo inted day, and 
shall so apply in supersession of the provisi ons contained in any other law.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the representation in the House of the People or in the 
Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House or the Assembly, as the case may be, 
existing or brought into exis tence on the appointed day.  
(6) At any time within six months of the date of the said Order, any printing mistake found therein 
and any other error arising therein from an accidental slip or  omission may be corrected by the Chief 
Election Commissioner by order pub lished in the Gazette of India.  
48. Special pro vision as to certain elections .―Where any election is held during the year 
commencing on the appointed day to fill a seat or seats in the Council of States allotted to a new or 
reorganised State or a seat or seats in the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council, if any, of such 
State,  any person who is for the time being an elector for a parliamentary constituency or assembly 
constituency in any of the connected States, shall, for the purpose of sub -section ( 1) of section 3,  
clause ( c) of section 5 or sub -section ( 1) of section 6, as the case may be, of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951), be deemed to be an elector for a parliamentary constituency or assembly 
constituency, as the case may be, of  that new or reorganised State.  
Explanation .―In this section “new or re organised State ” means any of the States specified in the first 
column of the following Table, and “connected States ”, in relation to a new or reorganised State, means 
the States specified against that new or reorgani sed State in the second column:  22 
 New or reorganised State  Connected States  
1. Andhra Pradesh          .               . Bombay and Mysore  
2. Bombay            .         .        .      . Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and 
Mysore  
3. Kerala               .         .        .      . Madras  
4. Madhya Pradesh          .               . Bombay  
5. Madras              .         .        .      . Kerala and Mysore  
6. Mysore             .         .        .      . Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, and Madras.  
PART V  
HIGH COURTS  
49. High Courts for the new States .―(1) The High Courts exercising immediately before the 
appointed day jurisdiction in relation to the existing States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, and Punjab 
shall,  as from the appointed day, be deemed to be the High Courts for the new States of Bombay, Madhya 
Pradesh and Punjab, respectively.  
(2) As from the appointed day, there shall be established a High Court for each of the new States o f 
Kerala, Mysore and Rajasthan.  
50. Abolition of certain Courts .―(1) As from the appointed day, the High Courts of all the existing 
Part B States, except Jammu and Kashmir, and the Courts of the Judicial Commissioners for Ajmer, 
Bhopal, Kutch and Vindhya Pradesh shall cease to fun ction and are hereby abolished.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prejudice o r affect the continued operation of any notice served, 
injunction issued, direction given or proceedings taken before the appointed day by any of the Courts 
abolished by that sub -section under the powers then conferred upon that Court.  
(3) Every such Judge  of a High Court abolished by sub -section ( 1) as the President after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India may, by order made before the appointed day, specify shall, as from that 
day, become a Judge, or if so specified the Chief Justice, of such Hi gh Court as the Presi dent may in that 
order specify.  
51. Principal seat and other places of sitting  of High Courts for new States .―(1) The principal 
seat of the High Court for a new State shall be at such place as the President m ay, by notified order, 
appo int. 
(2) The President may, after consultation with the Governor of a new State and the Chief Justice of 
the High Court for that State, by notified order, provide for the establishment of a permanent bench or 
benches of that High Court at one or more place s within the State other than the principal seat of the High 
Court and for a ny matters connected therewith.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division 
courts of the High Court for a new State may a lso sit at such other place or places in that State as the 
Chief Justice may, with the app roval of the Governor, appoint.  
52. Jurisdiction  of High Courts for new States .―The High Court for a new State shall have, in 
respect of any part of the territories included in that new State, all such original, appellate and other 
jurisdiction as, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, is exercisable in respect of 
that part of the said territories by any High Court or Judicial Commissione r's Cou rt for an existing State . 
 53. Power to enrol advocates, etc .―(1) The High Court for a new State shall have the like powers 
to approve, admit, enrol, remove and suspend advocates and attorneys, and to make rules with respect to 23 
 advocates and attorneys as a re, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, exercisable 
by the High Cou rt for the corresponding State.  
(2) The right of audience in the High Court for a new State shall be regulated in accordance with the 
like principles as, immediatel y before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audience 
in the High Cou rt for the corresponding State:  
Provided that, subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court for a new State in 
exercise of the power conferred by  this section, any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is 
an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act in any such High Court or Judicial 
Commissioner's Court as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court for the 
new State, shall be recognised as an advocate or an attorney entitled to practise or to act, as the case may 
be, in th e High Court for the new State.  
54. Practice and procedure .―Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately 
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court for the corresponding 
State shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court for a new State, and 
accordingly, the High Court for the new State shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with 
respect to practice and procedure as are, immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High 
Court for the corresponding State:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in forc e immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court for the corresponding State shall, until varied or 
revoked by rules or orders made by the High Court for a new State, apply with the necessary 
modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court for the new State as if made by that 
Court.  
55. Custody of sea l of the High Court .―The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court for the corresponding State shall, with the 
necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court for a new State.  
56. For m of writs and other processes .―The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and othe r processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court for the 
corresponding State shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and 
other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court for a new  State.  
57. Powers of Judges .―The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court for the corresponding 
State and with respect to matters ancillary to the ex ercise of those powers shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court for a new State.  
58. Procedure as t o appeals to the Supreme Court .―The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court for the corresponding State 
and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the 
High Court for a new State.  
59. Transfer of pr oceedings to Bombay High Court .―(1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High 
Court at Nagpur (which on the appointed day becomes the High Court for the new State of Madhya 
Pradesh and is referred to in this Act as the High Court of Madhya Pradesh) shall, as from that day, have 
no jurisdiction in respe ct of the territory transferred from the existing State of Madhya Prad esh to the new 
State of Bombay.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Nagpur or the High Court of Hyderabad 
immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief  Justice of that High Court, having 
regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which 
ought to be heard and decided by the High Court for the new State of Bombay (referred to in this Act as 24 
 the High Cour t of Bombay) shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferr ed to the High 
Court of Bombay.  
(3) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Saurashtra or in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for Kutch immediately before the appointed day shall stand transferr ed to the High Court 
of Bombay.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall have, and the High Court of Bombay shall not have, jurisdi ction 
to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review and other proceedings, where any such pro ceedings seek any relief in respect of 
any orders passed by the High Court at N agpur bef ore the appointed day:  
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High 
Court of Bombay, he shall order th at they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereu pon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(5) Any order made before the appointed day by any Court referred to in sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3) in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Bombay by virtue of sub -section ( 2) 
or sub -section ( 3) shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that Court, but also as an order 
of the High Court of Bombay; and any order made by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in any 
proceedings wi th respect to which that Court retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section to ( 4) shall for 
all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that High Court, but also as an order of the High Court of 
Bom bay. 
60. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfe r of pro ceedings to, Kerala High Court .―(1) As 
from the appointed day the jurisdiction of the High Court for the State of Kerala (referred to in this Act as 
the High Court o f Kerala) shall extend to the 1[Union territory] of the Laccadive , Minicoy and Amindivi 
Islands.  
(2) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Madras shall, as from the appointed day, have 
no jurisd iction in respect of the said 1[Union territory] or in respect of any territory transferred from the 
State of  Madras to the State  of Kerala.  
(3) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras immediately before the appointed day as 
are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of 
action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court 
of Kerala shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferr ed to the High Court of Kerala.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High Court of Kerala shall not have, jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications 
for review and other proceedi ngs, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order 
passed by the High Court at Madras before the appointed d ay: 
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Madras it 
appears to the Chief Justi ce of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Kerala, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereu pon be 
transferred accordingly.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956, for “Part C State”.  25 
 (5) Any order made by the High Cour t at Madras — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Kerala b y virtue 
of sub -section ( 3); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Madras retains jurisdictio n by 
virtue of sub -section ( 4), 
shall for all purpos es have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Madras, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Kerala.  
(6) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Travancore -Cochin immediately before the 
appointed day other than those certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 66 shall stand transferred to the High Court of Kerala, and any order made before the appointed 
day by the first mentioned High Court in any such proceedings shall for all purposes have effect, not only 
as an order of that High Court, but also as an ord er of the High Court of Kerala.  
61. Transfer of proceeding s to Madhya Pradesh High Court .―(1) Such proceedings pending in 
the High Court of the existing State of Rajasthan immediately befor e the appointed day as are certified by 
the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other 
circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh sh all, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to th e High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh.  
(2) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Madhya Bharat or in the Court of the Judicial 
Commissioner for Bhopal or in the Court of the Judicial Comm issioner for Vindhya Pradesh, immediately 
before the appointed day, shall stand transferred to th e High Court of Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) Any order made before the appointed day by any Court referred to in sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2) shall for all purpo ses have effect not only as an order of that Court but also as an order of 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.  
62. Transfer of proce edings to Mysore High Court .―(1) Except as hereinafter provided, neither 
the High Court of Bombay nor the High Court at Madras  shall, as from the appointed day, have 
jurisdiction in respect of any territory transferred from the existing State of Bombay or the State of 
Madras, as the case may be, to the new State of Mysore.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Hyderab ad or the High Court at Bombay or 
Madras, immediately before the appointed day, as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings 
which ought to  be heard and decided by the High Court for the new State of Mysore (referred to in this 
Act as the High Court of Mysore) shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferr ed to the 
High Court of Mysore.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Bombay or, as the case may be, the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High 
Court of Mysore shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applicat ions for leave 
to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings, where any such 
proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Bombay or M adras before 
the appointed day:  
Provided that if after a ny such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Bombay or at 
Madras it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High 
Court of Mysore, he shall order that they shall be so transferred and such p roceedings shall thereu pon be 
transferred accordingly.  26 
 (4) Any order made by the High Court of Hyderabad before the appointed day in any proceedings 
transferred to the High Court of Mysore by virtue of sub -section ( 2) shall, for all purposes, have effect n ot 
only as an order of the High Court of Hyderabad, but also as an order made by the High Court of Mysore.  
(5) Any order made by the Hi gh Court at Bombay or Madras — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Mysore b y virtue 
of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) the said High Court shall be known as the High Court of Bombay or at Madras retains 
jurisdictio n by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of the High Court of Bombay or at Madras, but 
also as an ord er of the High Court of Mysore.  
(6) All proceedings pending in the High Court of the existing State of Mysore immediately before the  
appointed day, shall stand transferred to the High Court of Mysore; and any order made before the  
appointed day by the first mentioned High Court in any such proceedings shall for all purposes have 
effect, not only as an order of that High Court, but also as an ord er of the High Court of Mysore.  
63. Transfer of pr oceedings to Punjab High Court .―(1) All proceedings pending in the High 
Court of Patiala and East Punjab States Union immediately before the appointed day shall stand 
transferred to the High Court for the new State of Punjab (referred to in this Ac t as the High Court of 
Punjab).  
(2) Any order made before the appointed day by the High Court of Patiala and East Punjab States 
Union shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that Court, but also as an order ma de by 
the High Court of Punjab.  
64. Transfer of proce edings to Rajasthan High Court .―(1) As from the appointed day, the High 
Court of Bombay shall have no jurisdiction in respect of the territory transferred from the existing State of 
Bombay,  to the new State of Rajasthan.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Bombay or the High Court of Madhya Bharat 
immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having 
regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which 
ought to be heard and decided by the High Court for the new State of Rajasthan (referred to in this Act as 
the High Court of Rajasthan) shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High 
Court of Rajasthan.  
(3) All proceedings pending in the High Court of the existing State of Rajasthan immediately before 
the appointed day other than those certified under sub -section ( 1) of section 61 and all proceedings 
pending in the Court of the Judicial C ommissioner for Ajmer immediately before the appointed day shall 
stand transferred to the High Court of Rajasthan.  
(4) Any order made before the appointed day by any Court referred to in sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3) in any proceedings transferred to  the High Court of Rajasthan by virtue of sub -section ( 2) 
or sub -section ( 3) shall, for all purposes, have effect not only as an order of that Court, but also as an 
order of the High Court of Rajasthan.  
65. High Court of Andhra Pradesh .―(1) As from the appointed day, ― 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of the existing State of Andhra shall extend to the whole of 
the territories transferred to that State from the e xisting State of Hyderabad;  
(b) the said High Court shall be known as the Hi gh Court of Andhra Pradesh; and  
(c) the principal seat of the said Hi gh Court shall be at Hyderabad.  27 
 (2) All proceedings pending in the High Court of Hyderabad immediately before the appointed day, 
other than those certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court under sub -section ( 2) of section 59 or 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 62, shall stand transferred to th e High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
(3) Any order made by the High Court of Hyderabad before the appointed day in any proceedings 
transferred to the High C ourt of Andhra Pradesh by virtue of sub -section ( 2) shall, for all purposes, have 
effect not only as an order of the High Court of Hyderabad but also as an order made by th e High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
(4) Any person who, immediately before the appointed  day, is an advocate entitled to practise in the 
High Court of Hyderabad shall, as from the appointed day, be recognised as an advocate entitled to 
practise in th e High Court of Andhra Pradesh:  
Provided that if any such person makes, within one year from t he appointed day, an application to the 
High Court of Bombay or to the High Court of Mysore for being recognised as an advocate entitled to 
practise in that High Court, he shall be so recognised, and on such recognition, he shall cease to be 
recognised as an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
66. High Court  for the areas added to Madras .―(1) Except as hereinafter provided the jurisdiction 
of the High Court at Madras shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the whole of the territories 
transferred to the State of Madras from the State of Travancore -Cochin.  
(2) Such proceedings pending i n the High Court of Travancore -Cochin immediately before the 
appointed day as are certified before that day by the Chief Justice of that High Court having regard to the 
place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances to be proceedings which o ught to be heard 
and decided by the High Court at Madras shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred 
to the Hi gh Court at Madras.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Kerala shall have, and the High Court at Madras shall not have, jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications 
for r eview and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order 
passed by the High Court of Travancore -Cochin before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Kerala, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of t hat High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court at 
Madras, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereu pon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made — 
(a) by the High Court of Travancore -Cochin before the appointed day in any proceedings 
transferred to the High Court at Madras b y virtue of sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) by the High Court of Kerala in any proceedings with respect to which that High Court retains 
jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section ( 3), shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the 
High Court of Travancore -Cochin or the High Court of Kerala, as the case may be, but also as an 
order ma de by the High Court at Madras.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by th e High Court at Madras, any such person who 
immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of Travancore - 
Cochin as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madras having regard 
to the transfer of territories from Travancore -Cochin to Madras, shall be recognised as an advocate 
entitled to practise in the High Court at Madras.  
67. Right to appear or act in proceedings tr ansferred to other High Courts .―Any person who 
immediately befo re the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in 28 
 the High Court for an existing State and was authori sed to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred 
from that High Court to any other High Court under any o f the foregoing provisions of this Part shall have 
the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the other High Court i n relation to those proceedings  
68. Interpretation .―For the p urposes of sections 59 to 66 ― 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that court has disposed of all 
issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applicat ions for review, petitions for revisi on and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as inc luding 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
69. Savings .―Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court for a new State of 
any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effe ct subject to any provision that may be 
made on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority 
havin g power to make such provision.  
PART VI  
AUTHORI SATION OF EXPENDITURE  
70. Authori sation of expenditure of new States .―In the case of every new State, the Governor or 
Rajpramukh of the corresponding State may at any time before the appointed day authori se such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the new State as he deems necessary for a ny period not 
extending beyo nd the 31st day of March, 1957:  
Provided that the Governor of the new State may, after the appointed day, authori se such further 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems  necessary for the said period.  
71. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories und er existing 
Appropriation Acts .―(1) As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of the State of 
Andhra or Madras before that day for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of the 
State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial yea r 1956 -57 shall have effect also in 
relation to the transferred territory in that State, and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend 
any amount in such transferred territory out of the amount authori sed by such Act to be expended for any 
servi ce in that State.  
(2) The Governor of Andhra Pradesh or of Madras may, after the appointed day, authori se such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in 
the transferred territory of the State fo r any period not extending beyo nd the 31st day of March, 1957.  
72. Reports relating to the accounts of certain States .―(1) Where the whole or any part of the 
territory of an existing State has been transferred to another existing State or to a new State by  the 
provisions of Part II, the  reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in  
clause ( 2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of that existing State in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day, shall be submitted to the  Governor of such State or of each of such States as the President 
may be order specify and the Governor shall thereupon cause them to be laid before  the Legislature of 
that State.  
(2) The President may b y order — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of  the Consolidated Fund of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh 
or Punjab or of any Part B or Part C State on any service during the financial year 1955 -56 or any 
earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in 
the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authori sed, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter a rising out of the said reports.  29 
 73. Allowances and privileges of Governors of certain States .―The allowances and privileges of 
the Governor of Andhra Pradesh or of Madras or of each new State shall, until provision in that behalf is 
made by Parliament by law under clause ( 3) of article 158, be such as the Pres ident may, by order, 
determine.  
74. Distribution of revenues .―(1) Sectio n 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1953 
(3 of 1953) and paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) Order, 1953, shall, in 
respect of the financial year 1956 -57, have effect in the modified form set out in the Fourt h Schedule.  
(2) There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of each of the three financial 
years 1957 -58, 1958 -59 an d 1959 -60 as grants -in-aid of — 
(a) the State of Bombay, the sum, if any, by which 8.58 per cent. of  the total of the amounts 
payable to that State under articles 270 and 272 falls s hort of 248.04 lakhs of rupees;  
(b) the State of Kerala, the sum, if any, by which 61.91 per cent. of the total of the amounts 
payable to that State under the said articles f alls s hort of 232.38 lakhs of rupees;  
(c) the State of Madras, the sum, if any, by which 2.97 per cent. of the total of the amounts 
payable to that State under the said articles falls shor t of 24.65 lakhs of rupees;  
(d) the State of Mysore, the sum, if any , by which 46.75 per cent. of the total of the amounts 
payable to that State under the said articles falls short of 28 9.80 lakhs of rupees.  
PART VII  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF CERTAIN PART A AND PART B STATES  
75. Application of Part .―The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of 
the assets and liabilities immediately before the appointed day of every Part A or Part B State the whole 
or any part of whose territories is transferred to another State or become s 1[Union territory] by virtue of 
the provisions of Part II; and the expression “existing State ” shall accordingly be construed to mean any 
such Part A State or Part B State.  
76. Land and goods .―(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belongi ng to an existing State shall — 
(a) if within the existing State, pass to the successor State  in which they are situated; or  
(b) if outside the existing State, pass to the successor State or if there be two or mor e successor 
States, to  the principal successor State:  
Provided that where there are two or more successor States and the Central Government is of 
opinion that any goods or class of goods should be distributed among them otherwise than according 
to the situ ation of the goods, the Central Government may issue such directions as it thinks fit for a 
just and equitable distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass to th e successor States 
accordingly.  
(2) Any unissued stores of any class in an existing State  shall pass to the successor State, or if there be 
two or more successor States, shall be divided between them in proportion to the total indents for stores of 
that class made in the period of three years ending with the 31st day of March, 1956, for the te rritories of 
the existing State included respectively in each of those successor States excluding the indents relating to 
the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over t he whole of the existing 
State:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956, for “Part C State”.  30 
 Provided that nothing in  this sub -section shall apply to stores held for specific purposes, such as use 
or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or undertakings or on parti cular works under 
construction.  
(3) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable pr operty of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.  
77. Treasury and bank balances .―The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of an existing 
State and the credit balances of that State with the Reserve Bank of India immediately before the 
appointed day shall pass to the successor State, or, if there be two or more successor States, be divided 
between them acc ording to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purpose of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances of 
the successor States in the books of the Reserve Bank o f India on the appointed day:  
Provided further that if any successor State has no account with the Reserve Bank of India the 
adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Government may by order direct.  
78. Arrears of taxes. ―The right to recover arrears of a ny tax or duty on property, including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the right to 
recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose territories the pla ce of 
assessment of that tax or duty is included.  
79. Right  to recover loans and advances .―(1) The right to recover any loans or advances made 
before the appointed day by an existing State to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in an 
area within that State shall belong to the successor State in which that area is included.  
(2) The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day by an existing State to 
any person or institution outside that State shall belong to the successor State or, if there be two or more 
successor States, to  the principal successor State:  
Provided that where there are two or more successor States, any sum recovered in respect of any such 
loan or advance shall be divided between all the successor States acc ording to the population ratio.  
80. Credits in certain funds .―The investments in the cash balance investments account, the famine 
relief fund and the general fund of an existing State and the sums at the credit of an existing State in the 
central road fund shall pass to the successor State or, if there be two or more successor States, be d ivided 
between them according to the population ratio; and the investments in any special fund the objects of 
which are confined to a local area in an existing State shall pass to the successor State in which that area 
is included.  
81. Assets and lia bilities of State undertakings .―(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of an existing State shall pass to the successor State in wh ich the 
undertaking is located.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by an existing State for any commercial or 
industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall pass to the 
successor State in wh ich the undertaking is located.  
82. Public debt .―(1) The public debt of the existing State of Hyderabad attributable to loans raised 
by the issue of Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the 31st day of 
October, 1956, shall as from that day be the debt of  the Union, and immediately on such transfer of the 
debt, the Central Government shall be deemed to have made a loan to that State of an amount equal to the 
debt so transferred on the same terms in regard to interest and repayment as are applicable to the  loans so 
raised by that State.  31 
 (2) The public debt of any other existing State attributable to loans raised by the issue of Government 
securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day shall, as from that day, 
be the debt of t he successor State or, if there be two or more successor States, be the debt of such one of 
them as the Central Government may, by order, spe cify; and in the latter case, ― 
(a) the other successor States shall be liable to pay to the successor State so spec ified their shares 
of the sums due from time to time for the servicing  and repayment of the debt, and  
(b) for the purpose of determining the said shares, the debt shall be deemed to be divided between 
the successor States as if it were a debt referred to i n sub -section ( 3). 
(3) The public debt of an existing State attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, t he 
Reserve Bank of India or any other bank before the appointed day, including in the case of Hyderabad the 
loan deemed to have been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), shall pass to the 
successor State, or if there be two or more successor States, be divided between them in proportion to the 
total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incurred up to th e appointed day in the 
territories of the existing State included respectively in each of those successor States:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, only expenditure on assets for which capital accounts 
have been ke pt shall be taken into acco unt: 
Provided further that any loan taken from the Central Government by the Government  of an existing 
State before the appointed day in connection with the construction of buildings, roads or other works for 
the capital of a new State or any State affecte d by the provisions of Part II or for purposes incidental 
thereto shall, to the extent of the expenditure so incurred until that day, be wholly the liability of the 
successor State in  which the capital is included.  
(4) Where a sinking fund or depreciation fund is maintained by an existing State for the repayment of 
any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall pass to the 
successor State or, if there be two or more successor States, be divided between them in  the same 
proportion as the public debt referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) In this section, the expression “Government security ” means a security created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under, clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Publ ic Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944).  
83. Refun d of taxes collec ted in excess. ―The liability of an existing State to refund any tax or duty 
on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in 
which the property is situated, and the liability of an existing State to refund any other tax or duty 
collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in whose territories the place of assessment 
of that tax or duty is included.  
84. Deposits .―The liability of an existing State in respect of any civil deposit or  local fund deposit 
shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the successor State in whose area  the deposit has been 
made.  
85. Provident funds .―The liability of an existing State in respect of the provident fund account of a 
Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of the 
successor State to which that Government s ervant is permanently allotted.  
86. Pensions .―The liability of the existing States in respect of pensions shall pass to, or be 
apportioned between, the successor States in accordance with the provisions c ontained in the Fifth 
Schedule.  
87. Contracts .―(1) Where before the appointed day an existing State has made any contract in the 
exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed to have been 
made in the ex ercise of the executive power — 32 
 (a) if there be only one successor Stat e,―of that State;  
(b) if there be two or more successor States and the purposes of the contract are, as from the 
appointed day, exclusively purposes of any o ne of them, ―of that State; and  
(c) if there be two or more successor States and the purposes of the contract are, as from  that day, 
not exclusivel y purposes of any one of them, ―of the principal successor State;  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State, be rights or liabilities of 
the successor State or the principal s uccessor State specified above:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( c), the initial allocation of rights an d 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between all the successor States concerned, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government 
may by order direct.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to b e included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any Court or other tribunal in proceeding s 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any  liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other  financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
88. Liability  in respect of actionable wrong .―Where, immediately before the appointe d day, an 
existing State is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong other than breach of c ontract, 
that liability shall — 
(a) if there be only one successor State , be a liability of that State;  
(b) if there be two or more successor States  and the cause of action arose wholly within the 
territories which as from that day are the territories of one of them, be a liabili ty of that successor 
State; and  
(c) in any other case, be initially a liability of the principal successor State, but subjec t to such 
financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the successor States concerned, or in default 
of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
89. Liability as gua rantor of co -operative society .―Where, immediately before the appointed day, 
an existing State is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society, that 
lability of the existing State shal l— 
(a) if there be only one successor State , be a liability of t hat State;  
(b) if there be two or more successor States and the area of the society's operations is limited to 
the territories which as from that day are the territories of one of them, be a liabili ty of that successor 
State; and  
(c) in any other case, be a liability of  the principal successor State:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( c), the initial allocation of liabilities 
under this section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the 
succe ssor States, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  33 
 90. Items in suspense .―If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referr ed to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
91. Residuary provision .―The benefit or burden of any assets or liabilities of an existing State not 
dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall — 
(a) if there be only one successor  State, pass to that State, and  
(b) if there be two or more successor States, pass to the principal successor State in the first 
instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between all the successor Stat es, 
before the 1st day of October, 1957, or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may 
be order direct.  
92. Power of the Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain 
cases .―Where by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States becomes entitled 
to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is 
of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by any State tha t it 
is just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transferred to or shared with, one or more of 
the other successor States, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by one or more of 
the other successor State s, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner, or the other 
successor State or States shall make to the State primarily subject to the liability such contribution in 
respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation wi th the State Government s concerned 
by order determine.  
93. Certain expenditure to be ch arged on the Consolidated Fund .―All sums payable by the 
Union to any State or by any State to any other State or to the Union by virtue of the provisions of this 
Part sh all be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of 
the State by which such sums are payable.  
PART VIII  
APPORTIONMENT OF CERTAIN ASSETS AND LIABILITIES OF THE UNION  
94. Definitions .―In this Part, ― 
(a) “existing  State ” means any of the existing Part C States of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg,  Kutch and 
Vindhya Pradesh;  
(b) “Union purposes ” mean the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matte rs mentioned 
in the Union List.  
95. Passing of certain assets and liabilit ies of the Union to successor  States .―Subject to the other 
provisions of this Part — 
(a) such of the assets of the Union within an existing State as are immediately before the 
appointed day held by the Union for purposes of the governance of that State shal l, as from that day, 
pass to the successor State, unless the purposes for which the assets are so held are Union purposes; 
and 
(b) all liabilities of the Union arising out of, or in relation to, the governance of an existing State 
shall, as from the appoin ted day, be liabilities of the successor State, unless the liabilities are relatable 
to a Union  purpose.  
96. Arrears of taxes .―The right to recover arrears of any tax (including land revenue) due in an 
existing State, being a tax enumerated in the State List, sha ll pass to the successor State.  34 
 97. Loans and advances .―The right to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed 
day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in an existing State shall belong to the 
successor State unl ess the loan or advance was made in connection with  a Union purpose.  
98. D ebts due to Central Government .―Any debt of an existing State attributable to any loan given 
by the Central Government on or after the 1st day of April, 1954, and outstanding immedia tely before the 
appointed day shall be a debt due by the successor S tate to the Central Government.  
99. Provident fund .―The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account of a 
Government servant serving immediately before the appointed day  in an existing State under the 
administrative control of the Lieutenant -Governor or Chief Commissioner thereof shall, as from that day, 
be the li ability of the successor State:  
Provided that the Central Government shall transfer to the successor State fun ds equal to the liability 
of the  Union as on the appointed day.  
100. Pensions .―Where a Government servant under the administrative control of the Lieutenant -
Governor or Chief Commissioner of an existing State has, before the appointed day, retired or proce eded 
on leave preparatory to retirement, any outstanding claim in respect of his pension shall be settled by the 
successor State; but the liability in respect of the pension sanctioned to any such Government servant, 
whether before or after the appointed d ay, shall be the liabilit y of the Union.  
101. Contracts .―(1) Any contract made before the appointed day by the Union in the exercise of its 
executive power for purposes of the governance of an existing State shall, as from that day, be deemed to 
have been made in the exercise of the executive power of the successor State, unless the purposes of the 
contract are Union purposes; and all rights and liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any 
such contract shall, to the extent to which they would hav e been rights and liabilities of the Union if this 
Act had not been passed, be rights and liab ilities of the successor State.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 87 shall apply in relation to any such contract 
as they apply in relation to a contract to which sub -section (1) of that section applies.  
PART IX  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS AND INTER -STATE  AGREEMENTS  AND ARRANGEMENTS  
102. Provision as to certai n State Financial Corporations .―(1) As from the appointed day, the  
Financial Corporations established under the State Financial Cor porations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951 ), for the 
existing States of Madhya Bharat, Pu njab, Rajasthan and Travancore -Cochin shall be deemed to be the 
Financial Corporations established under the said  Act for the new States of Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan and Kerala, re spectively.  
(2) The States of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan shall be liable to pay to the States of 
Madras, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, respectively, on account of the shar e of each of the last -named 
States in the paid -up capital of the Financial Corporations for the existing States of Travancore -Cochin, 
Madhya Bharat and Rajasthan, respectively, such amount as the Central Gov ernment may by order 
determine.  
(3) As from the a ppointed day, the Financial Corporations established under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the existing States of Andhra and Hy derabad shall stand 
amalgamated and shall be deemed to be the Financial Corporation established unde r the said Act f or the 
State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(4) After consulting the Governments of the existing States of Andhra and Hyderabad, the Central 
Government may, before the appointed day, by notified order, provide for the constitution of the Board of 
Directors of the Financial Corporation for the State of  Andhra Pradesh and for such consequential, 35 
 incidental and supplemental matters as may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be necessary to 
give effect to the  provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The State of Andhra Pradesh shall be liable to pay to ea ch of the new States of Mysore and 
Bombay on account of its share of the paid -up capital of the Financial Corporation for the existing State 
of Hyderabad such amount as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine.  
(6) As from the appointed day, the Fin ancial Corporations established under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the existing States of Bombay and Saurashtra shall stand 
amalgamated and shall be deemed to be the Financial Corporation established under the said A ct for t he 
new State of Bombay.  
(7) After consulting the Governments of the existing States of Bombay and Saurashtra, the Central 
Government may, before the appointed day, by notified order, provide for the constitution of the Board of 
Directors of the Financial C orporation for the new State of Bombay and for such consequential, incidental 
and supplemental matters as may, in the opinion of the Central Government, be necessary to give effect to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 6). 
(8) The new State of Bombay shall be liable to pay to each of the new States of Mysore and Rajasthan 
on account of its share of the paid -up capital of the Financial Corporation for the existing State of 
Bombay such amount as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine.  
103. Provisions as to the Madras In dustrial Investment Corporation .―(1) As from the appointed 
day, the Madras Industrial Investment Corporation constituted for the existing State of Madras shall be 
deemed to have been constituted for that State with its area as altere d by the provisions of Part II.  
(2) The State of Madras shall be liable to pay to each of the new States of Kerala and Mysore on 
account of its share of the paid -up capital of the said Corporation such amount as the Central Government 
may by order determine.  
104. Amendment of Act 2 of 1934 .―With effect from the appointed day, the following amendments 
shall be made in the Reserve Bank of India Ac t, 1934 (2 of 1934 ), namely: ― 
(1) in section 2, in the proviso to clause ( f), for the words “any Central co -operative society in that 
State to be a State co -operative bank ”, the words “any one or more co -operative societies carrying on 
business in that State to be a State co -operative bank or banks ” shall be substit uted.  
(2) in section 20, ― 
(a) the words and letter “and t he Governments of Part A States ” shall be omitted;  
(b) for the words “their accounts respectively ”, the words “its account ” shall be substituted;  
(c) for the words “their exchange ”, the words “its exchange ” shall be substituted;  
(d) after the words “public  debt”, the words “of the Union ” shall be inserted;  
(3) in section 21, ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),― 
(i) the words “and the State Governments ” whereve r they occur, shall be omitted;  
(ii) for the word “their”, at both places where it occurs, the word “its” shall be 
substituted;  
(iii) in the proviso, the words “or any State Government ” shall be omitted, and for the 
word “they” the word “it” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), the words “and each State Government ” shall be omitted;  36 
 (c) for sub-section ( 4), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: ― 
“(4) Any agreement made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before Parliament ”; and  
(d) sub -section  (5), shall be omitted;  
(4) in sub -section ( 1) of section 21 -A, the word and letter “Part B ” shall be omitted;  
(5) after section 21 -A, the following secti on shall be inserted, namely: ― 
21-B. Effect of agreements made between the Bank and certain States befor e the Ist 
November, 1956. ―“(1) Any agreement made under section 21 or section 21 -A between the 
Bank and the Government of a State specified in the Explanation below and in force 
immediately before the Ist day of November, 1956, shall, as from that day have effect as if it 
were an agre ement made on that day under section 21 -A between the Bank and the 
Government of the corresponding State subject to such modifications, if any, being of a 
character not affecting the general operation of the agreement, as may be agreed upon 
between the Ban k and the Government of the corresponding State, or in default of such 
agreement, as may be made therein by o rder of the Central Government.  
Explanation .―In this sub -section “corresponding State ” means, ― 
(a) in relation to the agreement between the Bank an d the State of Andhr a, the State 
of Andhra Pradesh;  
(b) in relation to the agreement between the Bank and any other Part A State as it 
existed before the Ist day of November, 1956, th e State with the same name; and  
(c) in relation to the agreement between the Bank and the Part B  State of Mysore or 
Travancore -Cochin as it existed before the Ist day of November, 1956, the State of  
Mysore or Kerala respectively.  
(2) Any agreement made under section 21 -A between the Bank and t he Government of the 
Part B State of Hyderabad, Madhya Bharat or Saurashtra shall be deemed to have terminated on 
the 31st day of October, 1956 .”. 
105. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 .―In the Multi -Unit Co -operative Societies Act, 1942 (6 of 1942), 
after sectio n 5, the following sectio ns shall be inserted, namely: ― 
 “5A. Transitional provisions regarding certain co -operative societies affected by 
reorganisation of States .―(1) Where by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the States 
Reorganisation  Act, 1956, any co -operative society which, immediately before the Ist day of 
November, 1956, had its objects confined to  one State becomes, as from that day, a multi -unit co -
operative society, it shall be deemed to be a co -operative society to which this Act applies and shall 
be deemed to be actually registered in the State in which the principal place of business of the co -
operative society is situated.  
(2) If it appears to the Central Registrar of Co -operative Societies necessary or expedient that any 
such society should be reconstituted or reorganised in any manner or that it should be dissolved, the 
Central Registrar may, with the approval of the Central Government, place before a meeting of the 
general body of the society held in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, a 
scheme for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the society, including proposals 
regarding the formation of new co -operative societies and the transfer thereto of the assets a nd 
liabilities of that  society.  
(3) If the scheme is sanctioned by a resolution passed by a majority of the members present at the 
said meeting, either without modifications or with modifications to which the Central Registrar 
agrees, he shall certify the scheme and upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any law, regulation or bye -law for the time being in force, be 
binding on all the societies affected by the scheme, as well as the shareholders and c reditors of all 
such societies.   37 
 (4) If the scheme is not sanctioned under sub -section ( 3), the Central Registrar may refer the 
scheme to such Judge of the appropriate High Court as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief 
Justice thereof, and the decision of that Judge i n regard to the scheme shall be final and shall be 
binding on all the societies affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors of all 
such societies.  
Explanation .―In this sub -section “appropriate High Court ” means the High Court within wh ose 
jurisdiction the principal place of business of the multi -unit co -operative society is situated.  
5B. Power to delegate .―The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power or authority exercisable by the Central Registrar of Co -operative Societies 
under this Act shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions as may b e specified in 
the direction, be exercisable also by such Registrar of Co -operative Societies of a State or by such 
officer subordinate to the Central Government or to a State Government as may be specified in the 
notification. ”. 
106. Provision as to certa in State Electricity Boards and apportionment o f their assets and 
liabilities .―(1) The State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 
1948), for any of the existing States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and Saurashtra shall as from the 
appointed day continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately 
before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may from time to time 
be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government  under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such 
Board shall include a direction that the said Act shall in its application to that Board have effect subject to 
such exceptions and modifications as the Cent ral Government thinks fit.  
(3) A State Electricity Board continued under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as from, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on, the Ist day of November, 1957, or such earlier date as the Central 
Government may by order app oint; and upon such dissolution, its assets and liabilities shall, ― 
(a) in the case of the Board for Saurashtra, p ass to the State of Bombay, and  
(b) in the case of the Board for the existing State of Bombay or Madhya Pradesh, be apportioned 
between the su ccessor States in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of 
the dissolution of the Board or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Gov ernment 
may by order determine.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this  section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of any of the successor States to the existing States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and 
Saurashtra from constituting at any time after the appointed day a State Electricity Board for that 
successor State  under the provisions of the said Act; and if such a Board is so constituted before the 
dissolution of a Board continued under sub -section ( 1) and functioning in any part of that successor  
State, ― 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board to take 
over from the existing Board all or any of its undertakings, assets and liabilities in that State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board, any assets and liabilities which would otherwise 
have passed to the successor State by or under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall pass to the new 
Board ins tead of to the successor State.  
107. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of elec tric power and 
supply of water .―If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the 
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the development 
of any project for such generation or s upply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of 
that area by reason of the fact that it has been transferred by the provisions of Part II from the State in 
which the power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the 
catchment are  a reservoirs and other works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the 38 
 Central Government may give such directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other 
authority concerned for the maintena nce, so far as practicabl e, of the previous arrangement.  
108. Continuance of agreements and arrangements relating to certain irrigation, p ower or 
multi -purpose projects .―(1) Any agreement or arrangement entered into between the Central 
Government and one or more existing States or between two or mor e existing States relating to — 
(a) the administration, maintenance and operation of any project execut ed before the appointed 
day, or  
(b) the distribution of benefits, such as, the right to receive and utilise w ater or electric power, to 
be derived as a result of  the execution of such project,  
which was subsisting immediately before the appointed day shall continue in force, subject to such 
adaptations and modifications, if any (being of a character not affecting  the general operation of the 
agreement or arrangement) as may be agreed upon between the Central Government and the successor 
State concerned or between the successor States concerned, as the case may be, by the Ist day of 
November, 1957, or, if no agreem ent is reached by the said date, as may be made therein by o rder of the 
Central Government.  
(2) Where a project concerning one or more of the existing States affected by the provisions of Part II 
has been taken in hand, but not completed, or has been accepted by the Government of India for inclusion 
in the Second Five Year Plan before the appointed  day, neither the scope of the project nor the provisions 
relating to its administration, maintenance or operation or to the distribution of benefits to be der ived 
from  it shall be varied, ― 
(a) in the case where a single successor State is concerned with t he project after the appointed 
day, except with the  previous approval  of the Central Government, and  
(b) in the case where two or more successor States are concerned with the project after that day, 
except by agreement between those successor States, or if  no agreement is reached, except in such 
manner as the Central Government may by order direct,  
and the Central Government may from time to time give such directions as may appear to it to be 
necessary for the due completion of the project and for its admi nistration, mainte nance and operation 
thereafter.  
(3) In this section, the expression “project ” means a project for the promotion of irrigation, water 
supply or drainage or for the development of electric power or for the regulation or development of any 
inter-State river or river valley.  
109. General provisio n as to statutory corporations .―(1) Save  as otherwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where any body corporate has been constituted under a Central Act, 
State Act or Provincial Act for an existing State the whole or any part of which is by virtue of the 
provisions of  Part II transferred to any other existing State or to a new State, then, notwithstanding such 
transfer, the body corporate shall, as from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those 
areas in respect of which it was functioning and operati ng immediately before that day, subject to such 
directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until other provision is made 
by law in resp ect of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by th e Central Government under sub-section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall 
in its application to that body corporate have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may  
be spe cified in the direction.  
110. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain e xisting road transport 
permits .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  
(4 of 1939) a permit granted by the State or a Regional Transport Authority in an existing Stat e, the whole 39 
 or any part of the territories of which is transferred to another existing State or to a new State shall, if such 
permit was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area  in the territories so 
transferred, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to the 
provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be necessary for any such 
permit to be count ersigned by any other State or Regional Transport Authority for the purpose of 
validating it for use in such transferred te rritories:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, add to, a mend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority b y 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operation s in any transferred territory under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees 
or other charges for its operations beyond the boundaries of the State in which such permit was granted:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, authori se the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or oth er charges, as the case 
may be.  
111. Special provision relating to retrenchm ent compensation in certain cases .―Where on 
account of the reorganisation of the States under this Act, any body corporate constituted under a Central 
Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any law relating to  
co-operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of an existing State, is reconstituted or 
reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate or undertaking, 
or is dissolved, and in consequence of such re constitution, reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolution, 
any workman employed by such body corporate or in any such undertaking is transferred to, or  
re-employed by, any other body corporate or undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) such transfer or re -employment shall not 
entitle him to any compensation unde r that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or   
re-employment are not less 357 favourable  to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the  transfer or re -employment; and  
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate or the undertaking where th e workman is 
transferred or re -employed, is by agreement or otherwise legally liable to pay to the workman, in the 
event of his retrenchment, compensation under section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 
1947), on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not b een interrupted by  the transfer or 
re-employment.  
112. Provision as to the Devas wom Surplus Fund of Travancore .―(1) As from the appointed day, 
there shall be established in the State of Madras a Devaswom Fund for the management of Hindu temples 
and shrines  in the territories transferred to that State from the State of Travancore -Cochin.  
(2) The assets as on the appointed day of the Devaswom Surplus Fund constituted by section 26 of 
the Travancore -Cochin Hindu Religious Institutions Act, 1950, shall be divid ed into two parts in the ratio 
of 37.5 to 13.5 in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, direct, and the smaller part 
shall, as from the appointed day, be transferred to the Fun d mentioned in sub -section ( 1). 
113. Continuance of facilities  in certain State institutions .―The Central Government may, in 
respect of the institutions of the categories specified in the Sixth Schedule located in a new State or in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras, direct that such facilities as may be specified in the direction shall be 
provi ded to the Government and the people of one or more adjoining States for such period as may be so 
specified; and thereupon those facilities shall be provided for the said period upon such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the State Governm ents concerned before the 31st day of 40 
 March, 1957, or, if no agreement is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by o rder of the Central 
Government.  
PART X  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
114. Provisions relating to All -India Services .―(1) In this section, th e expression “State cadre ”― 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Servi ce (Cadre) Rules, 1954, and  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Poli ce 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954.  
(2) As from the appointed day, there shall be constituted for each of the new States a State cadre of 
the Indian Administrative Service  and a State cadre of the Indian Police Service . 
(3) The initial strength and composition of each of the said cadres shall be such as the Central 
Government may b y order dete rmine before the appointed day.  
(4) The cadres of each of the said services for th e existing States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, 
Punjab and Vindhya Pradesh and for the existing Part B States shall, as from the appointed day, cease to 
exist, and the members of each of the said services borne on those cadres shall be allocated to the State 
cadres of the same service for the new States or for the other existing States in such manner and with 
effect from such date or dates as the Central G overnment may by order specify.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation after the appointed day of the All -
India Services Act , 1951 (61 of 1951 ), or the rules made thereunder in relation to the State cadres of the 
said services constituted under sub -section ( 2) and in relation to the members of those ser vices borne on 
the said cadre s. 
115. Provisi ons relating to other services .―(1) Every person who immediately before the appointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of Lieutenant -
Governor or Chief Commissioner in any of the existing States of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg, Kutch and 
Vindhya Pradesh, or is serving in connection with the affairs of any of the existing States of Mysore, 
Punjab, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and Saurashtra shall, as from that day, be deemed to have 
been allotted to serve in connection with the affair s of the successor State to that existing State.  
(2) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs 
of an existing State part of whose territories is transferred to another State by the provisions of Part II  
shall, as from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the principal 
successor State to that existing State, unless he is required by general or special order of the Central 
Government to serve provisionally in connecti on with the affairs of  any other successor State.  
(3) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be finally 
allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to 
have taken effect.  
(4) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not already s erving therein be made available for serving in that successor State from such 
date as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned, and in default of such agreement, as 
may be determined by th e Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may by  order establish one or more Advisory Committees for the 
purpose  of assisting it in regard to — 41 
 (a) the division and integration of the services among the new States and the States of Andhra 
Pradesh an d Madras; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable tre atment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.  
(6) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to any person to whom the 
provisions of sect ion 114 apply.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect after the appointed day the operation of the 
provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions 
of service of persons serving in co nnection with the aff airs of the Union or any State:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of  
any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage  except 
with the previous appr oval of the Central Government.  
116. Provision as to continuance  of officers in the same posts .―(1) Every person who immediately 
before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection  with the 
affairs of the Union or of an existing State in any area which on that day falls within a nother existing 
State or a new 1*** State or a 2[Union territory] shall, except where by virtue or in consequence of the 
provisions of this Ac t such post or office ceases to exist on that day, continue to hold the same post or 
office in the other existing State or new 1*** State or 2[Union territory] in which such area is included on 
that day, and shall be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to such post or office by the 
Government of, or other appropriate authority in, such State, or by the Central Government or other  
appropriate authority in such 2[Union territory], as the case may be.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, after the appointed day, 
from passing in relation to any such person any order affecting his cont inuance in  such post or office.  
117. Power of Central  Government to give directions .―The Central Government may at any time 
before or after the appointed day give such directions to any State Government as may appear to it to be 
necessary for the purpose of giving e ffect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State 
Government sha ll comply with such directions.  
118. Provisions as to St ate Public Service Commissions .―(1) The Public Service Commissions for 
the existing States of Bombay, Mysore, Punjab, Rajasthan and Travancore -Cochin shall, as from the 
appointed day, be deemed to be the Public Service Commissions fo r the corresponding new States.  
(2) As from the appointed day, the Public Service Commissions for the existing States of Hyderabad, 
Madhya Bh arat, Madhya Pradesh, Patiala and East Punjab States Union and S aurashtra shall cease to 
exist.  
(3) Every person holding office immediately before the appointed day as chairman or other member 
of any of the Commissions  mentioned in sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) sha ll become a member, and if so specified also the chairman, of such one of the Public 
Service Commissions for the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and 
Mysore as the President shall by order spe cify; and  
(b) shall, as such member or c hairman, be entitled to receive from the Government of the State 
conditions of service not less favourable than those to which he was entitled under the provisions 
applicable to him immediately before the appointed d ay. 
                                                           
1. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) order, 1956.  
2. Subs., ibid., for “Part C State”.  42 
 (4) Every person who becomes a membe r of a Public Service Commission on the appointed day 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall, subject to the proviso to clause ( 2) of article 316, hold 
office or continue to hold office until the expiration of his term of office as determined under  the 
provisions applicable to him immedi ately before the appointed day.  
PART XI  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
119. Territorial extent of laws .―The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to an existing State shall, until otherwise provided by a 
competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the terri tories within that 
State immedi ately before the appointed day.  
120. Power to adapt laws .―For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to 
any of the States 1[or Union territories] formed or territorially altered by the provisions of Part II, the 
appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, by order make 
such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and 
modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislatur e or other competent 
authority.  
Expla nation .―In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means — 
(a) as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union Li st, the Central 
Government; and  
(b) as respects any other law, ― 
(i) in its application to a 2*** State, the St ate Government, and  
(ii) in its application to a 3[Union terr itory], the Central Government.  
121. Power to construe laws .―Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 120 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any Court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforc e such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its applica tion in 
relation to any State 4[or Union territory] formed or territorially altered by the provisions of Part II, 
construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessa ry or proper in regard 
to the matter before th e Court, tribunal or authority.  
122. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions .―The Centr al 
Government, as respects any 3[Union territory], and the State Government as respects any new  State or 
any transferred territory, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or 
person who, as from the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under 
any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such law  shall have effect 
accordingly.  
123. Legal  proceedings .―Where immediately before the appointed day, the Union or an existing 
State is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or lia bilities subject to 
apportionment under this Act, the successor State which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property 
or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  
2. The word and letter “Part A” omitted., ibid. 
3. Subs. ibid., for “Part C State”.  
4. Ins., ibid. 43 
 Union or the exis ting State as a party to those proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, 
and the procee dings may continue accordingly.  
124. Right of pleaders  to practise in certain Courts .―Any person who immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate Courts in an existing State 
which is affected by the provisions of Part II shall, for a period of six months from that day, continue to 
be entitled to practise in those Courts, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within 
the jurisdiction of those Courts has bee n transferred to another State.  
125. Provisions as to certain pending proceedings .―(1) Every proceeding pend ing immediately 
before the appointed day before a Court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any 
area which on that day falls within a State shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to any part of the 
territories which as f rom that day are the  territories of another State 1[or form a Union terri tory], stand 
transferred to the corresponding Court, tribunal, authority or officer in the other State 1[or the Union 
territory, as the case may be].  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the Court, tribunal, 
authority or officer before which or whom such proceeding is pending on t he appointed day, is 
functioning and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes a ny suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding Court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in a State  1[or Union territory] mea ns― 
(i) the Court, tribunal, autho rity or officer in that State 1[or Union territory] in which, or 
before whom, the proceeding would have lain if the proceeding had been institu ted after the 
appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such Court, tribunal, autho rity or officer in that State 1[or Union 
territory] as may be determined after the appointed day by  the Government of that State 1[or the 
Central Government, as the case may be], or before the appointed day by the Government of the 
corresponding State , to be the corresponding Court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
126. [Declaration of certain ancient monuments, etc., in Part C States to be of national  
 importance.] ―Rep. by the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958  (24 of 
1958), s. 39 (w.e.f. 15-10-1959 ). 
127. Effect of the provisions of the Ac t inconsistent with other laws .―The provisions of this Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therew ith contained in any other law.  
128. Power to remove difficulties .―If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may by order do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him 
to be necessary or expedient for the purp ose of removing the difficulty.  
129. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to give effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins.  by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  44 
 1[(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House  of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session o r the successive sessions afo resaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule .] 
130. Repeal of Act 49 of 1951 .―(1) The Government of Part C States Act, 1951, is repealed with  
effect from the appointed day.  
(2) The said re peal shall not affect any laws made by the Legislature of a Part C State by virtue of any 
power conferred on that Legislature by the Act so repealed, and all such laws in force immediately before 
the appointed day shall continue in force, subject to such a daptations and modifications as may be made 
therein under section 120, until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature  or other 
competent authority.  
___________  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 28 ( 3)] 
Every sitting member representing a cons tituency specified in the first column of the Table below in 
the Legislative Assembly of the existing State specified against it in the second column shall, as from the 
appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of the State specified against 
that constituency in the third column and cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of which he 
was a memb er immediately before that day:  
TABLE  
Name of Constituency  Existing State  State to which transferred  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Palanpur -Abu-Vadagam -Danta .                    Bombay        .               . Bombay.  
2. Chandgad        .           . Bombay        .               . Bombay.  
3. Halsur             .            . Hyderabad    .               .       Bombay.  
4. Udgir               .           . Hyderabad    .               . Bombay.  
5. Kodangal         .           . Hyderabad    .               .            Andhra Pradesh.  
6. Tandur -Seram  .           . Hyderabad    .               . Mysore.  
7. Bidar               .            . Hyderabad    .               . Mysore.  
8. Zahirabad       .             . Hyderabad    .               .             Andhra Pradesh.  
9. Mudhol           .             . Hyderabad    .               .           Andhra Pradesh.  
10. Deglur          .              . Hyderabad    .               . Bombay.  
11. Kinwat         .              . Hyderabad    .               . Bombay.  
12. Asifabad      .               . Hyderabad    .               .           Andhra Pradesh.  
13. Bhanpura     .               . Madhya Bharat              .             Madhya Pradesh.  
14. Panemangalore  .         . Madras         .                .               Mysore.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2, and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  45 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 35 ( 2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONS TITUENCIES (MADRAS ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table — 
(a) for the entry relating to the Madras (Graduat es) Constituency, substitute: — 
“Madras (Graduates) Entire State 1[6]”; 
(b) for the entry in the second column relating to the Madras (Teachers) Constituency, substitute 
“Entire State ”; 
(c) in the third column, for the figure “3” wherever it occurs, substitute “4”; and  
(d) omit the entry relating to the West Coast (L ocal Authorities)  Constituency.  
____________  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 40]  
ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE AND ASSIGNMENT OF SEATS TO STATE 
LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLIES  
The number of seats in the House of the People to be a llotted to each of the States 2[and Union 
territories] and the number of seats to be assigned to the  Legislative Assembly of each 3[State other than 
Jammu and Kashmir] shall be as shown in the following Table: — 
TABLE  
4* * *  Number of seats in the House 
of the People  Number of seats in the 
Legisla tive Assembly  
1. Andhra Pradesh  .       .     . 43 301 
2. As sam .     .     .      .           .  12 108 
3. Bihar .       .     .      .     .     . 55 330 
4. Bombay  .        .      .    .     .   66 396 
5. Kerala .       .      .      .         .  18 126 
6. Madhya Pradesh .        .      . 36 288 
7. Madras .      .       .      .       .  41 205 
8. Mysore .     .      .       .        .  26 208 
9. Orissa    .      .          .          .  20 140 
10. Punjab     .        .       .       .  22 154 
11. Rajasthan    .     .     .         .  22 176 
12. Uttar Pradesh .        .     .   . 86 430 
13. West Bengal .      .     .      . 34 238 
14. Jammu and Kashmir   .    .  6  
15. Delhi .       .      .         .     .  5  
16. Himachal Pradesh    .       .  4  
17. Manipur       .      .     .      .  2  
18. Tripura     .      .          .     .  2  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1956, s. 3, for “4” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
2. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “Part A State”.  
4. The word “States” omitted., ibid. 46 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 74 ( 1)] 
I. M ODIFIED FORM OF SECTION 3 OF THE UNION  DUTIES  OF EXCISE  (DISTRIBUTION ) ACT, 1953  
3. Distribution of a part of the Union duties of excise among the States .—(1) During the first half 
of the financial year commencing on the Ist day of April, 1956, there shall be paid out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India to each of the Sta te specifie d in column 1 of the Table below such percentage of the 
distributable Union duties of excise for the half year as is set out against it in column 2:  
TABLE  
State  Percentage  
Andhra           .        .         .         .          .         .            . 5.92 
Assam             .        .         .         .          .         .            . 2.61 
Bihar     .        .        .         .         .          .         .            .                          11.60 
Bombay         .        .        .          .          .          .           .                           10.37  
Hyderabad     .        .        .          .          .          .           .   5.39 
Madhya Bharat       .        .          .          .          .           .   2.29 
Madhya Pradesh     .        .          .          .          .           .   6.13 
Madras           .        .        .          .          .          .           .                           10.30  
Mysore           .        .        .          .          .          .           .    2.84  
Orissa     .       .        .        .          .          .          .           .    4.22 
Patiala and East Punjab States Union       .           .        .   1.00 
Punjab     .       .        .        .          .          .          .           .    3.66 
Rajasthan .       .        .        .          .          .          .          .      4.41 
Saurashtra       .         .        .          .          .          .          .      1.19 
Travancore -Cochin    .        .          .           .          .         .     2.68 
Uttar Pradesh              .        .          .          .          .         .                             18.23  
West Bengal              .        .          .          .          .          .                              7.16 
 (2) During the second half of the said financial year, there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India to each of the States specified in column 1 of the Table below such percentage of the 
distributable Union duties of excise for the half year as is set out against it in column 2 and such 
additional percentage, if any, of the said duties as is set out agains t it in column 3:  
TABLE  
State  Percentage  Additional percentage  
Andhra Pradesh    .      .        .  9.03 .. 
Assam            .      .      .        . 2.61 .. 
Bihar              .      .      .        .                 11.60  .. 
Bombay         .      .      .         .     12.57  1.19 
Kerala            .     .       .         .                1.49 2.42 
Madhya Pradesh  .       .         .   6.25 .. 
Madras            .     .       .         .   8.39 0.26 
Mysore           .     .       .         .   2.90 2.62 
  47 
 State  Percentage  Additional percentage  
Orissa        .     .       .         .  4.22 .. 
Punjab       .     .       .         .  4.66 .. 
Rajasthan   .     .       .         .  4.40 .. 
Uttar Pradesh   .       .         .          18.23  .. 
West Bengal    .        .        .          7.16 .. 
(3) For  the purposes of this section — 
(a) the first half and the second half of the financial year commencing on the Ist  day of April, 
1956, shall be deemed to be the first seven months and the remaining five months, respec tively, of 
that financial year;  
(b) the distributable Union duties of excise for the first half and for the second half of the said 
financial year shall be deemed to be seven -twelfths and five -twelfths, respectively, of the 
distributable Union duties of excise for that financial year.  
II. M ODIFIED FORM OF PARAGRAPHS 3 AND 5 OF THE CONSTITUTION   
(DISTRIBUT ION OF REVENUES ) ORDER , 1953  
3. (1) For the purposes  of clause ( 2) of article 270, the proceeds attributable to Part C States for the 
first half and 1[to Union territories] for the second half, of the financial year commencing on the Ist day of 
April, 1956, shall be taken to be   
  per cent. and  1 per cent. respectively, of so much of the net proceeds 
of taxes on income for the half year as does not represent the net proceeds of taxes payable in respect of 
Union emoluments.  
(2) The percentage of the net proceeds of taxes on income, except in so f ar as those proceeds 
represent proceeds attributable to Part C States or to taxes payable in respect of Union emoluments, which 
is to be assigned to Part A States and Part B States (other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir) under 
clause ( 2) of article 270  in the first half of the said financial year shall be 55 per cent.; and the total 
amount to be so assigned shall be distributed amon g the said States as follows: — 
State  Percentage  
Andhra Pradesh     .      .        .     .      .       .        .  5.49 
Assam                 .      .        .     .      .       .        .  2.25 
Bihar                    .      .        .     .      .       .        .  9.75 
Bombay              .      .        .     .      .       .        .  17.50  
Hyderabad     .      .      .       .      .      .       .       .  4.50 
Madhya Bharat    .      .       .      .       .      .        . 1.75 
Madhya Pradesh   .      .      .      .       .      .       .  5.25 
Madras                .      .       .      .      .       .       .  9.56 
Mysore               .      .        .     .      .       .        .  2.45 
Orissa                 .      .        .     .      .       .        .  3.50 
Patia la and East Punjab States Union  .      .         . 0.75 
Punjab                .      .        .     .      .       .         .  3.25 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956.  48 
 State  Percentage  
Rajasthan         .      .        .     .      .       .        .  3.50 
Saurashtra         .      .        .     .      .       .        .  1.00 
Travancore -Cochin    .        .     .      .       .       .                             2.50 
Uttar Pradesh       .      .        .     .      .       .      .                           15.75  
West Bengal        .      .        .     .      .       .       .                           11.25  
(3) The percentage of the net proceeds of the taxes on income, except in so far as those proceeds 
repre sent proceeds attributable to 1[Union territories] or the taxes payable in respect of Union 
emolument s, which is to be assigned to 2[States (other than the State  of Jammu and Kashmir)] under 
clause ( 2) of article 270 in the second half of the said financial year shall be 55 per cent.; and the total 
amount to be so assigned shall be distributed amon g the said States as follows: — 
State  Percentage  Additional percentage  
Andhra Pradesh      .    .     .    . 8.09 .. 
Assam .       .    .     .    .    .    . 2.25 .. 
Bihar  .      .     .     .    .    .    .      9.75 .. 
Bombay     .     .     .    .    .    .      18.10  1.00 
Kerala        .     .    .     .    .    . 1.38 2.26 
Madhya Pradesh .    .    .    .    . 5.14 .. 
Madras .     .      .     .    .    .    . 7.79 0.24 
Mysore .     .      .     .    .   .     . 3.74 2.25 
Orissa .      .       .     .    .   .     . 3.50 .. 
Punjab .    .       .     .     .    .    . 4.00 .. 
Rajasthan .        .      .    .    .     . 3.51 .. 
Uttar Pradesh   .      .     .    .    . 15.75  .. 
West Bengal    .      .     .     .    . 11.25  .. 
(4) For t he purposes of this paragraph — 
(a) the first half and the second half of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1956, shall be deemed to be the first seven months and the remaining five months, respec tively, of 
that financial year;  
(b) the net proceeds of taxes on income for the first half and for the second half of the said 
financial year shall be deemed to be seven -twelfths and five -twelfths, respectively, of the net 
proceeds of such  taxes for that financial year.  
5. (1) In accordance with the provisions of clause ( 1) of article 275, there shall be charged o n the 
Consolidated Fund of India — 
(a) in the first seven months of the said financial year, as grants -in-aid of the revenues of each of 
the States specified below , the sum specified against it:  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 1) Order, 1956, for “Part C States”.  
2. Subs., ibid., for “Part A States”.  49 
 (i) For general purposes — 
 
Assam  . . . . 58.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Mysore  . . . . 23.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Orissa  . . . . 43.75 lakhs of rupees.  
Punjab  . . . . 72.92 lakhs of rupees.  
Saurashtra  . . . . 23.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Travancore -Cochin  . . . 26.25 lakhs of rupees.  
West Bengal  . . . . 46.67 lakhs of rupees.  
(ii) For the e xpansion of primary education — 
Bihar   . . . . 48.42 lakhs of rupees.  
Hyderabad  . . . . 23.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Madhya Bharat  . . . 10.50 lakhs of rupees.  
Madhya Pradesh  . . . 29.17 lakhs of rupees.  
Orissa  . . . . 18.67 lakhs of rupees.  
Patiala and East Punjab States  
Union  . . . . 5.25 lakhs of rupees.  
Punjab  . . . . 16.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Rajasthan  . . . . 23.33 lakhs of rupees.  
(b) in the remaining five months of the said financial year, as grants -in-aid of the revenues of each of 
the States specified below , the sum specified against it:  
(i) For general purposes — 
Assam  . . . . 41.67 lakhs of rupees.  
Mysore  . . . . 16.67 lakhs of rupees.  
Orissa  . . . . 31.25 lakhs of rupees.  
Punjab  . . . . 52.08 lakhs of rupees.  
Bombay  . . . . 16.67 lakhs of rupees.  
Kerala  . . . . 16.93 lakhs of rupees.  
Madras  . . . . 1.82 lakhs of rupees.  
West Bengal  . . . . 33.33 lakhs of rupees.  
(ii) For the e xpansion of primary education — 
Bihar   . . . . 34.58 lakhs of rupees.  
Andhra Pradesh  . . . 9.62 lakhs of ru pees.  
Mysore  . . . . 2.41 lakhs of rupees.  
Bombay  . . . . 12.10 lakhs of rupees.  50 
 Madhya Pradesh  . . . 20.98 lakhs of rupees.  
Orissa  . . . . 13.33 lakhs of rupees.  
Punjab  . . . . 15.42 lakhs of rupees.  
Rajasthan  . . . . 16.56 lakhs of rupees.  
(2) There shal l also be charged on the Consolidated Fu nd of India — 
(a) in the first seven months of the said financial year, as grants -in-aid of each of the States of 
Mysore, Saurashtra and Travancore -Cochin, the sum by which the total of the amounts p ayable to that 
State under sub -paragraph ( 2) of paragraph 3 of this Order and under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of 
the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1953, falls short of 201.25 lakhs of rupees, 160.42 
lakhs of rupees and 163.33 lak hs of rupees, respectively; and  
(b) in the remaining five months of the said financial year, as grants -in-aid of each of the States of 
Mysore, Bombay, Kerala and Madras, the sum by which the total of the amounts payable to that State 
as additional percentages under sub -paragraph ( 3) of paragraph 3 of this Order and under sub -section 
(2) of section 3 of the said Act falls short of 143.75 lakhs of rupees, 114.58 lakhs of rupees, 105.38 
lakhs of rupees and 11.29  lakhs of rupees, respectively.  
(3) Any sum or sums payable und er this paragraph shall be in addition to any sum or sums 
payable to the States under each of the provisos  to clause (1) of article 275.  
____________________  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 86]  
APPORTIONMENT OF L IABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, the successor State or each of the successor 
States shall, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by an existing State, pay the pe nsions 
drawn in its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the sai d adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection 
with the affairs of an existing State who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the 
appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding imm ediately before that day, shall be the 
liability of the successor State, or, if there be two or more successor States, of such one of them as the 
Central G overnment may by order specify.  
3. In any case where there are two or more successor States, there sh all be computed, in respect of the 
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the 31st day of March, 1957 and in respect of 
each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in all the successor States in respect of the 
pensions referred to  in paragraphs 1 and 2. That total representing the liability of the existing State in 
respect of pensions shall be apportioned between the successor States in the population ratio and any 
successor State paying more than its due share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by the success or 
State or States paying less.  
4. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed 
day in connection with the affairs of an existing State and retiring on or after that day , shall be that of the 
successor State granting the pension; but the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such 
officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of that existing State shall, if there be two 
or more succes sor States, be allocated between them in the population ratio, and the Government granting 
the pension shall be entitled to receive from each of the other successor Stat es its share of this liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed  day in connection with the affairs of more than 
one successor State, the successor State or States other than the one granting the pension shall reimburse 
to the Government by which the pension is granted an amount which bears to the portion of the pensio n 51 
 attributable to his service after the appointed day the same ratio as the period of his qualifying service 
after the appointed day under that successor State bears to the total qualifying service of such officer after 
the appointed day reckon ed for the p urposes of pension.  
(3) In reckoning the said total qualifying service, any service of such officer before the appointed day 
in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the Lieutenant -Governor or 
Chief Commissioner in an y of the existing States of Ajmer, Bhopal, Coorg, Kutch and Vin dhya Pradesh 
shall be added as if the said service had been service after the appointed day in connection with the affairs 
of the successo r State to that existing State.  
5. Any reference in thi s Schedule to a pension shall be construed as including a reference to the 
commuted value of the pens ion. 
_______________  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 113)  
(1) Engineering Coll eges and Schools of Technology.  
(2) Medical Colleges.  
(3) Agricultural Colleges.  
(4) Veterinary Colleges.  
(5) Government hospitals providing for special treatment, such as,  
(i) tuberc ulosis hospitals and sanatoria,  
(ii) cancer hospitals,  
(iii) radium institutes,  
(iv) mental hospitals,  
(v) lepro sy hospitals and sanatoria, and  
(vi) hospitals providing fo r Unani or Ayurvedic treatment.  
(6) Research Institutes, such as, — 
(i) irrigation research institutes,  
(ii) Government analysts’  departments, and  
(iii) serum institutes.  
(7) Central Jails.  
(8) Borsta l Schools, Reformatory  Schools and Certified Schools.  
(9) Police Tr aining Colleges and Institutes.  
(10) Fire Services Training Scho ols. 
(11) Hostels for Scheduled Castes, Schedul ed Tribes and Backward Classes.  
(12) Photo Registry Offices.  
(13) Central Records Offices.  
(14) Forest Schools.  
(15) Finger Print Bureaux.  
--------------------------The Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE SUPREME COURT (NUMBER OF JUDGES) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 55 OF 1956  
[16th September, 1956.]  
 
An Act to provide for an increase in the number of Judges of the Supreme Court, excluding the 
Chief Justice.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This act may be called the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956.  
2. Maximum number of Supreme Court Judges other than Chief Justice. —The maximum 
number of Judges of the Supreme Court, excluding the Chief Justice of India, shall be 1[thirty ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 2009, s. 2, for “twenty -five” (w.e.f. 5 -2-2009).  
--------------------------The Terminal Tax on Railway Passengers Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE TERMINAL TAX ON RAILWAY PASSENGERS ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1956  
[12th December, 1956 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy of a terminal tax on passengers carried by railway from or to 
certain places of pilgrimage or where fairs, melas  or exhibitions are held.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Terminal Tax on 
Railway Passengers Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “maximum rates ” mean the rates of terminal tax specified in the Schedule;  
(b) “mela” means a public gathering on the occasion of any religious festival;  
(c) “notified place ” means a place of pilgrimage or a place where a fair meal or exhibition is 
being or is likely to b e led, which the Central Government has, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declared to be a notified place for the purpose of this Act;  
(d) “railway administration ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Railways                    
Act, 1890 ( 9 of 1890).  
3. Terminal tax on passengers carried by railway from or to notified places .—(1) Subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act, there shall be levied on all passengers carried by railway from or to 
any notified place a terminal tax in r espect of every railway ticket (whether single or return) at such rates 
not exceeding the maximum rates as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
fix; and such notification shall specify the date with effect from which, and ma y also specify the period 
for which, the terminal tax shall be leviable : 
Provided that where no such period is specified in the notification, the terminal tax shall be leviable 
for so long as this Act is in force.  
(2) Subject to the maximum rates, different rates of terminal tax may be fixed, — 
(a) In relation to different notified places; and  
(b) in respect of short -distance passengers and long -distance passengers; provided that the rate in 
respect of short -distance passengers shall be always low er than that in respect of long -distance 
passengers.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section a passenger travelling by railway from or to any notified place to or 
from a distance of not more than one hundred and fifty miles shall be deemed to be a short -distance 
passenger and any other passenger travelling by railway shall be dee med to be a long -distance passenger.  
4. Terminal tax not to be levied within certain limits .—No terminal tax shall be levied on any 
passenger travelling by railway from or to any notified place to or from any railway station situated 
within a radius of for ty miles from that notified place or within such shorter distance from that place as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1957, vide notification No. S. R. O. 867, dated 8th March, 1957, see Gazette  of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 . 2 
 5. Power of Central Government to vary rates of tax .—The Central Government may, by 
notific ation in the Official Gazette, vary from time to time in respect of railway passengers generally or a 
class of railway passengers the rates of the terminal tax levied in relation to any notified place under 
section 3.  
6. Power of Central Government to disc ontinue levy .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare that with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the terminal tax levied in relation to any notified place shall for reasons specified in the  
notification cease to be levied in relation to that place.  
7. Mode of recovery of tax .—(1) The terminal tax levied under this Act shall be collected by means 
of a surcharge on fares by the railway administration, and where it is so collected the                        
railway administration shall have all the powers and remedies for the recovery thereof as though the same 
were a rate or fare which the railway administration is empowered to levy under the Indian Railway      
Act, 1890 (9 of 1890).  
(2) Such portion of the total proceeds of the tax attributable to any notified place as the Central 
Government may from time to time ascertain shall be deducted to meet the cost of collection of the tax.  
8. No other terminal tax on railway passengers when terminal tax under this Act is         
levied .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law where a terminal tax in relation to any notified 
place is levied under this Act on passengers carried by railway, no other terminal tax in relation to such 
place shall be l evied under any other law on such passengers.  
9. Exemptions .—Nothing contained in this Act or in any other law shall be deemed to authorise the 
levy of a terminal tax on the following classes of passengers carried by railway, namely: — 
(a) children not over  three years of age;  
(b) police officers travelling on railway warrants;  
(c) persons travelling or military warrants and troops travelling is reserved vehicles at vehicle 
rate; and  
(d) free pass holders.  
 
  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
MAXIMUM RATES OF TERMINAL TAX  
[See section 2( a)] 
 
1 2 
 
Class of accommodation  Maximum rates of terminal tax  
(a) 
(In respect of every single ticket)  (b) 
(In respect of every return ticket)  
 Rs.         A.           P.  Rs.         A.             P.  
Air-conditioned or first class  1             8              0  3             0              0  
Second Class  1             0              0 2             0              0  
Third Class  0             8              0 1             0              0  
 
--------------------------The University Grants Commission Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION ACT , 1956  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of Act to institutions for higher studies other than Universities.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMISSION  
4. Establishment of the Commission.  
5. Composition of the Commission.  
6. Terms and conditions of service of members . 
7. Meetings of the Commission.  
8. Vacancies amongst members or defect in constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings of the 
Commission.  
9. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for particular purposes.  
10. Staff of the Commission.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Commission.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
12. Functions of the Commission.  
12A. Regulation of fees and prohibition of donations in certain cases.  
12B. Prohibition regarding givi ng of any grant to a University not declared by the Commission fit to 
receive such grant.  
13. Inspection.  
14. Consequences of failure of Universities to comply with recommendations of the Commission.  
15. Payment to the Commission.  
16. Fund to the Commission.  
17. Budget.  
18. Annual report.  
19. Account and audit.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Directions by the Central Government.  
21. Returns and information.  
22. Right to confer degrees.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Prohibition of the use of the word „University ‟ in certain cases.  
24. Penalties.  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Power to make regulations.  
27. Power to delegate.  
28. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
  3 
 THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION ACT , 1956  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1956  
[3rd March, 1956 .] 
An Act  to make provision for the co -ordination and determination of standards in Universities 
and for that purpose, to establish a University Grants Commission.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the University Grants Commission 
Act, 1956.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Commission ” means the University Grants Commission established under section 4;  
(b) “executive authority ”, in relation to a University, means the chief executive authority of the  
University (by what ever name called) in which the general administration of the University is vested;  
(c) “Fund ” means the Fund of the University Grants Commission constituted under section 16;  
(d) “member ” means a member of the University Grants Commission and includes the Chairman  
2[and Vice -Chairman];  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “University ” means a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a 
Provincial Act or a State Act, and includes any such institution as  may, in consultation with the 
University concerned, be recognised by the Commission in accordance with the regulations made in 
this behalf under this Act.  
3. Application of Act to institutions for higher studies other than Universities .—The Central 
Govern ment may, on the advice of the Commission, declare, by notification  in the Official Gazette, that 
any institution for higher education, other than a University, shall be deemed to be a University for the 
purposes of this Act, and on such a declaration bein g made, all the provisions of this Act shall apply to 
such institution as if it were a University within the meaning of clause ( f) of section 2.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMISSION  
4. Establishment of the Commission .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Commission by the name 
of the University Grants Commission.  
(2) The said Commission shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a co mmon seal, 
and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
3[5. Composition of the Commission. —(1) The Commission shall consist of — 
(i) a Chairman,  
(ii) a Vice -Chairman, and  
(iii) ten other members,  
to be appointed by the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. 5th November, 1956, vide notification No . S.R. O. 2608, dated 1st November, 1956, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,       
Part II, sec. 3.  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for section 5 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  4 
  
(2) The Chairman shall be chosen from among persons who are not officers of the Central 
Government or of any State Government.  
(3) Of the other members referred to in clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) two shall be chosen from among the officers of the Central Government , to represent that 
Government;  
(b) not less than four shall be chosen from among persons who are, at the time when they are so 
chosen, teachers of Universities; and  
(c) the remainder shall be chosen from among persons — 
(i) who have knowledge of, or experi ence in , agriculture, commerce, forestry or industry;  
(ii) who are members of the engineering, legal, medical or any other learned profession; or  
(iii) who are Vice -Chancellors of Universities or who, not being teachers of Universities , are, 
in the opinion of the Central Government, educationists of repute or have obtained 
high   academic distinctions:  
Provided that not less than one -half of the number chosen under this clause shall be from among 
persons who are not officers of the Centr al Government or of any State Government.  
(4) The Vice -Chairman shall exercise such of the powers, and discharge such of the duties , of the 
Chairman as may be prescribed.  
(5) Every appointment under this section shall take effect from the date on which it is notified by the 
Central Government in the Official Gazette.]  
6. Terms and conditions of service of members .—1[(1) A person appointed as Chairman,         
Vice -Chairman or other member after the commencement of the University Grants Commission 
(Amendment ) Act, 1985 shall, unless he sooner becomes disqualified for continuing as such under the 
rules that may be made under this Act, — 
(a) in the case of Chairman, hold office for a term of five years or until he attains the age of   
sixty -five years, whichever  is earlier;  
(b) in the case of Vice -Chairman , hold office for a term of three years or until he attains the age 
of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier;  
(c) in the case of any other member, hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that — 
(i) a person who has held office as Chairman or Vice -Chairman shall be eligible for further 
appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other member , and 
(ii) a person who has held office as any other member shall be eligible for further appointment as 
Chairman , Vice-Chairman or other member : 
Provided further that a person who has held office for two terms, in any capacity, whether as 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other member [excluding a member referred to in clause ( a) of                  
sub-section ( 3) of section 5], shall not be eligible for any further appointment as Chairman,                  
Vice -Chairman or other member. ] 
(2) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, 
but he shall continue in offi ce until his resignation is accepted b y the Central Government.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 70 of 19 85, s. 2, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 20-12-1985). 5 
 1[(3) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, whether by reason of his death, 
resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, the Vice -Chairman 
holding office as such for the time being shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5, act as the Chairman and shall, unless any other person is appointed earlier as the Chairman, 
hold the office of the Chairman for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose place he is 
to so act:  
Provided that where no Vice -Chairman is holding office at the time when the vacancy in the office    
of the Chairman occurs, the Central Government shall, notwithstanding  anything contained in                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, appoint any other member to act as the Chairman and the person so appointed 
shall not hold the office of the Chairman for a period exceeding six months . 
(4) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice -Chairman or any other member, whether by 
reason of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity , 
such vacancy shall be filled up by the Central Government by making a fresh ap pointment and the 
member so appointed shall hold office for a term of three years.  
(5) The office of the Chairman and the Vice -Chairman shall be whole -time and salaried and subject 
thereto, the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, Vice -Chairman  and other members shall be 
such as may be prescribed.]  
7. Meetings of the Commission .—The Commission shall meet at such times and places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided 
by regulations made under this Act.  
8. Vacancies amongst members or defect in constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings of 
the Commission .—No act or proceedings of the Commission shall be deemed to be invalid by reason 
merely of any vacancy in, or  any defect in the constitution of, the Commission.  
9. Temporary association of persons with the Commission for particular purposes .—(1) The 
Commission may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purpos es as may be determined by 
regulations made  under this Act, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any 
of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Commission under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a 
right to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting 
of the Commission, and shall not be a member of any other purpose.  
10. Staff of the Commission .—Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in 
this beh alf, the Commission may appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think necessary 
for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act and the terms and conditions of service of the 
employees shall be such as may be determined by the Commission.  
11. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Commission .—All orders and decisions 
of the Commission shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member 
authori sed by the Commission in this behalf , and all ot her instruments issued by the Commission shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission authori sed in like 
manner in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
12. Functions of the Commi ssion .—It shall be the general duty of the Commission to take, in 
consultation with the Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may think fit for the 
promotion and co -ordination of University education and for the determination and mai ntenance of 
standards of teaching, examination and research in Universities, and for the purpose of performing its 
functions under this Act, the Commission may — 
(a) inquire into the financial needs of Universities;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of  1972, s. 4, for sub -section s (3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  6 
  
(b) allocate  and disburse, out of the Fund of the Commission, grants to Universities established or 
incorporated by or under a Central Act for the maintenance and development of such Universities or 
for any other general or specified purpose;  
(c) allocate and disburse, out of the Fund of the Commission, such grants to other Universities as 
it may deem  1[necessary or appropriate for the development of such Universities or for the 
maintenance, or development, or both, of any specified activities of such Universit ies] or for any 
other general or specified purpose : 
Provided that in making any grant to any such University, the Commission shall give due 
consideration to the development of the University concerned, its financial needs, the standard 
attained by it and t he national purposes which it may serve;  
2[(cc) allocate and disburse out of the Fund of the Commission, such grants to institutions deemed 
to be Universities in pursuance of a declaration made by the Central Government under section 3, as 
it may deem nece ssary, for one or more of the following purposes, namely: — 
(i) for maintenance in special cases,  
(ii) for development,  
(iii) for any other general or specified purpose;]  
3[(ccc) establish, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act, institution s for 
providing common facilities, services and programmes for a group of universities or for the 
universities in general and maintain such institutions or provide for their maintenance by allocating 
and disbursing out of the Fund of the Commission such gr ants as the Commission may deem 
necessary;]  
(d) recommend to any University the measures necessary for the improvement of University 
education and advise the University upon the action to be taken for the purpose of implementing such 
recommendation;  
(e) advise the Central Government or any State Government on the allocation of any grants to 
Universities for any general or specified purpose out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the 
Consolidated Fund of the State, as the case may be;  
(f) advise any autho rity, if such advise is asked for, on the establishment of a new University or 
on proposals connected with the expansion of the activities of any University;  
(g) advise the Central Government or any State Government or University on any question which 
may be referred to the Commission by the Central Government or the State Government or the 
University, as the case may be;  
(h) collect information on all such matters relating to University education in India and other 
countries as it thinks fit and make the s ame available to any University;  
(i) require a University to furnish it with such information as may be needed relating to the 
financial position of the University or the studies in the various branches of learning undertaken in 
that University, together w ith all the rules and regulations relating to the standards of teaching and 
examination in that University respecting each of such branches of learning;  
(j) perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may be deemed necessary by the 
Commission f or advancing the cause of higher education in India or as may be incidental or 
conducive to the discharge of the above functions.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of  1972, s. 5, for “necessary for the development of such Universities” (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 17-6-1972).  
3. Ins. by Act 59  of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  7 
 1[12A. Regulation of fees and prohibition of donations in certain cases .—(1) In this section, — 
(a) “affiliation ”, together with its grammatical variations includes , in relation to a college, 
recognition of such college by, association of such college with, and admission of such college to the 
privileges of, a university;  
(b) “college ” means any institution, whether known as su ch of by any other name which provides 
for a course of study for obtaining any qualification from a university and which, in accordance with 
the rules and regulations of such university, is recognised as competent to provide for such course of 
study and pr esent students undergoing such course of study for the examination for the award of such 
qualification;  
(c) “prosecution ”, in relation to a course of study, includes promotion from one part or stage of 
the course of study to another part or stage of the co urse of study;  
(d) “qualification ” means a degree or any other qualification awarded by a university;  
(e) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
(f) “specified course of study ” means a course of study in respect of which regulations of the 
nature mentioned in sub -section ( 2) have been made;  
(g) “student ” includes a person seeking admission as a student;  
(h) “university ” means a university or institution referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 22.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 12 if, having regard to — 
(a) the nature of any course of study for obtaining any qualification from any university;  
(b) the types of activities in which persons obtaining such qualification are likely to be engaged 
on the basis of  such qualification;  
(c) the minimum standards which a person possessing such qualification should be able to 
maintain in his work relating to such activities and the consequent need for ensuring, so far as may 
be, that no candidate secures admission to su ch course of study by reason of economic power and 
thereby prevents a more meritorious candidate from securing admission to such course of study; and  
(d) all other relevant factors,  
the Commission is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public in terest, it may, after 
consultation with the university or universities concerned, specify by regulations the matters in 
respect of which fees may be charged, and the scale of fees in accordance with which fees shall be 
charged in respect of those matters o n and from such date as may be specified in the regulations in 
this behalf, by any college providing for such course of study from, or in relation to, any student in 
connection with his admission to, and prose cution of, such course of study : 
Provided that different matters and different scales of fees may be so specified in relation to 
different universities or different classes of colleges or different areas.  
(3) Where regulations of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 2) have been made in relation to a ny 
course of study, no college providing for such course of study shall — 
(a) levy or charge fees in respect of any matter other than a matter specified in such regulations;  
(b) levy or charge any fees in excess of the scale of fees specified in such regula tions, or  
(c) accept, either directly or indirectly, any payment (otherwise than by way of fees) or any 
donation or gift (whether in cash or kind),  
from, or in relation to, any student in connection with his admission to, and prosecution of, such course of  
study.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 1984 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  8 
 (4) If, after making, in relation to a college providing for a specified course of study, an inquiry in the 
manner provided by regulations, and after giving such college a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
the Commission is satisfied that such  college has contravened the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the 
Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, pass an order prohibiting such 
college from presenting any students then undergoing such course of study therein to any un iversity for 
the award of the qualification concerned.  
(5) The Commission shall forward a copy of the order made by it under sub -section ( 4) to the 
university concerned, and on and from the date of receipt by the University of a copy of such order, the 
affiliation of such college to such university shall, in so far as it relates to the course of study specified in 
such order, stand terminated and on and from the date of termination of such affiliation and for a period of 
three years thereafter affiliatio n shall not be granted to such college in relation to such or similar course of 
study by that or any other university.  
(6) On the termination of the affiliation of any college under sub -section ( 5), the Commission shall 
take all such steps as it may consid er appropriate for safeguarding the interests of the students concerned.  
(7) The provisions of this section and the regulations made for the purposes of this section shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other l aw for the time being in 
force.]  
1[212B.] Prohibition regarding giving of any grant to a University not declared by the 
Commission fit to receive such grant .—No grant shall be given by the Central Government, the 
Commission, or any other organisation recei ving any funds from the Central Government, to a University 
which is established after the commencement of the University Grants Commission (Amendment)        
Act, 1972  (33 of 1972) , unless the Commission has, after satisfying itself as to such matters as may be 
prescribed, declared such University to be fit for receiving such grant.]  
13. Inspection .—(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the financial needs of a University or its 
standards of teaching, examination and research, the Commission may, after consu ltation with the 
University, cause an inspection of any department or departments thereof to be made in such manner as 
may be prescribed and by such person or persons as it may direct.  
(2) The Commission shall communicate to the University the date on which any inspection under       
sub-section ( 1) is to be made and the University shall be entitled to be associated with the inspection in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Commissio n shall communicate to the University its views in regard to the results of any such 
inspection and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the University, recommend to the University the 
action to be taken as a result of such inspection.  
(4) All communicat ions to a University under this section shall be made to the executive authority 
thereof and the executive authority of the University shall report to the Commission the action, if any, 
which is proposed to be taken for the purpose of implementing any such  recommendation as is referred to 
in sub -section ( 3). 
14. Consequences of failure of Universities to comply with recommendations of the 
Commission .—If any University  3[grants affiliation in respect of any course of study to any college 
referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 12A in contravention of the provision s of that sub -section or] fails 
within a reasonable time to comply with any recommendation made by the Commission under section 12 
or section 13,  4[or contravenes the provisions of any rule made un der clause ( f) or clause ( g) of             
sub-section ( 2) of section 25, or of any regulation made under clause ( e) or clause (f) or clause ( g) of 
section 26,] the Commission, after taking into consideration the cause, if any, shown by the University  
5[for such failure or contravention,] may withhold from the University the grants proposed to be made out 
of the Fund of the Commission.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1972, s. 6 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  
2. Section 12A renumbered as section 12B of that section by Act 59 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f.  1-10-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 33 of 1972, s. 7 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972) . 
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “for its failure to comply with such recommendation” (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  
 9 
 15. Payment to the Commission .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behal f, pay to the Commission in each financial year such sums as may be 
considered necessary for the performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.  
16. Fund of the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall have its own Fund ; and all sum s which 
may, from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the Commission 
(including any sum which any State Government or any other authority or person may hand over to the 
Commission) shall be carried to the Fund and all payments by the Commission shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may, subject to the approval of the Central Government , be decided by the Commission.  
(3) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Commission.  
17. Budget .—The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be 
prescribed , a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
18. Annual report .—The Commission shall prepare once every year, in such form and at such time 
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous 
year, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and the Government shall cause 
the same to be laid befor e both Houses of Parliament.  
19. Account and audit .—(1) The Commission shall cause to be maintained such books of account 
and other books in relation to its account in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation with 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
(2) The Commission shall, as soon as may be after closing its annual accounts, prepare a statement of 
accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor -General by such date, as the 
Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, determine.  
(3) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General at such 
times and in such manner as he thinks fit.  
(4) The annual accounts of the Commissio n together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
to the Central Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament and shall also forward a copy of the audit report to the Commission for taking suitabl e action 
on the matters arising out of the audit report.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Directions by the Central Government .—(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Commission shall be guided by such directions on questions of policy relating to national purposes as 
may be given to it by the Central Government.  
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission as to whether a 
question is or is not a question of policy relating to national purposes, the decisio n of the Central 
Government shall be final.  
21. Returns and information .—The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government such 
returns or other information with respect to its property or activities as the Central Government may, from 
time to time, r equire.  
22. Right to confer degrees .—(1) The right of conferring or granting degree s shall be exercised only 
by a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a Provincial Act or a State Act or 
an institution deemed to be a University under section 3 or an institution specially empowered by an Act 
of Parliament to confer or grant degrees.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1), no person or authority shall confer, or grant, or hold himself 
or itself out as entitled to confer or grant, any degree.  10 
 (3) For the purposes of this section, “degree ” means any such degree as may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, be specified in this behalf by the Commission by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
23. Prohibition of the use  of the word “University ” in certain cases .—No institution, whether a 
corporate body or not, other than a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, a  
Provincial Act or a State Act shall be entitled to have the word “University ” associated with its name in 
any manner whatsoever:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall, for a period of two years from the commencement of this 
Act, apply to an institution which , immediately before such commencement, had the word “University ” 
associated with its name.  
24. Penalties .—Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 22 or section 23 shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and if the person contravening is an association or 
other body of individuals, every  member of such association or other body who knowingly or wilfully 
authori ses or permits the contravention shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in t he Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely: — 
(a) the procedure for the ret irement of members under section 6;  
(b) the disqualifications for continuing as a member of the Commission;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of members of the Commission;  
(d) the terms and conditions of service of employees appointe d by the Commission;  
(e) the additional functions which may be performed by the Commission under clause ( j) of 
section 12;  
(f) the returns and information which are to be furnished by Universities in respect of their 
financial position or standards of teaching and examination maintained therein;  
(g) the inspection of Universities;  
(h) the form and manner in which the budget and reports are to  be prepared by the Commission;  
(i) the manner in which the accounts of the C ommission are to be maintained;  
(j) the  form and manner in which returns or other information are to be furnished by the 
Commission to Central Government;  
(k) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
1[(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power  to give retrospective 
effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or any of them but 
no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to 
whom such rule may be applicable.]   
26. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Commission  2[may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations] consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, —  
(a) regulating  the meetings of the Commission and the procedure for conducting business thereat;  
(b) regulating the manner in which and the purposes for which persons may be associated with 
the Commission under section 9;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1984, s. 5, for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “may make regulations” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  11 
  
(c) specifying the terms and conditions of serv ice of the employees appointed by the 
Commission;  
(d) specifying the institutions or class of institutions which may be recognised by the 
Commission under clause ( f) of section 2;  
(e) defining the qualifications that should ordinarily be required of any pe rson to be appointed to 
the teaching staff of the University , having regard to the branch of education in which he is expected 
to give instruction;  
(f) defining the minimum standards of instruction for the grant of any degree by any University;  
(g) regulat ing the maintenance of standards and the co -ordination of work or facilities in 
Universities.  
1[(h) regulating the establishment of institutions referred to in clause ( ccc) of section 12 and other 
matters relating to such institutions;   
(i) specifying  the matters in respect of which fees may be charged , and scales of fees in 
accordance with which fees may be charged , by a college under sub -section ( 2) of section 12A;  
(j) specifying the manner in which an inquiry may be conducted under sub -section ( 4) of      
section 12A.]  
(2) No regulation shall be made under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) 1[(or        
clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( j)] of sub -section ( 1) except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.   
1[(3) The power to make regulations conferred by this section [except clause ( i) and clause ( j) of       
sub-section ( 1)] shall include the power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, to the regulations or an y of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to 
any regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such regulation may be 
applicable.]   
2[27. Power to delegate .—(1) The Commission may, 3[by regulations made, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,] under this Act, delegate to its Chairman, Vice -Chairman or any of its officers, its power 
of general superintendence and direction over the business transacted by, or in, the Commission, 
including the powers with rega rd to the expenditure incurred in connection with the maintenance of the 
office and internal administration of the Commission.   
(2) No regulation shall be made under this section except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.]  
4[28. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may b e comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without pre judice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1972, s. 8 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 59 of 1984, s. 7, for “by re gulation made” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1984).  
--------------------------The Womens and Childrens Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE WOMEN ’S AND CHILDREN ’S INSTITUTIONS (LICENSING) ACT, 1956  
  __________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Licensing of institutions . 
4. Application for licence . 
5. Grant of licence . 
6. Licence not transferable . 
7. Revocation of licence . 
8. Appeals.  
9. Penalty.  
10. Act not to apply to certain institutions.  
11. Power to make rules . 
12. Repeal and savings.  
  2 
 THE WOMEN ’S AND CHILDREN ’S INS TITUTIONS (LICENSING) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 105 OF 1956  
[30th December , 1956 .]  
An Act to provide for the licensing of institutions for women and children and for matters 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short  title, extent an d commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Women ’s and Children ’s 
Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “child ” means a boy or girl who has not compl eted the age of eighteen years;  
(b) “institution ” means an institution established and maintained for the reception, care, 
protection an d welfare of women or children;  
(c) “licensing authority ” means the State Government or such officer or authority as may be 
prescribed;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed  by rules made by the S tate Government under this Act;  
(e) “woman ” means a female who has completed the age of eighteen years . 
3. Li censing of institutions .―After the commencement of this Act, no person shall establish or 
maintain an institution except under and in accordance with the conditions of a licence granted under this 
Act. 
4. Application for licence .―Every person desiring to establish an institution s hall make an 
application to the licensing authority in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a person maintai ning an institution at the com mencement of this Act shall be allowed a 
period of three months from such com mencement to mak e an application for a licence.  
5. Grant of licence .―(1) On receipt of an application under section 4, the licensing authority, after 
making such inquiry as it considers necessary, shall, by order in writing, either grant the licence or refu se 
to grant it.  
(2) Where a licence is refused, the grounds for such refusal shall be communicated to the appl icant in 
the prescribed manner.  
(3) A licence, unless sooner revoked, shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the 
licence and  may, on application made in this behalf sixty days before the date of its expiration, be 
renewed for such period as the licen sing authority may deem proper:  
Provided that a licence may be renewed on an application made within sixty days before the date of  
its expiration if the licensing authority is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not making the 
application earlier.  
(4) Every licence granted under this Act shal l be in the pres cribed form and shall be subject to such 
conditions as may be presc ribed:  
Provided that any such condition may require that the management of an institution shall, wherever 
practicable, be entrusted to women.  
(5) No fee shall be charged for the gra nt of a licence under this Act.  
6. Licence not transferable .―A licence gran ted under this  Act shall not be transferable.  3 
 7. Revocation of licence .―(1) Where any person to whom a licence has been granted under this Act, 
or any agent or servant of such person commits a breach of any of the conditions thereof, or any of the 
provisions of this Act, or any of the rules made thereunder, or where the licensing authority is not 
satisfied with the condition, management or superintendence of an institution, the licensing authority may, 
without prejudice to any other penalty which ma y have been incurred under this Act, for reasons to be 
recorded, revoke t he licence by order in writing:  
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the licence to 
show cause why the lice nce should not be revoke d. 
(2) Where a licence in respect of an institution has been revoked under the foregoing sub -section, 
such institution shall cease to function fr om the date of such revocation:  
Provided that where an appeal lies under section 8 against the order of revocat ion, such insti tution 
shall cease to function ― 
(a) where no such appeal has been preferred, immediately on the expiration of the period 
prescribed  for the filing of such appeal;  
(b) where such appeal has been preferred but the order of revocation has been upheld, from t he 
date of the appellate order.  
(3) On the revocation of a licence in respect of an institution, the licensing authority may direct that 
any woman or child who is an inmate of such institution on the da te of such revocation shall be ― 
(a) restored to the custody of her or his parent, husband or lawfu l guardian, as the case may be; or 
(b) transferred to anoth er institution.  
8. Appeals .―(1) Where the licensing authority is other than the State Government, any person 
aggrieved by an order of t he licensing authority refusing to grant a licence or revoking a licence, may 
within such period as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to the State Government agai nst such refusal or 
revocation.  
(2) The order of the State Government on such appeal and sub ject only to such order, the order of the 
licensing authority shall be final . 
9. Penalty .―Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder, or any of the conditions of a licence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred and f ifty rupees, or with both.  
10. Act not to  apply to certain institutions .―Noth ing in this Act shall apply to ― 
(a) hostels, or boarding houses attache d to, or controlled or recognised by educational 
institutions;  or 
(b) any protective home established under the Suppression of Immoral Traffi c in Women and 
Girls Act, 1956 (104 of 1956).  
11. Power to make rules .―(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out  the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for ― 
(a) the form of application for licence and the parti culars to be contained therein;  
(b) the form of licence and the conditions subject to whi ch such licence may be granted;  
(c) the management of institutions;  
(d) the reception, care, protection and welfare of women and children in institutions, including al l 
matters relating to their diet, clothing, accommodation , training and general conduct;  
(e) the inspection of institutions;  4 
 (f) the maintenance of  registers and account and sub mission of returns and audit of such accounts;  
(g) the discharge from institutions of women and children and their transfer f rom one institution 
to another ; 
(h) the manner of filing appeals under this Act and the time within whi ch such appeals shall be 
filed;  
(i) the manner of service of ord ers and notices Under this Act;  
(j) any other matter which is to be or may be pres cribed.  
12. Repeal and savings .―(1) As from the date of commen cement in any State of this Act, any State 
Act corresponding to this Act in force in that State immediately before such com mencement shall stand 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act of any State Act referred to in sub -section ( 1), anything 
done or any action taken (including any direction given, any register, rule or order made or any restriction 
imposed) under the provisions of such  State Act shall in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if 
the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or such action was  taken and shall continue in 
force accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
Explanation .―In this section, the expression “State Act ” includes a “Provincial Act ”.  
--------------------------The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 
 THE YOUNG PERSONS (HARMFUL PUBLICATIONS) ACT, 1956  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Penalty for sale, etc., of harmful publications . 
4. Power of Government to declare harmful publications forfeited.  
5. Appeal to High Court against order of forfeiture.  
6. Power to seize and destroy harmful publications . 
7. Offences under this Act to be cognizable . 
 
  2 
 THE YOUNG PERSONS ( HARMFUL PUBLICATIONS) ACT, 1956  
ACT NO. 93 OF 1956  
[28th December , 1956.]  
An Act to prevent the dissemination of certain publica tions harmful to young persons.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as f ollows:― 
1. Short tit le, extent and commencement .―(1)This Act may be called the Young Persons (H armful 
Publications) Act, 1956.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall  come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, ― 
(a) “harmful publication ” means any book, magazine, Pamphlet, leaflet, newspaper or other like 
publication which consists of stories told with the aid of pictures or without the aid of pictures or 
wholly in pictures, being stori es portraying  wholly or mainly ― 
(i)the commission of offences; or  
(ii) acts of violence or cruelty; or  
(iii) incidents of a repulsive or horrible nature;  
in such a way that the publication as a whole would tend to corrupt a young person into whose hands it 
might fall, whether by inciting or encouraging him to commit offences or acts of violence or cruelty or in 
any other man ner whatsoever;  
(b) “State Government ” in relation to a Union territory, m eans the administrator thereof;  
(c) “young person ” means a person  under the age of twenty years.  
3. Penalty for sale,  etc., of harmful publications .―(1) If a person ― 
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts into circulati on, any 
harmful publication, or  
(b) for purposes of sale, hire,  distribution, public exhibition or circulation, prints, makes or 
produces or has in his possess ion any harmful publication, or  
(c) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any harmful publication can be 
procu red from or through any person,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six mont hs, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) On a conviction under this section, the court may order the destruction of all the copies of the 
harmful publication in respect of which the conviction was had and which are in the custody of the court 
or remain in the possession or  power of the person convicted.  
4. Power of Government to decla re harmful publications forfeited .―(1) The State Government 
may, if  it is of opinion after consul tation with the principal law officer of the State, whether called the 
Advocate -General or by any other  name, that any publication is a harmful publication, declare, by order 
notified in the Official Gazette, that every copy of such publication shall be forfeited to the G overnment 
and every such notification shall state the ground for  the order.  
                                                           
1. Ist February, 1957, see Gazette of India, 1957, Extraordinary, Part. II, sec. 3.  
1st July, 1965 , extended to and brought into force in respect of Dadra and Nagar Haveli vide Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
Extended to  the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch.  3 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 6, where there is an  
order of forfeiture under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any publication it shal l be lawful for any police 
officer to seize the same wherever found in the territo ries to which this Act extends.  
5. Appeal to High Cou rt against order of forfeiture .―Any person aggrieved by an order of 
forfeiture passed by the State Government under section 4 may, within sixty days of the date of such 
order, apply to the High Court to set aside such order, and upon such application the High Court may pass 
such order as  it deems fit.  
6. Power to seize and destroy har mful publications .―(1) Any police officer or any other officer 
empowered in this behalf by the State Government may  seize any harmful publication.  
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class may, by warrant, author ise any police officer not below the rank 
of sub -inspector to enter and search any place where any stock of harmful publications may be or may be 
reasonably suspected to be, and such police officer may seize any publication found in such place if in his 
opinion i t is a harmful publication.  
(3) Any publication seized unde r sub -section ( 1) shall be pro duced, as soon as may be, before a 
magistrate of the first class, and any publication seized under sub -section ( 2) shall be produced, as soon as 
may be, before the court which issued the warrant.  
(4) If in the opinion of the magistrate or court such publication is a harmful publication, the 
Magistrate or court may cause it to be destroyed, but if in the opinion of th e magistrate or court, such 
publication is not a harmful publication, the magistrate or court shall dispose of it in the manner provided 
in sections 523, 524 and 525 of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
7. Offences u nder this Act to be cognizable .―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure,  1898 (5 of 1898) any offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
______  
