--------------------------The Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act, 1957--------------------------
 
1 THE CANTONMENTS (EXTENSION OF RENT CONTROL LAWS) ACT, 1957  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to extend to cantonments laws relating to control of rents and regulation of house 
accommodation.  
4. Extension of the Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955 to the cantonment of Mhow.  
   
2 THE CANTONMENTS (EXTENSION OF RENT CONTROL LAWS) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1957  
[18th December , 1957 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension to cantonments of laws relating to the control of rent and 
regulation of house accommodation.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
 1. Short title .—1[(1)] This Act may be called the Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) 
Act, 1957.  
2[(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of January , 1950. ] 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, “cantonment ” means any place declared to be a cantonment under 
section 3 of the Cantonments Act, 1924  (2 of 1924) . 
 3. Power to extend to cantonments laws relating to control of rents and regulation of house 
accommodation .—3[(1)] The Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, extend to 
any cantonment with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment relating to the 
control of rent and regulation of house accommodation which is in force4*** in the State in which the 
cantonment is situated:  
Provided that nothing contained in any enactment so extended shall apply to — 
(a) any premises within the cantonment belonging to the Government;  
(b) any tenancy or other like relationship created by a grant from the Government in respect of 
premises within the cantonment taken on lease or requisitioned by the Government; or  
(c) any house within the cantonment which is, or may be, appropriated by the Central 
Government on lease under the Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act, 1923  (6 of 1923) . 
5[(2) The extension of any enactment under sub -section ( 1) may be made from such earlier or future 
date as the Central Government may think fit:  
Provided that no such extension shall be  made from a date earlier than — 
(a) the commencement of such enactment , or 
(b) the establishment of the cantonment , or 
(c) the commencement of this Act , 
whichever is later.  
(3) Where any enactment in force in any State relating to the control of rent and regulation of house 
accommodation is extended to a canton ment from a date earlier than the date on which such extension is 
made (hereafter referred to as the “earlier date ”), such enactment, as in force on such earlier date, shall 
apply to such cantonment, and, where any such enactment has been amended at any ti me after the earlier 
date but before the commencement of the Cantonments (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Amendment 
Act, 1972  (22 of 1972) , such enactment as amended, shall apply to the cantonment on and from the date 
on which the enactment by which such a mendment was made came into force.  
                                                           
1. Section 1 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 22 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 6-1-1950). 
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-1-1950). 
3. Section 3 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-1-1950). 
4. The words “on the date of the notification” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-1-1950).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-1-1950).  
3 (4) Where , before the extension to a cantonment of any enactment relating to the control of rent and 
regulation of house accommodation therein (hereafter referred  to as the “Rent Control Act ”),— 
(i) any decree or order for the regulation of , or for eviction from , any house accommodation in 
that cantonment , or 
(ii) any order in the proceedings for the execution of such decree or order , or 
(iii) any order relating to the control of rent or other incident of such house acco mmodation,  
was made by any court, tribunal or other authority in accordance with any law for the control of rent and 
regulation of house accommodation for the time being in force in the State in which such cantonment is 
situated, such decree or order shall, on and from the date on which the Rent Control Act is extended to 
that cantonment, be deemed to have been made under the corresponding provisions of the Rent Control 
Act, as extended to that cantonment, as if the said Rent Control Act , as so extende d, were in force in that 
cantonment , on the date on which such decree or order was made. ] 
 4. Extension of the Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955 to the cantonment of 
Mhow .—1[(1)] The Madhya Bharat Accommodation Control Act, 1955  (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955) , 
as in force in that part of the State of Madhya Pradesh which immediately before the 1st day of 
November, 1956, formed the State of Madhya Bharat is hereby extended to , and brought into force in, the 
cantonment of Mhow with  the following modifications, namely: — 
In the said Act, — 
(a) for the words “commencement of this Act ” wherever they occur, the words “extension of 
this Act to the cantonment ” shall be substituted;  
(b) in section 1, for sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), the following sub -sectio ns shall be 
substituted, namely :— 
“(2) It extends to the Cantonment of Mhow . 
(3) It shall remain in force up to the 31st day of December, 1957; but the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct from time to time that it shall 
remain in force for such further period as may be specified in the notificati on so, however, 
that the total period for which it may remain in force shall not exceed two years from the 31st 
day of December, 1957 .”; 
(c) in section 2, in cl ause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), for the words “a Municipality ”, the words 
“the Cantonment Board ” shall be substituted;  
(d) in section 3, in clause ( e), for the word “Municipal ”, the words “Cantonment Board ” shall 
be substituted;  
(e) in section 4, — 
(i) in clause ( g), for the words “city or town concerned ”, the word “cantonment ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) in clause ( h), for the words “ city or town for that purpose and if he was in occupation, 
has for sufficient reasons vacated it after the Act has bee n extended to that city or town” , the 
words “cantonment for that purpose or  if he was in occupation, has for sufficient reasons 
vacated it after the extension of this Act thereto ” shall be substituted;  
(f) in section 6, — 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), the words and  brackets “situated in the city of Lashkar (including 
Gwalior and Morar), Indore, Ujjain or Ratlam ” shall be omitted;  
(ii) sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted;  
                                                           
1. Section 4 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 22 of 1972, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26-1-1950).  
4 (g) in section 14, the words “the provisions of this Act cease to be applicable to any town, or ” 
shall be omitted;  
(h) in section 15, after the word “instituted ”, the words “or if instituted, continued ”, shall be 
inserted;  
(i) in section 18, sub -section ( 4) shall be omitted;  
(j) in section 21, the words “or deemed to have been passed ” shall be omitted ; 
(k) in section 22, the words “or deemed to have been made ” shall be omitted;  
(l) section 23, section 27 and the Schedule shall be omitted;  
(m) in sections 24 and 25, the words “or deemed to have been made ” shall be omitted.  
1[(2) Any law relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation in force in the 
cantonment of Mhow immediately before the commencement therein of the Madhya Bharat 
Accommodation Control Act, 1955  (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955) , shall be, an d shall be deemed 
always to have been , extended to that cantonment under section 3 of this Act with effect from the 
commencement of such law in that cantonment or from the commencement of this Act, whichever is 
later:  
Provided that no such law shall contin ue, and shall be deemed to have continued, in force in the 
cantonment of Mhow on and from the commencement therein of the Madhya Bharat Accommodation 
Control Act, 1955  (Madhya Bharat Act 23 of 1955) . 
(3) Where, before the extension under sub -section ( 2) of any law to the cantonment of Mhow, — 
(i) any decree or order for the regulation of, or for eviction from, any house accommodation in 
that cantonment; or  
(ii) any order in the proceedings for the execution of such decree or order; or  
(iii) any order relatin g to the control of rent or other incide nt of such house accommodation,  
was made by any court, tribunal or other authority in accordance with any law for the control of rent and 
regulation of house accommodation for the time being in force in that cantonment, such decree or order 
shall, on and from the commencement of such law in that cantonment, be deemed to have been made 
under the corresponding provisions of the first -mentioned Act as if the said Act were in force in th at 
cantonment on the date o n which such decree or order was made.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1972, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26-1-1950).  
--------------------------The Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957--------------------------
1 THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1957  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment of competent authority.  
4. Preliminary notification respecting intention to prospect for coal in any area and powers of   
competent authorities thereupon.  
5. Effect of notification on prospecting licences and mining leases.  
6. Compensation for any necessary damage done under sect ion 4. 
7. Power to acquire land or rights in or over land notified under section  4. 
8. Objections to acquisition.  
9. Declaration of acquisition.  
9A. Special powers in cases of urgency.  
10. Vesting of land or rights in Central Government.  
11. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of land or rights in a Government company.  
12. Power to take possession of land acquired.  
13. Compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have effect, rights under mining leases being 
acquired, etc.  
14. Method of determining compensation.  
15. Costs.  
16. Interest on awards.  
17. Payment of compensation.  
18. Prospecting and mining to be done by Central Government in conformity with the Mineral 
Concession Rules.  
18A. Payment to State Governments in lieu of royalty . 
19. Power to delegate.  
20. Appeals.  
21. Power to obtain information.  
22. Power to enter and inspect.  
23. Penalties.  
24. Service of notices and orders.  
25. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
26. Jurisdiction of civil courts.  
27. Power to make rules.  
28. Notifications under Act 1 of 1894 in which proceedings are pending to be treated as notifications 
under this Act.  2 THE COAL BEARING AREAS (ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1957  
[8th June , 1957.]  
An Act to establish in the economic interest of India greater public control over the coal mining 
industry and its development by providing for the acquisition by the State of unworked land 
containing or likely to contain coal deposits or of rights in or over such land, for the 
extinguishment or modification of such rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease, 
licence or otherwise, and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Bearing Areas 
(Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957.  
(2) It extends  to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “competent authority ” means any person appointed to be a competent authority under                   
section 3;  
(b) “Government company ” means a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , in which any land or rights in or over land sha ll have vested under 
section 11;  
(c) “Mineral Concession Rules ” means the rules for the time being in force made under the Mines 
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948  (53 of 1948) ; 
2[(cc) “mining lease ” includes a mining sub -lease, and “lessee ” shall be construed accordingly;]  
(d) the expression “person interested ” includes all persons claiming an interest in compensation to 
be made on account of  the acquisition of land, or of  the acquisition , extinguishment o r modification 
of any rights in or over land, under this Act;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Tribunal ” means the Tribunal constituted under section 14.  
3. Appointment of competent authority .—The Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint any person to be the competent authority for the purposes of this Act; and 
different persons may be appointed as competent authorities for different provisions of this Act and for 
different areas.  
4. Preliminary notification respecting intention to prospect for coal in any area and powers of 
competent authorities thereupon .—(1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government that coal is 
likely to be obtained from land in any locality, it may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, give notice 
of its intention to prospect for coal therein.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall give a brief description of the land and state its 
approximate area.  
(3) On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1), it shall be law ful for the competent authority  
and for his servants and workmen — 
(a) to enter upon and survey any land in such locality;  
(b) to dig or bore into the sub -soil; 
                                                           
1. 12th June, 1957, vide Notification No. S.R.O.  1931  (E), dated 1 0th June, 1957, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                 
Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).   3 (c) to do all other acts necessary to prospect for coal in the land;  
(d) to set out the boundaries of the land in which prospecting is proposed to be done and the 
intended line of the work , if any , proposed to be made thereon;  
(e) to mark such boundaries and line by placing marks; and  
(f) where otherwise the survey cannot be  completed and the boundaries and line marked, to cut 
down and clear away any part of any  standing crop, fence or jungle:  
Provided  that no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or garden attached to 
a dwelling house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such 
occupier at least seven days ’ notice in writing of his intentio n to do so.  
(4) In issuing a notification under this section the Central  Government shall exclude there from that 
portion of any land in which coal mining operations are actually being carried on in conformity with the 
provisions of any enactment, rule or o rder for the time being in force or any premises on which any 
process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of coal obtained as a result of such 
operations is being carried on are situate.  
5. Effect of notification on prospecting licen ces and mining leases .—On the issue of a notification 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in  respect of any land — 
(a) any prospecting licence  1[which authorises any person] to prospect for coal or any other 
mineral in the land shall cease to have effect; and 
(b) any mining lease  2*** shall, in so far as it authorises the lessee or any person claiming 
through him to undertake any operation in the land, cease to have effect for so long as the notification 
under that sub -section is in force.  
6. Compensation f or any necessary damage done under section  4.—(1) Whenever any action of 
the nature described in sub -section ( 3) of section 4 is to be taken, the competent authority shall, before or 
at the time such action is taken, pay or tender payment for all necessary  damage which is likely to be 
caused, and in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered or as to the person to 
whom it should be paid or tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the decision of the Central 
Government, an d the decision of the Central Government shall be final.  
(2) The fact that there exists any such dispute as is referred to in this section shall not be a bar to 
action under sub -section ( 3) of section 4.  
7. Power to acquire land or rights in or over land n otified under section  4.—(1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that coal is obtainable in the whole or any part of the land notified under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4, it may, within a period of two years from the date of the said n otification or 
within such further period not exceeding one year in the aggregate as the Central Government may 
specify in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, give notice of its intention to acquire the 
whole or any part of the land or of  any rights in or over such land, as the case may be.  
(2) If no notice to acquire the land or any rights in or over such land is given under sub -section ( 1) 
within the period allowed there under, the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 sh all cease 
to have effect on the expiration of three years from the date thereof.  
 8. Objections to acquisition .—(1) Any person interested in any land in respect of which a 
notification under section 7 has been issued may, within thirty days of the issue of  the notification, object 
to the acquisition of the whole or any part of the land or of any rights in or over such land.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 3, for “granted to any person under the Mineral Concession Rules which authorises                       
him” (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).  
2. The words “granted to any person under the Mineral Concession Rules” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).   4 Explanation .—It shall not be an objection within the meaning of this section for any person to say 
that he himself desires to undertake  mining operations in the land for the production of coal and that such 
operations should not be undertaken by the Central Government or by any other person.  
(2) Every objection under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the competent authority in writing, and  the 
competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of being heard either in person or by a legal 
practitioner and shall, after hearin g all such objections and after making such further inquiry, if any,                    
as he thinks necessary , 1[either make a report in respect of the land which has been notified under                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 or of rights in or over such land, or make different reports in respect of 
different parcels of such land or of rights in or over such land, to the Central Government, containing his 
recommendations on the objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him, for the 
decision of that Government.]  
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be inte rested in land who would be 
entitled to claim an interest in compensation if the land or any rights in or over such land were acquired 
under this Act.  
 9. Declaration of acquisition .—(1) When the Central Government is satisfied, after considering the 
repor t, if any, made under section 8 that any land or any rights in or over such land should be acquired, a 
declaration shall be made by it to that effect  2[, and different declarations may be made from time to time 
in respect of different parcels of any land, or of rights in or over such land, covered by the same 
notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, irrespective of whether one report or different reports has 
or have been made (wherever required) under sub -section ( 2) of section 8]:  
3[Provided  that n o declaration in respect of any particular land, or rights in or over such land, covered 
by a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 7, issued after the commencement of the Coal Bearing 
Areas (Acquisition and Development) Amendment and Validation Ac t, 1971  (54 of 1971) , shall be made 
after the expiry of three years from the date of the said notification:  
Provided further that, where a declaration ] relates to any land or to any rights in or over land 
belonging to a State Government which has or have not been leased out, no such declaration shall be 
made except after previous consultation with the State Government.  
(2) 4[Every declaration] shall be p ublishe d in the Official Gazette, and — 
(a) in any case where land is to be acquired, shall state the district or other territorial division in 
which the land is situate and its approximate area; and, where a plan shall have been made of the 
land, the place  where such plan may be inspected;  
(b) in any case where rights in or over such land are to be acquired, shall state the nature and 
extent of the rights in addition to the matters relating to the land specified in clause ( a); and  
a copy of every such declaration shall be sent to the State Government concerned.  
5[9A. Special powers in cases of urgency .—If the Central Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary to acquire immediately the whole or any part of the land notified under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4 or any rights in or over such land, the Central Government may direct that the provisions of 
section 8 shall not apply, and if it does so direct, a declaration may be made under section 9 in respect 
thereof at any time after the issue of the notifi cation under section 7. ] 
10. Vesting of land or rights in Central Government .—(1) On the publication in the Official 
Gazette of the declaration under section 9, the land or the rights in or over the land, as the case may be, 
shall vest absolutely in the Central Government  6[free from all encumbrances].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 2, for cer tain words (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f 11 -12-1971).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Provided that, where the declaration” (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “The declaration” (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).  
5. Ins. by Act 51 of  1957, s. 4 (w.e.f 12 -6-1957).  
6. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 2-6-1957).  5 (2) Where the rights under any mining lease  1[granted or deemed to have been granted by a State 
Government] to any person are acquired under this Act, the Central Government shall, on and from the 
date of s uch vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining lease 
under the Mineral Concession Rules had been granted by the State Government to the Central 
Government, the period thereof being the entire period for which such a  lease could have been granted by 
the State Government under those rules.  
11. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of land or rights in a Government 
company .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the Central Government may, if it i s 
satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and 
conditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, direct, by order in writing, that the land or 
the rights in or over the land, as the case may be,  shall, instead of vesting in the Central Government 
under section 10 or continuing to so vest, vest in the Government company either on the date of 
publication of the declaration or on such other date as may be specified in the direction.  
(2) Where the ri ghts under any mining lease acquired under this Act vest in a Government company 
under sub -section ( 1), the Government company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the lessee of the State Government as if a mining lease under the Mineral Concession Rules 
had been granted by the State Government to the Government company, the period thereof being the 
entire period for which such a lease could have been granted by the State Government under those rules; 
and all the rights a nd liabilities of the Central Government in relation to the lease or the land covered by it 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities of the 
Government company.  
12. Power to take possession of land acq uired .—The competent authority may, by notice in 
writing, require any person in possession of any land acquired under this Act to surrender or deliver 
possession of the land within such period as may be specified in the notice, and if a person refuses or f ails 
to comply with any such notice, the competent authority may enter upon and take possession of the land, 
and for that purpose may use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.  
13. Compensation for prospecting licences ceasing to have effect, rights under mining leases 
being acquired, etc .—(1) Where a prospecting licence ceases to have effect under section 5,  there shall 
be paid to the person interested compensation, the amount of which shall be a sum made up of all items of 
reasonable and bona  fide expenditure actually incurred in respect  of the land, that is to say, — 
(i) the expenditure incurred in obtaining the licence;  
(ii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the preparation of maps, charts and other 
documents relating to the lan d, the collection from the land of cores or other mineral samples and the 
due analysis thereof and the preparation of any other relevant records or material;  
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of the construction of roads or other essential  
works on the land, if such roads or works are in existence and in a usable condition;  
(iv) the expenditure, if any, incurred in respect of any other operation necessary for prospecting 
carried out in the land.  
(2) Where the rights under a mining lease are  acquired under this Act, there shall be paid to the 
person interested compensation, the amount of which shall be a sum made up of  the following items, 
namely, — 
(i) if the lease was granted after prospecting operations had been carried out in respect of the land 
under a prospecting licence, the sum of all items of reasonable and bona fide  expenditure actually 
incurred with respect to the matters specified in clauses  (i), (ii), (iii) and ( iv) of sub -section ( 1) before 
the date of the lease:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 5, for “granted by a State Government” (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).  6 Provided  that where two or more leases had been granted in relation to any land covered 
previously by one prospecting licence, only so much of the expenditure aforesaid as bears to  the total 
expenditure the same proportion as the area under the mining lease in respect of which the rights have 
been acquired bears to the total area covered by the mining leases shall be payable under this clause;  
(ii) any reasonable and bona fide  expen diture of the nature referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) 
of sub -section ( 1) actually incurred in relation to the lease, together with the salami , if any, paid for 
obtaining the lease;  
(iii) the expenditure, if any, incurred by way of payment of dead -rent or minimum royalty during 
any year or years when there was no production of coal;  
(iv) interest on any such expenditure referred to in clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) as has actually been 
incurred 1[up to ] the year in which the rights under the lease are acquired, interest being calculated in 
the following manner, that is to say, — 
interest at the rate of five per centum per annum in respect of the expenditure incurred during 
each calendar year for the first  five years commencing from the year in which such expenditure 
was incurred plus interest at the rate of four per centum per annum in respect of each subsequent 
year after the expiration of the first five years and ending with the year in which the righ ts under 
the lease are acquired : 
Provided  that the total sum payable under this clause shall not exceed one -half of the total amount 
referred to in  2[clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii)]. 
(3) Where the rights under a mining lease acquired under section 9 relate only to a part of the land 
covered by the mining lease, the amount of compensation payable shall be such as bears to the total 
compensation which would have been payable if the rights of the mining lessee in respect of the entire 
land had been acquired , the sam e proportion which the area of the land in respect of which the rights are 
acquired bears to the total area of the land covered by the mining lease.  
(4) Where a mining lease ceases to have effect for any period under clause ( b) of section 5,  there shall 
be paid by way of compensation for the period during which the lease so ceased to have effect, a sum 
equivalent to five per centum of any such expenditure as is referred to in clauses ( i) and ( iii) of                      
sub-section ( 2) for each year during  which the lease remains suspended . 
(5) Where any land is acquired under section 9, there shall be paid compensation to the person 
interested the amount of which shall be determined a fter taking into consideration — 
(a) the market value of the land at the d ate of the publication of the notification under                          
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
Explanation .—The value of any minerals lying in the land shall not be taken into consideration in 
determining the market value of any land;  
(b) the dama ge sustained by the person interested, by reason of the taking of any standing crops 
or trees which may be on the land at the time of the taking possession thereof;  
(c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at the time of taking possession of the 
land, by reason of severing such land from other land;  
(d) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested, at the time of taking possession of the 
land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable proper ty in any other 
manner, or his earnings;  
(e) if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled to change 
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 6, for “during the period commencing from the date of the lease and ending with” (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “clauses ( ii) and ( iii)” (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).   7 (f) the damage, if any, bona fide  resulting from diminution of the profits of the land between the 
time of the publication of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 4  and the time of the 
publication of the declaration under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 9.  
1[(5A) In determining the amount of compensation for any land acquired under section 9,  any increase 
to the value of the other land of the person interested, likely to accrue from the use to which the land 
acquired will be put shall not be taken int o consideration.]  
(6) Where any operation carried on by or on behalf of the Central Government in the exercise of any 
powers conferred by this Act causes or is likely to cause damage to the surface of any land or any works 
thereon and in respect thereof no  provision for compensation is made elsewhere in this Act, the competent 
authority shall pay or tender payment for all such damage, and, in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of 
the amount so paid or tendered or as to the person to whom it is to be paid  or tendered, he shall refer the 
dispute to the decision of the Tribunal.  
(7) No compensation under this section in relation to maps, charts and other documents shall be paid 
unless the person to whom it is payable has delivered to the prescribed authority  all the maps, charts and 
other documents.  
14. Method of determining compensation .—(1) Where the amount of any compensation payable 
under this Act can be fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with such agreement.  
(2) Where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Government shall constitute a Tribunal 
consisting of a person who is or has been or is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court for the purpose of 
determining the amount.  
(3) The Central Government may in any particular case nomi nate a person having expert knowledge 
in mining to assist the Tribunal, and where such nomination is made, the person or persons interested may 
also nominate any other person for the same purpose.  
(4) At the commencement of the proceedings before the Tribu nal the Central Government and the 
person interested shall state what in their respective opinions is a fair amount of compensation.  
(5) The Tribunal shall  after hearing the dispute, make an award determining the amount of 
compensation which appears to it to be just , and specify the person or persons to whom the compensation 
shall be paid; and in making the award the Tribunal shall have regard to the circumstances of each case 
and to the foregoing provisions of this Act with respect to the manner in which t he amount of 
compensation shall be determined in so far as the said provisions or any of them may be applicable.  
(6) Where there is a dispute as to the person or persons entitled to compensation and the Tribunal 
finds that more persons than one are entitle d to compensation, it shall apportion the amount thereof 
among such persons and in such manner as it thinks fit.  
(7) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940  (10 of 1940) , shall apply to any proceedings under this 
section.  
2[(8) The Tribunal, in the proceeding s before it, shall have all the powers which a civil court has 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him  on oath;  
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of any document ; 
(iii) reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(iv) requisitioning any public record from any court or office; and  
(v) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.]  
15. Costs .—Every aw ard made by the Tribunal shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the 
proceedings before it and by what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).   8 16. Interest on awards .—If the sum which in the opinion of the Tribunal ought to have been 
awarded as compensation is in excess of the sum which the Central Government has stated to be a fair 
amount of compensation, the award of the Tribunal may direct that the Central Government shall pay 
interest on such excess at the rate of five per  centum  per annum from the date on which it became payable 
to the date of payment of such excess.  
17. Payment of compensation .—(1) Any compensation payable under this Act may be tendered or 
paid to the persons interested entitled thereto, and the Central Government  shall pay it to them unless 
prevented by some one or more of the contingencies mentioned in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) If the persons interested entitled thereto shall not consent to receive it or if there be any dispute as 
to the sufficiency of the amount of c ompensation or the title to receive it or the apportionment thereof, the 
Central Government shall deposit the amount of compensation with the Tribunal:  
Provided that any person admitted to be interested may receive such payment under protest as to the 
sufficiency of the amount:  
1[Provided further that every person who claims to be an interested person (whether such person has 
been admitted to be interested or not) including the person referred to in the preceding proviso shall be 
entitled to prefer a cl aim for compensation before the Tribunal:  
Provided also that no person who has received the amount otherwise than under protest shall be 
entitled to prefer any such claim before the Tribunal.]  
(3) When the amount of compensation is not paid or deposited as  required by this section, the Central 
Government shall be liable to pay interest thereon at the rate of five per centum per annum from the time 
the compensation became due until it shall have been so paid or deposited.  
18. Prospecting and mining to be don e by Central Government in conformity with the Mineral 
Concession Rules .—Where prospecting is done under this Act by or on behalf of the Central 
Government in any land situate within the jurisdiction of a State Government or where the Central 
Government or  a Government company has become the lessee of a State Government in respect of any 
land under this Act, the terms and conditions under which the prospecting can be done or rights under the 
lease exercised shall, as far as may be, be the same as the terms and conditions applicable to prospecting 
licences and mining leases under the Mineral Concession Rules; and in case of doubt or dispute, shall be 
settled by arbitration or in such other manner as the Central Government and the State Government may 
decide.  
2[18A.  Payment to State Governments in lieu of royalty .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, where any land or any rights in or over land belonging to a State Government (other than the 
rights under a mining lease granted or deemed to have been granted by the State Government to any 
person) vest in the Central Government under sectio n 10 or in a Government Company  under section 11, 
the Central Government or the Company , as the case may be, may pay to the State Government such sum 
of money as woul d have been payable as royalty by a lessee had such land or rights been under a mining 
lease granted by the State Government. ] 
19. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged by it under this Act shall, in 
such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
or discharged also by any person specified in this behalf in  the notif ication  and any such person may, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government, by order in writing, direct that any power or duty which 
has been directed to be exercised or discharged by him shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, i f any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercised or discharged by any such person 
subordinate to him as may be specified therein.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1971, s. 6, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -12-1971).   9 20. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any award of the Tribunal under section 14 may, within 
thirty days from the date of such award, prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the 
land or some portion of the land which has been acquired or the land or some portion of the land covered 
by a prospecting licence or by a mining lease in respect of which mining rights have been acquired is 
situate.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a competent authority or by any other person in virtue 
of any powers exercisable by him under this Act may, within twenty -one days from the date of the order, 
prefer an appeal to the Central Government.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may, after calling for a 
report from the competent authority of person concerned, and giving an opportunity to the parties to be 
heard, and after  making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such orders as it thinks fit, and the 
order of the Central Government shall be final.  
(4) Where an appeal is preferred under sub -section ( 2), the Central Government may stay the 
enforcement of the orde r of the competent authority or person concerned for such period and on such 
conditions as it thinks fit.  
 21. Power to obtain information .—The Central Government or any person authorised in writing by 
it in this behalf may, by order in writing, require an y person to furnish to such authority as may be 
specified in the order such information in his possession as may be required relating to any property in 
respect of which action is proposed to be taken under this Act.  
 22. Power to enter and inspect .—The co mpetent authority, or any person authorised in writing by it 
in this behalf , by general or special order, may enter and inspect any property for the purpose of 
determining whether and, if so, in what manner an order under this Act should be made in relatio n to any 
property or with a view to securing compliance with any order made under this Act.  
23.  Penalties .—Whoever wi lfully obstructs any person in doing any of the acts authorised by                 
sub-section ( 3) of section 4 or wi lfully fills up, destroys, damages or displaces any m ark made under 
section 4, or wi lfully obstructs the lawful exercise of any other power conferred by or under this Act, or 
fails to comply with any order made or direction given under this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
24. Service of notices and orders .—Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, every 
notice or order issued or made under this Act shal l— 
(a) in the case of a notice or order of a general nature or affecting a number of persons, be 
notified in the Official Gazette and also published in the locality in such manner as may  be 
prescribed; and  
(b) in the case of a notice or order directed to an individual  1[be served on such individual] ,— 
(i) wherever it is practicable to do so by delivering or tendering it to that individual; or  
(ii) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it on the door or some other 
conspicuous part of the res idence in which that individual lives,  and a written report thereof shall 
be prepared and witnessed by two persons living in the neighbo urhood; or  
(iii) failing service by these means, by post.  
25. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any person for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
  10 (2) No suit or other legal proceedin g shall lie against the Central Government or the competent 
authority or any other person for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereun der.   
26. Jurisdiction of civil courts .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no civil court 
shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the Central Government or the competent authority 
or any other person is empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
27. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in t he Official Gazette, 
make rules  for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the procedure to be followed in making any inquiry under this Act;  
(b) the procedure to be followed  by the Tribunal in proceedings under section 14;  
(c) the form and manner in which appeals to the Central Government may be made under this 
Act; and  
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the Central Governmen t under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the e xpiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
28. Notifications under Act 1 of 1894 in which proceedings are pending to be treated as 
notifications under this Act .—(1) Every notification issued before the commencement of this  Act, 
whether by the Central Government  or by a State Government, under section 4 of the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), in which lands were stated to be needed for 
the prospecting of coal seams for the development of collieries to be worked by the Union of India shall 
be deemed to hav e been issued by the Central Government under section 4 of this Act as if this Act had 
been in force on the date of the notification.  
(2) Every notification issued before the commencement of this Act, whether by the Central 
Government or by a State Government, under section 6 of the said Act in which lands were stated to be 
needed for the development of coal shall be deemed to have been issued under section 9 of this Act as if 
this Act had been in force on the date of the notification.  
(3) Any object ion preferred under section 5A of the said Act in respect of any land covered by any 
notification issued under section 4 of the said Act shall be deemed to be an objection preferred under 
section 8 of this Act to the relevant competent authority and may be 2[disposed of by him as if the 
objection had been made in relation to a notification issued under section 7  of this Act  3[in respect of such 
land] or of any rights in or over such land; and the Central Government may at any time make a 
declaration under section 9 of this Act in respect of the land or any part thereof or any rights  in or over 
such land or part].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 51 of 1957, s. 7, for “disposed of by him accordingly” (w.e.f. 12 -6-1957).  
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 1969, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -8-1969).  11 1[(3A) Where in respect of any land co vered by any notification issued under section 4 of the said Act, 
no objection has been preferred under section 5A thereof within the period specified in that section, then 
it shall be deemed that a notification had been issued under section 7 of this Act in respect of such land or 
of any rights in or over such land and that no objection to the acquisition of the land or any rights in or 
over the land had been preferred under section 8 of this Act, and accordingly the Central Government 
may at any time make  a declaration under section 9 of this Act in respect of the land or any part thereof or 
any rights in or over such land or part.]  
(4) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the provisions of this Act (including 
provisions relating to c ompensation) shall apply in relation to any such notification as is referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) as they apply in relation to any notification issued under section 4 or 
section 9, as the case may be, of this Act.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1969 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -8-1969).   
--------------------------The Copyright Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957 
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Interpretation.  
3. Meaning of publication.  
4. When work not deemed to be published or performed in public.  
5. When work deemed to b e first published in India.  
6. Certain disputes to be decided by Appellate Board . 
7. Nationality of author where the making of unpublished work is extended over considerable 
period.  
8. Domicile of Corporations.  
CHAPTER II  
COPYRIGHT  OFFICE AND APPELLATE  BOARD  
9. Copyri ght Office.  
10. Registrar and Deputy Registrars of Copyrights.  
11. Appellate Board . 
12. Powers and procedure of Appellate Board . 
CHAPTER III  
COPYRIGHT  
13. Works in which copyright subsists.  
14. Meaning of copyright.  
15. Special provision regarding copyright in designs registered or capable of being registered under 
the Design s Act, 2000 . 
16. No copyright except as provided in this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT AND THE RIGHTS OF THE OWNER  
17. First owner of copyright.  
18. Assignment of copyright.  
19. Mode of assignment.  
19A. Disputes with  respect to assignment of copyright.  
20. Transmission of copyright in manuscript by testamentary disposition.  
21. Right of author to relinquish copyright.  
CHAPTER V  
TERM OF COPYRIGHT  
22. Term of copyright in published literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works.  
23. Term of copyright in anonymous and pseudonymous works.  
24. Term of copyright in posthumous work.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. [Omitted. ] 
26. Term of copyright in cinematograph films . 
27. Term of copyright in sound recording . 
28. Term of copyright Government works .  
28A. Term of copyright in wo rks of public undertakings.  
29. Term of copyright in works of international organisations.  
CHAPTER VI  
LICENCES  
30.  Licences by owners of copyright.  
30A. Application of sections 19.  
31. Compulsory licence in works withheld from public.  
31A. Compulsory licence in unpub lished  or published works.  
31B. Compulsory licence for benefit of disabled.  
31C. Statutory licence for cover versions.  
31D. Statutory licence for broadcasting of literary and musical works and sound                        
recording.  
32. Licence to produce and  publish translations.  
32A. Licence to reproduce and publish works for certain purposes.  
32B. Termination of licences issued under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VII  
COPYRIGHT SOCIETIES  
33. Registration of copyright society.  
33A. Tariff Scheme by copyright societies.  
34. Administration of rights of owner by copyright society.  
34A. [  Omitted . ] 
35.  Control over the copyright society by the au thor and other owners of rights.  
36.  Submission of returns and reports.  
36A. Rights and liabilities of performing rights societies.  
CHAPTER V III 
RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING ORGANISATION AND OF PERFORMERS  
37. Broadcast reproduction right.  
38.  Performer ’s right . 
38A. Exclusive right of performers.  
38B. Moral rights of the performer.  
39. Acts not infringing broadcast reproduction right or performer ’s right.  
39A. Certain provisions to apply in case of broadcast reproduction right and performer ’s . 
CHAPTER IX  
INTERNATIONAL COPYRIGHT  
40. Power to extend copyright to foreign works.  
40A. Power of Central Government to apply Chapter VIII to broadcasting organisations and 
perform ers in certain other countries . 
41.  Provisions as to works of certain international organisations.  
42. Power to restrict rights in works of foreign authors first published in India.  
42A. Power to restrict rights of foreign broadcasting organisations and perf ormers . 
43.  Orders under this Chapter to be laid before Parliament.  3 
 CHAPTER X  
REGISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT  
SECTIONS  
44. Register of Copyrights.  
45. Entries in Register of Copyrights . 
46. Indexes.  
47. Form and inspection of register.  
48.  Register of Copyrights to be prima facie  evidence of particulars entered therein.  
49. Correction of entries in the Register of Copyrights.  
50. Rectification of Register by [Appellate Board] . 
50A. Entries in the Register of Copyrights, etc., to be published.  
CHAPTER XI  
INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT  
51.  When copyrig ht infringed.  
52. Certain acts not to be infringement of copyright.  
52A. P articulars to be included in recor ds and video Films.  
52B. [ Omitted .] 
53. Importation of infringing copies.  
53A. Resale share right in original copies.  
CHAPTER XII  
CIVIL REMEDIES  
54.  Definitio n. 
55. Civil remedies for infringement of copyright.  
56.  Protection of separate rights.  
57. Author ’s special right s. 
58. Rights of owner against persons possessing or dealing with infringing copies.  
59.  Restriction on remedies in the case of works of architecture.  
60.  Remedy i n the case of groundless threat of legal proceedings.  
61. Owner s of copyright to be party to the proceeding.  
62. Jurisdiction of court over matters arising under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES  
63. Offence  of infringement of copyright or other rights conferred by this Act.  
63A. Enhanced penalty on second and subsequent convictions.  
63B. Knowing use of infringing copy of computer programme to be an offence . 
64. Power of police to seize infringing copies.  
65. Possession of plates for purpose of making infringing copies.  
65A.  Protection of technological measures.  
65B. Protection of Rights Management Information.  
66. Disposal of infringing copies or plates for purpose of making infringing copies.  
67. Penalty for making false entries in register, etc., for producing or tendering false e ntries . 
68.  Penalty for making false statements for the purpose of deceiving or influencing any authority or 
officer.  
68A. Penalty for contravention of section 52A.  4 
 SECTIONS  
69. Offences by companies.  
70.  Cognizance of offences . 
CHAPTER XIV  
APPEALS  
71. Appeals against c ertain orders of Magistrate.  
72. Appeals against orders of Registrar of Copyrights and [Appellate Board] . 
73.  Procedure for appeals.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
74. Registrar of Copyrights and [Appellate Board]  to possess certain powers of civil courts.  
75. Orders for payme nt of money passed by Registrar of Copyrights and [Appellate Board]  to be 
executable as a decree.  
76. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
77. Certain persons to be public servants.  
78. Power to make rules.  
79. Repeals, savings , and transitional provisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1957 
ACT NO. 14 OF 19571 
 [4th June , 1957 .] 
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to copyright . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent a nd commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Copyright Act, 1957.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Interpretation .—In thi s Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adaptation ” means, — 
(i) in relation to a dramatic work, the conversion of the work into a non -dramatic work;  
(ii) in relation to a literary work or an artistic work, the conversion of the work into a 
dram atic work by way of performance in public or otherwise;  
(iii) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, any abridgement of the work or any version of 
the work in which the story or action is conveyed wholly or mainly by means of pictures in a 
form suitab le for reproduction in a book, or in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical;  3***  
(iv) in relation to a musical work, any arrangement or transcription of the work;  4[and]  
 4[(v) in relation to any work, any use of such work involving its re -arrangem ent or 
alteration;]   
5[(aa) “Appellate Board ” means the Appellate Board referred to in section 11; ] 
(b) 6[work of architecture] means any building or structure having an artistic character or design, 
or any model for such building or structure;  
(c) “artist ic work ” means, —  
(i) a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram, map, chart or plan), an engraving 
or a photograph, whether or not any such work possesses artistic quality;  
(ii) an 6[work  of architectur e]; and  
(iii) any other work of artistic  craftsmanship;  
(d) “author ” means ,— 
(i) in relation to  a literary or dramatic work, the author of the work;  
(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer;  
(iii) in relation to an artistic work other than a photograph, the artist;  
(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking the photograph;  
                                                             
1. The Act has been extended Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Schedule, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by           
Reg. 6 of  1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule, and brought into force in the State of Sikkim (w.e.f. 27 -4-1979) : vide notification 
No. S.O. 226(E), dated 27 -4-1979, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. 21st January, 1958, vide notification No. 269, dated 21st January 1958, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3.  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995). 
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995). 
5. Ins . by Act 7 of 2017 , s. 160  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994 , s. 2, for “architectural work of art ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995). 6 
 1[(v) in relation to a cinematograph film or sound recording, the producer; and  
(vi) in relation to any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is                            
computer -generated, the person who causes the work to be created;]  
2[(dd) “broadcast ” means communication to the public — 
(i) by any means of wireless diffusion, whether in any one or more of the forms of signs, 
sounds or visual images; or  
(ii) by wire,  
and includes a re -broadcast ;] 
(e) “calendar year ” means the year commencing on the 1st day of January;  
3[(f) “cinematograph film ” means any work of visual recording 4*** and includes a sound 
recording accompany ing such visual recording and “cinematograph ” shall be construed as incl uding 
any work produced by any process analogous to cinematography including video films;]  
5[(fa) “commercial rental ” does not include the rental, lease or lending of a lawfully acquired 
copy of a computer programme, sound  recording, visual recording or ci nematograph film for                 
non-profit purposes by a non -profit library or non -profit educational institution.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, a “non-profit library or non -profit educational 
institution ” means a library or educationa l institution which receives grants from the Government or 
exempted from payment of tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961).]  
6[(ff) “communication to the public ” means making any work or performance available for being 
seen or heard or otherwise en joyed by the public directly or by any means o f display or diffusion 
other than by issuing physical copies of it, whether simultaneously or at places and times chosen 
individually, regardless of whether any member of the public actually sees, hears or othe rwise enjoys 
the work or performance so made available.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, communication through satellite or cable or any 
other means of simultaneous commu nication to more than one house hold or place of residence 
including resid ential rooms of any hotel or hostel shall be deemed to be communication to the 
public; ] 
(g) “delivery ”, in relation to a lecture, includes delivery by means of any mechanical instrument 
or by  7[broadcast];  
(h) “dramatic work ” includes any piece for recitat ion, choreographic work or entertainment in 
dumb show, the scenic arrangement or acting, form of which is fixed in writing or otherwise but does 
not include a cinematograph film;  
8[(hh) “duplicating equipment ” means any mechanical contrivance or device use d or intended to 
be used for making copies of any work;]  
(i) “engravings ” include etchings, lithographs, wood -cuts, prints and other similar works, not 
being photographs;  
(j) “exclusive licence ” means a licence which confers on the licensee or on the licen see and 
persons authorised by him, to the exclusion of all other persons (including the owner of the 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994 , s. 2,  for sub -clauses ( v) and ( vi) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995) . 
2.  Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
3.  Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
4. The words “on any medium produced through a process from which a m oving image may be produced by any means ” omitted   
by Act 27 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5.  Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-6-2012).  
6.  Subs.  by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( ff) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012 ). 
7. Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2, for “radio -diffusio n” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
8. Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  7 
 copyright) , any right comprised in the copyright in a work, and “exclusive licensee ” shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(k) “Government work ” means a work whi ch is made or published by or und er the direction or 
control of — 
(i) the Government or any department of the Government;  
(ii) any Legislature in India;  
(iii) any court, tribunal or other judicial authority in India;  
1[(l) “Indian work ” means a liter ary, dr amatic or musical work, — 
(i) the author of which is a citizen of India; or  
(ii) which is first published in India; or  
(iii) the author of which, in the case of an unpublished work , is, at the time of the making 
of the work, a citizen of India;]  
2[(m) “infringing copy ” means — 
(i) in relation to a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, a reproduction thereof 
otherwise than in the form of a cinematograph ic film;  
(ii) in relation to a cinematographic film, a copy of the film made on any medium by any 
means; 
(iii) in relation to a sound recording, any other recording embodying the same soun d 
recording, made by any means;  
(iv) in relation to a programme or performance in which such a broadcast reproduction 
right or a performer ’s right subsists under the pro visions of this Act, the sound recording or a 
cinemato graphic film of such  programme or performance,  
if such reproduction, copy or sound recording is made or imported in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act;]  
(n) “lecture ” includes address, speech and sermon;  
3[(o) “literary work ” includes computer programmes, tables and compila tions including  computer 
4[data bases] ;] 
5[(p) “musical work ” means a work consisting of music and includes any graphical notation of 
such work but does not include any words  or any action intended to be sung, spoken or performed 
with the music;]  
6[(q) “performance ”, in relation to performer ’s right, means any visual or acoustic presentation 
made live by one or more performers;]  
7[(qq) “performer ” includes an actor, singer, mu sician, dancer, acrobat, juggler, conjurer, snake 
charmer, a person delivering a lecture or any other person who makes a performance;]  
8*   *  *   *   *  
(s) “photograph ” includes photo -lithograph and any work produced by any process analogous to 
photograp hy but does not include any part of a cinematograph film;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 198 3, s. 3, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994,  s. 2, for  clause ( m) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for clause ( o) (w.e. f. 10-5-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 2, for “data basis ” (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( q) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995) . 
8. Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).  8 
 (t) “plate ” includes any stereotype or other plate, stone, block, mould, matrix, transfer, 
negative,  1[duplicating equipment] or other device used or intended to be used for printing or 
reproducing  copies of any work, and any matrix or other appliance by which  2[sound recording] for 
the acoustic presentation of the work are or are intended to be made;  
(u) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
3[(uu) “producer ”, in relation to a  cinematograph film or sound recording, means a person who 
takes the initiative and responsibility for making the work;]  
4*   *   *   *  * 
5*   *   *   *  * 
6[(x) “reprography ” means the making of copies of a work, by photo copying or similar means;  
 7[(xa) “Right Management Information ” means, — 
(a) the title or other information identifying the work or performance;  
(b) the name of the author or performer;  
(c) the name and address of the owner of rights;  
(d) terms and conditions regarding the use of the rig hts; and  
(e) any number or code that represents the information referred to in sub -clauses ( a) to ( d), 
but does not include any device or procedure intended to identify the user.]  
(xx) “sound recording ” means a recording of sounds from which such sounds ma y be produced 
regardless of the medium on which such recording is made or the method by which the sounds are 
produced;]  
 7[(xxa) “visual recording ” means the recording in any medium, by any method including the 
storing of it by any electronic means, o f moving images or of the representations thereof, from which 
they can be perceived, reproduced or communicated by any method.]  
(y) “work ” means any of the following wo rks, namely: — 
(i) a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work;  
(ii) a cinematograph film;  
(iii)  2[sound recording];  
(z) “work of joint authorship ” means a work produced by the collaboration of two or more 
authors in which the contribution of one author is not distinct from the contribution of the other 
author or authors;  
(za) “work of sculptur e” includes casts and models.  
8[3. Meaning of publication .—For the purposes of this Act, “publication ” means making a work 
available to the public by issue of copies or by communicating the work to the public .] 
4. When work not deemed to be published or pe rformed in public .—Except in relation to 
infringement of copyright, a work shall not be deemed to be published or performed in public, if 
published, or performed in public, without the licence of the owner of the copyright.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act  38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (10-5-1995).  
4. Omitted by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
5. Omitted by Act  38 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
6.  Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( x) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 2 012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  9 
  5. When work deemed to be first  published in India .—For the purposes of this Act, a work 
published in India shall be deemed to be first published in India, notwithstanding that it has been 
published simultaneously in some other country, unless such other country provides a shorter term of 
copyright for such work; and a work shall be deemed to be published simultaneously in India and in 
another country if the time between the publication in India and the publication in such other country does 
not exceed thirty days or such other period as  the Central Government may, in relation to any specified 
country, determine.  
1[6. Certain disputes to be decided by 2[Appellate Board] .—If any question arises — 
(a) whether a work has been published or as to the date on which a work was published for the 
purposes of Chapter V, or  
(b) whether the term of copyright for any work is shorter in any other country than that provided 
in resp ect of that work under this Act,  
it shall be referred to the 2[Appellate Board]  constituted under section 11 whose decision th ereon shall be 
final: 
Provided that if in the opinion of the 2[Appellate Board] , the issue of copies or communication to 
the public referred to in section 3 was of an insignificant nature, it shall not be deemed to be 
publication for the purposes of that s ection.]  
7. Nationality of author where the making of unpublished work is extended over considerable 
period .—Where, in the case of an unpublished work, the making of the work is extended over a 
considerable period, the author of the work shall, for the pur poses of this Act, be deemed to be a citizen 
of, or domiciled in, that country of which he was a citizen or wherein he was domiciled during any 
substantial part of that period.  
8. Domicile of corporations .—For the purposes of this Act, a body corporate sha ll be deemed to be 
domiciled in India if it is incorporated under any law in force in India.  
CHAPTER II  
COPYRIGHT  OFFICE AND 2[APPELLATE BOARD ] 
9. Copyright Office .—(1) There shall be established for the purposes of this Act an office to be 
called the Copy right Office.  
(2) The Copyright Office shall be under the immediate control of the Registrar of Copyrights who 
shall act under the superintendence and direction of the Central Government.  
(3) There shall be a se al for the Copyright Office.  
10. Registrar an d Deputy Registrars of Copyrights .—(1) The Central Govern ment shall appoint a 
Registrar of Copyrights and may appoint one or more Deputy Registrars of Copyrights.  
(2) A Deputy Registrar of Copyrights shall discharge under the superin tendence and directio n of the 
Registrar of Copyrights such functions of the Registrar under this Act as the Registrar may, from time to 
time, assign to him; and any reference in this Act to the Registrar of Copyrights shall include a reference 
to a Deputy Registrar of Copyrigh ts when so discharging any such functions.  
3[11. Appellate Board .—The Appellate Board established under section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 
1999  (47 of 1999)  shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 
2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Appellate Board for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Board shall 
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act. ] 
12. Powers and procedure of 2[Appellate Board] .—(1) The 2[Appellate Board]  shall,  subject to any 
rules that may be made under this Act, have power to regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of 
place s and times of its sittings : 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 4, for section 6 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2017,  s.160,  for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Subs. by s.160,  ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  10 
 Provided that the 1[Appellate Board]  shall ordinarily hear any proceeding instituted before it under 
this Act within the zone in which, at the time of the institution of the proceeding, the person instituting the 
proceeding actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section “zone” means a  zone specified in section 15 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956).  
(2) The  1[Appellate Board]  may exercise and discharge its powers and functions through Benches 
constituted by the Chairman of the 1[Appellate Board]  from amongst its 2[membe rs]: 
3[Provided that, if the Chairman is of opinion that any matter of importance is required to be heard by 
a larger bench, he may refer the matter to a special bench consisting of five members.]  
4*                       *                                 *    *   * 
 (5) No member of the 1[Appellate Board]  shall take part in any proceedings before the Board in 
respect of any matter in which he has a personal interest.  
(6) No act done or proceeding taken by the 1[Appellate Board]  under this Act shall be ques tioned on 
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board.  
(7) The 1[Appellate Board]  shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of   5[sections 345 and 
346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] and all proceedings before the Board shall be 
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER III  
COPYRIGHT  
13. Works in which copyright subsists .—(1) Subject to the p rovisions of this section and the other 
provisions of this Act, copyright shall subsist throughout India in the following cla sses of works, that is to 
say,— 
(a) original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works;  
(b) cinematograph film s; and  
(c) 6[sound recording].  
(2) Copyright shall not subsist in any work specified in sub -section ( 1), other than a work to which the 
provisions of section 40 or section 41 apply, unless ,— 
(i) in the case of a published work, the work is first published in India, or whe re the work is first 
published outside India, the author is at the date of such publication, or in a case where the author was 
dead at that date, was at the time of his death, a citizen of India;  
(ii) in the case of an unpublished work other than a  7[work of architecture], the author is at the date 
of making of the work a citizen of India or domiciled in India; and  
(iii) in the case of a  7[work of architecture], the work is located in India.  
Explanation. —In the case of a work of joint authorship, the condit ions conferring copyright 
specified in this sub -section shall be satisfied by all the authors of the work.  
(3) Copyright shall not subsist — 
(a) in any cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film is an infringement of the copyright 
in any other wor k; 
                                                             
1.  Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160,  for "Copyright Board"   (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017). 
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 4, for “members, each Bench consisting of not less than three members ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
4. Sub-section ( 3) and ( 4) omitted by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 6, for “sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ”                 
(w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by Act  38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
7. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for “architec tural work of art ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  11 
 (b) in any  1[sound recording] made in respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work, if in making 
the 1[sound recording], copyright in such work has been infringed.  
(4) The copyright in a cinematograph film or a record shall not affect the separate copyright in any 
work in respect of which or a substantial part of which, the film, or, as the case may be, the                     
1[sound recording] is made.  
(5) In the case of a  2[work of architecture], copyright shall subsist only in the artistic character and 
design and shall not extend to processes or me thods of  construction.  
3[14. Meaning of copyright .—For the purposes of this Act, “copyright ” means the exclusive right 
subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the  doing of any of the following acts in respect of 
a work or any su bstantial part thereof, namely :— 
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a  computer programme, — 
(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in any medium by 
electronic means;  
(ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in circulation;  
(iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;  
(iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;  
(v) to make any translation of the work;  
(vi) to mak e any adaptation of the work;  
(vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the acts specified in 
relation to the work in sub -clauses ( i) to ( vi); 
(b) in the  case of a computer programme ,— 
(i) to do any of the acts specifie d in clause ( a); 
4[(ii) to sell or give  on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial rental any  copy 
of the computer programme : 
Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer programmes 
where the programme itself is not the essential object of the rental.]  
(c) in the case of an artistic work, — 
5[(i) to reproduce the work in any material form including — 
(A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means; or  
(B) depiction in three -dimensions of a two -dimen sional work; or  
(C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three -dimension al work;]  
(d) in the  case of a cinematograph film, — 
6[(i) to make a copy of the film , including — 
(A) a photograph of any image forming part thereof; or  
(B) storing of it in any medium by e lectronic or other means;]   
7[(ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any copy of the 
film.]  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for “architectural work of art ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by s. 7 , ibid.,  for section 14 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
4. Subs. by A ct 49 of 1999, s. 3, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 5, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 21-6-2012 ). 
6. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
7. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  12 
 (e) in the case of a s ound recording, — 
(i) to make any other sound recording embodying it  1[including storing of it in any medium 
by electronic or other means] ; 
2[(ii) to sell or give  on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any copy of the 
sound recording ;] 
(iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,  a copy which has been sold once shall be deemed 
to be a copy already in circulation].  
15. Special provision regarding Copyright in designs registered or Capable of bein g registered 
under the 3*** 4[Design s Act, 2000  (16 of 2000) ].—(1) Copyright shall not subsist under this Act in any 
design which is registered under the   3*** 4[Designs Act, 2000  (16 of 2000) ]. 
(2) Copyright in any design, which is capable of being registered under the  3*** 4[Designs Act, 2000 
(16 of 2000)] but which has not been so registe red, shall cease as soon as any article to which the design 
has been applied has been reproduced more than fifty times by an industrial process by the owner of the 
copyright or, with his licence, by any other person.  
16. No copyright except as provided in this Act .—No person shall be entitled to copyright or any 
similar right in any work, whether published or unpublished, otherwise than under and in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force, but nothing in th is section shall 
be construed as abrogating any right or jurisdiction to restrain a breach of trust or confidence.  
CHAPTER IV  
OWNERSHIP OF COPYRIGHT AND THE RIGHTS OF THE OWNER  
17. First owner of copyright .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the author  of a work shall be 
the first  owner of the copyright therein : 
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or artistic work made by the author in the course of his 
employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical under a contract of 
service or apprentice ship, for the purpose of publication in a newspaper, magazine or similar 
periodical, the said proprietor shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first 
owner of the copyright in the work in so far a s the copyright relates to the publication of the work 
in any news paper, magazine or similar periodical, or to the reproduction of the work for the 
purpose of its being so published, but in all other respects the author shall be the first owner of the 
copyright in the work;  
(b) subject to the provisions of clause ( a), in the case of a photograph taken, or a painting or 
portrait drawn, or an engraving or a cinemato graph film made, for valuable consideration at the 
instance of any person, such person shall,  in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the 
first owner of the copyright therein;  
(c) in the case of a work made in the course of the author ’s employment under a contract of 
service or apprenticeship, to which clause ( a) or clause ( b) does not  apply, the employer shall, in 
the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein;  
5[(cc) in the case of any address or speech delivered in public, the person who has delivered 
such address or speech or if such person  has delivered such address or speech on behalf of any 
other person, such other person shall be the first owner of the copyright therein  notwithstanding 
that the person who delivers such address or speech, or, as the case may be, the person on whose 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for  sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. The words “Indian Patents and ” omitted by Act 23 of 1983, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 6, for “Designs Act, 19 11 (2 of 1911) ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  13 
 behalf  such address or speech is delivered, is employed by any other person who arranges such 
address or speech or on whose behalf or premises such address or speech is delivered;]  
(d) in the case of a Government work, Government shall, in the absence of any agr eement to 
the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein;  
1[(dd) in the case of a work made or first published by or under the direction or control of any 
public undertaking, such public undertaking shall, in the absence of any agreement to the 
contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this clause and section 28 A, “public under taking ” means — 
(i) an undertaking owned or controlled by Government; or  
(ii) a Government company as defined in section 617 o f the Companies Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956); 
or 
(iii) a body corporate established by or under any Central, Provincial or State Act;]  
(e) in the case of a work to which the provisions of section 41 apply, the international 
organisation concerned shall be the fir st owner of the copyright therein.  
2[Provided that in case of any work incorporated in a cinematograph work, nothing contained in 
clauses ( b) and ( c) shall affect the right of the author in the work referred to in clause ( a) of                  
sub-section  (1) of section 13.]  
18. Assignment of copyright .—(1) The owner of the copyright in an existing work or the prospective 
owner of the copyright in a future work may assign to any person the copyright either wholly or partially 
and either generally or subjec t to limitations and either for the whole term of th e copyright or any part 
thereof : 
Provided that in the case of the assignment of copyright in any future work, the assignment shall take 
effect only when the work comes into existence.  
 3[Provided further that no such assignment shall be applied to any medium or mode of exploitation of 
the work which did not exi st or was not in commercial use at the time when the assignment was made, 
unless the assignment specifically referred to such medium or mode of expl oitation of the work : 
Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in a cinematograph film shall 
not assign or waive the right to receive royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the assignee of 
copyright for the utilisation  of such work in any form other than for the communication to the public of 
the work along with the cinematograph film in a cinema hall, except to the legal heirs of the authors or to 
a copyright society for collection and distribution and any agreement to  contrary shall be void:  
 Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in the sound recording but not 
forming part of any cinematograph film shall not assign or waive the right to receive royalties to be 
shared on an equal basis w ith the assignee of copyright for any utilisation  of such work except to the legal 
heirs of the authors or to a collecting society for collection and distribution and any assignment to the 
contrary shall be void. ] 
(2) Where the assignee of a copyright beco mes entitled to any right comprised in the copyright, the 
assignee as respects the rights so assigned, and the assignor as respects the rights not assigned, shall be 
treated for the purposes of this Act as the owner of copyright and the provisions of this Act shall have 
effect accordingly.  
(3) In this section, the expression “assignee ” as respects the assignment of the copyright in any future 
work includes the legal representatives of the assignee, if the assignee dies before the work comes into 
existence.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 7 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012). 
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  14 
 19. Mode of assignment .—1[(1)] No assignment of the copyright in any work shall be valid unless it 
is in writing signed by the assignor or by his duly authorised agent.  
 2[(2) The assignment of copyright in any work shall identify such work, and shall spe cify the rights 
assigned and the duration and territorial extent of such assignment.  
(3) The assignment of copyright in any work shall also specify the amount of 3[royalty and any other 
consideration payable] , to the author or his legal heirs during the cu rrency of the  assignment and the 
assignment shall be subject to revision, extension or termination on terms mutually agreed upon by the 
parties.  
(4) Where the assignee does not exercise the rights assigned to him under any of the other                     
sub-sections of this section within a period of one year from the date of assignment, the assignment in 
respect of such right s shall be deemed to have lapsed after the expiry of the said period unless otherwise 
specified in the assignment.  
(5) If the perio d of assignment is not stated, it shall be deemed to be five years from the date of 
assignment.  
(6) If the territorial extent of assignment of the rights is not specified, it shall be presumed to extend 
within India.  
(7) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or                          
sub-section ( 6) shall be applicable to assignments made before the coming into force of the Copyright 
(Amendment) Act, 1994  (38 of 1994) ]. 
4[(8) The assignment of copyright in any  work contrary to the terms and conditions of the rights 
already assigned to a copyright society in which the author of the work is a member shall be v oid. 
(9) No assignment of copyright in any work to make a cinematograph film shall affect the right of th e 
author of the work to claim an equal share of royalties and consideration payable in case of utilisa tion of 
the work in any form other than for the communication to the public of the work, along with the 
cinematograph film in a cinema hall.  
(10) No assig nment of the copyright in any work to make a sound recording which does not form part 
of any cinematograph film shall affect the right of the author of the work to claim an equal share of 
royalties and consid eration payable for any utilisa tion of such work  in any form.]  
5[19A. Disputes with respect to assignment of copyright .—(1) If an assignee fails to make 
sufficient exercise of the rights assigned to him, and such failure is not attributable to any act or omission 
of the assignor, then, the 6[Appellate B oard]  may, on receipt of a complaint from the assignor and after 
holding such inquiry as it may deem necessary, revoke such assignment.  
(2) If any dispute arises with respect to the assignment of any copyright, the  6[Appellate Board]  may, 
on receipt of a c omplaint from the aggrieved party and after holding such inquiry as it considers 
necessary, pass such order as it may deem fit including an order for the recovery of any royalty payable : 
Provided that the 6[Appellate Board]  shall not pass any order under t his sub -section to revoke the 
assignment unless it is satisfied that the terms of assignment are harsh to the assignor in case the assignor 
is also the author : 
7[Provided further that , pending the disposal of an application for revocation of assignment und er  this 
sub-section, the 6[Appellate Board]  may pass such order, as it deems fit regarding implementation of the 
terms and conditions of assignment including any consideration to be paid for the enjoyment of the rights 
assigned: —  
                                                             
1. Section 19 re -number ed as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 23 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 8, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 9, for “royalty payable , if any ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. Subs. by  Act 38 of 1994, s. 9,  for section 19A (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
6.Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160,  for “Copyright Board ”(w.e.f.  26-5-2017)  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 10, for “Provided further that ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  15 
 Provided also that,]  no order of revocation of assignment under this sub -section, shall be made within 
a period of five years from the date of such assignment.]  
1[(3) Every complaint received under sub -section ( 2) shall be dealt with by the 2[Appellate Board]  as 
far as possible a nd efforts shall be made to pass the final order in the matter within a period of six months 
from the  date of  receipt of the complaint and any delay in compliance of the same, the 2[Appellate Board]  
shall record the reasons thereof.]  
20. Transmission of co pyright in manuscript by testamentary disposition .—Where under a 
bequest a person is entitled to the manuscript of a literary, dramatic or musical work, or to an artistic 
work, and the work was not published before the death of the testator, the bequest sh all, unless the 
contrary intention is indicated in the testator ’s will or any codicil thereto, be construed as including the 
copyright in the work in so far as the testator was the owner of the copyright immediately before his 
death.  
Explanation .—In this s ection, the expression “manuscript ” means the original document embodying 
the work, whether written by hand or not.  
21. Right of author to relinquish copyright .—(1) The author of a work may relinquish all or any of 
the rights comprised in the copyright in the work by giving notice in the prescribed form to 3[the Registrar 
of Copyrights  or by way of public notice]  and thereupon such rights shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3), cease to exist from the date of the notice.  
(2) On receipt of a not ice under sub -section ( 1), the Registrar of Copyrights shall cause it to be 
published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as he may deem fit.  
4[(2A) The Registrar of Copyright shall, within fourteen days from the publication of the notice in t he 
Official Gazette, post the notice on the official website of the Copyright Office so as to remain in the 
public domain for a period of not less than three years.]  
(3) The relinquishment of all or any of the rights comprised in the copyright in a work sh all not affect 
any rights subsisting in favour of any person on the date of  the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER V  
TERM OF COPYRIGHT  
22. Term of copyright in published literary, dramatic, musical and artistic works .—Except as 
otherwise herein after provided, copyright shall subsist in any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work 
5*** published within the lifetime of the author until  6[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar 
year next following the year in which the author dies.  
Explanation .—In this section the reference to the author shall, in the case of a work of joint 
authorship, be construed as a reference to the author who dies last.  
23. Term of copyright in anonymous and pseudonymous works .—(1) In the case of literary, 
dramatic , musical or artistic work (other than a photograph), which is published anonymously or 
pseudonymously , copyright shall subsist until  6[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next 
following the year in wh ich the work is first published : 
Provi ded that where the identity of the author is disclosed before the expiry of the said period, 
copyright shall subsist until  6[sixty years] from  the beginni ng of the calendar year next following the year 
in which the author dies.  
                                                             
1. Ins. b y Act 27 of 2012, s. 10 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 11, for “the Registrar of Copyright ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. The brackets and  words “(other than a photograph) ” omitted by  s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
6. Subs. by A ct 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years ” (w.e.f. 28 -10-1991).  16 
 (2) In sub -section ( 1), references to the author shall, in the case of an anonymous work of joint 
authorship, be construed, — 
(a) where the identity of one of the authors is disclosed , as references to that author;  
(b) where the identity of more authors than one is disclosed, as references to the author who dies 
last from amongst such authors.  
(3) In sub -section ( 1), references to the author sha ll, in the case of a pseudonym s work of j oint 
authorship, be construed, — 
(a) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the aut hors are pseudonym s and his or their 
identity is not disclosed, as references to the author whose name is not a pseudonym, or, if the names 
of two or more of the aut hors are not pseudonyms, as references to such of those authors who dies 
last; 
(b) where the names of one or more (but not all) of the authors are pseudonyms an d the identity 
of one or more of them is disclosed, as references to the author who dies last fr om amongst the 
authors whose names are not pseudonyms and the authors whose names are pseudonyms and are 
disclosed; and  
(c) where the names of all the authors are pseudonyms and the identity of one of them is 
disclosed, as references to the author whose id entity is disclosed or if the identity of two or more of 
such authors is disclosed, as references to such of those authors who dies last.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the identity of an author shall be deemed to have been 
disclosed, if ei ther the identity of the author is disclosed publicly by both the author and the publisher or 
is otherwise establi shed to the satisfaction of the  1[Appellate Board]  by that author . 
24. Term of copyright in posthumous work .—(1) In the case of a literary, dr amatic or musical work 
or an engraving, in which copyright subsists at the date of the death of the author or, in the case of any 
such work of joint authorship, at or immediately before the date of the death of the author who dies last, 
but which, or any a daptation of which, has not been published before that date, copyright shall  subsist 
until  2[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is 
first published or, where an adaptation of the work is published  in any earlier year, from the beginning of 
the calendar year next following that year.  
(2) For the purposes of this section a literary, dramatic or musical work or an adaptation of any such 
work shall be deemed to have been published, if it has been perfo rmed in public or if any  3[sound 
recordings] made in respect of the work have been sold to the public or have been offered for sale to the 
public.  
 25. [Term of copyright in photographs .] Omitted by the Copyright (Amendment) Act , 2012                
(27 of 2012), s. 13 ( w.e.f. 21-6-2012).  
 26. Term of copyright in cinematograph films .—In the case of a cinemato graph film, copyright 
shall subsist  until  2[sixty years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which 
the film is publis hed. 
27. Term of copyright in sound recording .—In the case a  3[sound recording] copyright shall subsist 
until 2[sixty years] from the beginning of the cal endar year next following the year in which the  2[sound 
recording] is published.  
28. Term of copyright Government work s.—In the case of Government work, w here Government 
is the first owner of the copyright therein, copyright shall subsist until   2[sixty years] from the beginning 
of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160,  for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
2. Subs. by Ac t 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years ” (w.e.f. 28 -10-1991).   
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  17 
 1[28A. Term of copyright in works of public und ertakings .—In the case of a work, where a public 
undertaking is the first owner of the copyright therein, copyright shall subsist until 2[sixty years] from the 
beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first published].  
29. Term of copyright in works of international organisations .—In the case of a work of an  
international organisation to which the provisions of section 41 apply, copyright shall subsist until  2[sixty 
years] from the beginning of the calendar year next following the year in which the work is first 
published.  
CHAPTER VI  
LICENCES  
30. Licences by owners of copyright .—The owner of the copyright in any existing wo rk or the 
prospective owner of the copyright in any future work may grant any interest in the right by licence in 
3[writing by him ] or by his duly authorised agent : 
Provided that in the case of a licence relating to copyright in any future work, the licenc e shall take 
effect only when the work comes into existence.  
Explanation. —Where  a person to whom a licence relating to copyright in any future work is granted 
under th is section dies before the work  comes into existence, his legal representatives shall, in  the absence 
of any provision to the contrary in the licence, be entitled to the benefit of the licence.  
4[30A. Application of 5[section  19].—The p rovisions of sections 19 and 19 A shall, with any 
necessary adaptations and modifications, apply in relation t o a licence under section 30 as they apply in 
relation to assignment of copyright in a work.]  
31. Compulsory licence in works withheld from public .—(1) If at any time during the term of 
copyright in 6[any work ] which has been published or performed in publ ic, a complaint is made to the 
7[Appellate Board]  that the owner of copyright in the work — 
(a) has refus ed to re publish or allow the republication of the work or has refused to allow the 
performance in public of the work, and by reason of such refusal the work is withheld from the 
public; or  
(b) has refused to allow communication to the public by  8[broadcast]  of such work or in the case 
of a   9[sound recording] the work recorded in such  9[sound recording], on terms which the 
complainant considers reasonable;  
the 7[Appellate Board] , after giving to the owner of the copyright in the work a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard and after holding such inquiry as  it may deem necessary, may, if it is satisfied that the 
grounds for such refusal are not reasonable, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the complainant 
a licence to re publish the work, perform the work in public or communicate the work to the public by   
8[broadcast], as the case may be, subject to payment to the owner of the copyright of such compensation 
and subject to such other terms and conditions as the 7[Appellate Board]  may determine; and thereupon 
the Registrar of Copyrights shall grant  the 10[licence to such person or persons who, in the opinion of the 
7[Appellate Board] , is or are qualified to do so ] in accordance with the directions of the 7[Appellate 
Board] , on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
11*   *   *   *       *. 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 11 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by A ct 13 of 1992, s. 2, for “fifty years ” (w.e.f. 28 -10-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 14, for “writing signed by him ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 10 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 15, for “section 19 and 19A ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
6. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “any Indian wo rk” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, for  “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
8. Subs. by Act 23 of 19 83, s. 2, for “radio -diffusion ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
9. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
10. Subs. by Ac t 27 of 2012, s. 16, for “licence to the complainant ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
11. The  Explanation omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  18 
 1*   *   *   *   *. 
2[31A. Compulsory licence in unpublished 3[or published works] .—4[(1) Where, in the case  of any 
unpublished  work or any work published or communicated to the public and the work is withheld from 
the public in India, the author is dead or unkno wn or cannot be traced, or the owner of the copyright in  
such work cannot be found, any person may apply to the 5[Appellate Board]  for a licence to publish or 
communicate to the public such work or a translation thereof in any language.]  
(2) Before making an application under sub -section ( 1), the applicant shall publish his proposal in one 
issue of a daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country and 
where the application is for the publication of a translation i n any language, also in one issue of any daily 
newspaper in that language.  
(3) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied 
with a copy of the advertisement issued under sub -section ( 2) and such fee as may  be prescribed.  
(4) Where an application is made to the 5[Appellate Board]  under this section, it may after holding 
such inquiry as may be prescribed, direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the applicant a licence to 
publish the work or a translati on thereof in the language mentioned in the application subject to the 
payment of such royalty and subject to such other terms and conditions as the 5[Appellate Board]  may 
determine, and thereupon the Registrar of Copyrights shall grant the licence to the applicant in accordance 
with the direction of the 5[Appellate Board] . 
(5) Where a licence is granted under this section, the Registrar of Copyrights may, by order, direct the 
applicant to deposit the amount of the royalty determined by the 5[Appellate Boar d] in the public account 
of India or in any other account specified by the 5[Appellate Board]  so as to enable the owner of the 
copyright or, as the case may be, his heirs, executors or the legal representatives to claim such royalty at 
any time.  
(6) Withou t prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, in the case of a work referred to in 
sub-section (1), if the original author is dead, the Central Government may, if it considers that the 
publication of the work is desirable in the national interes t, require the heirs, executors or legal 
representatives of the author to publish such work within such period as may be specified by it.  
(7) Where any work is not published within the period specified by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 6), the 5[Appellate Board]  may, on an application made by any person for permission to 
publish the work and after hearing the parties concerned, permit such publication on payment of such 
royalty as the 5[Appellate Board]  may,  in the circumstances of such case, det ermine in the prescribed 
manner.]  
6[31B. Compulsory licence for benefit of disabled .—(1) Any person working for the benefit of 
persons with disability on a profit basis or for business may apply to the 5[Appellate Board] , in such form 
and manner and accomp anied by such fee as may be prescribed, for a  compulsory licence to publish  any 
work in which copyright subsists for the benefit of such persons, in a case to which clause ( zb) of         
sub-section ( 1) of section 52 does not apply and the 5[Appellate Boa rd] shall dispose of such application  
as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of such application within a period of 
two months from the receipt of the application.  
(2) The 5[Appellate Board]  may, on receipt of an application un der sub -section ( 1), inquire, or direct 
such inquiry as it considers necessary to establish the credentials of the applicant and satisfy itself  that 
the application has been made in good faith.  
(3) If the 5[Appellate Board]  is satisfied, after giving to the owners of rights in the work a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessary, that a compulsory 
                                                             
1. The Explanation  omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 16  (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 19 83, s. 12 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 17, for “Indian works ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright  Board ”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
6. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012 , s. 18 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  19 
 licence needs to be issued to make th e work available to the disabled , it may direct the Registrar of 
Copyrig hts to grant to the applicant such a licence to publish the work.  
(4) Every compulsory licence issued under this section shall specify the means and format of 
publication, the period during which the compulsory licence may be exercised and, in the case of issue of 
copies, the number of copies that may be issue d including the rate or royalty:  
Provided that where the   1[Appellate Board]  has issued such a compulsory licence it may, on a further 
application and after giving reasonable opportunity to the owners of rights, extend the period of such 
compulsory  licence and allow the issue of more copies as it may deem fit.  
31C. Statutory licence for cover versions. —(1) Any person desirous of making a cover version, 
being a sound recording in respect of any literary , dramatic or  musical work, where sound reco rdings of 
that work have been made by or with the licence or consent of the owner of the right in the work, may do 
so subject to the provisions of this section : 
Provided that such sound recording s shall be in the  same medium as the last recording, unless the 
medium of the last recording is no longer in current commercial use.  
(2) The person making the sound recordings shall give prior notice of his intention to make the sound 
recordings in the manner as  may be pre scribed, and provide  in advance copies of all covers or labels with 
which the sound recordings are to be sold, and pay in advance, to the owner of rights in each work 
royalties in respect of all copies to be made by him, at the rate fixed by the 1[Appellat e Board]  in this 
behalf:  
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be sold or issued in any form of packaging or with any 
cover or label which is likely to mislead or confuse the public as to their identity,  and in particular shall 
not contain the name  or depict in any way any performer of an earlier sound recording of the same work 
or any cinematograph film in which sound recording was incorporated and, further, shall state on the 
cover that it is a cover version made under this section.  
(3) The person  making such sound recordings shall not make any alteration in the literary or musical 
work which has not been made previously by or with the consent of the owner of rights, or which is not 
technically necessary for the purpose of making the sound recordin gs: 
Provided that such sound recordings shall not be made until the expiration of five calendar years after 
the end of the year in which the first sound recordings of the work was made.  
(4) One royalty in respect of such sound recordings shall be paid for a minimum of fifty thousand 
copies of each work during each calendar year in which copies of it are made:  
Provided that the 1[Appellate Board]  may, by general order, fix a lower minimum in respect of works 
in a particular language or dialect having regard to the potential circulation of such works.  
(5) The person making such sound recordings shall maintain such registers and books of account in 
respect thereof, including full details of existing stock as may be prescribed and shall allow the owner of 
rights  or his duly author ised agent or representative to  inspect all records and books of account relating to 
such sound recording:  
Provided that if on a complaint brought before the 1[Appellate Board]  to the effect that the owner of 
rights has not been paid in full for any sound recordings purporting to be made in pursuance of this 
section, the 1[Appellate Board]  is, prima facie , satisfied that the complaint is genuine, it may pass an 
order ex parte  direct ing the person making the sound recording to cease from m aking further copies and, 
after holding such inquiry as it considers necessary, make such further order as it may deem fit, including 
an order for payment of royalty.  
Explan ation.—For the purpose s of this section “cover version ” means a sound recording mad e in 
accordance with this section.  
31D. Statutory licence for broadcasting of literary and musical works and sound                        
recording. —(1) Any broadcasting organi sation desirous of communicating to the public by way of a 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  20 
 broadcast or by way o f performance of a literary or musical work and sound recording which has already 
been published may  do so subject to the provisions of this section.  
(2) The broadcasting organi sation shall give prior notice, in such manner as may be prescribed, of its 
intention to broadcast the work stating the duration and territorial coverage of the broadcast, and shall pay 
to the owner of rights in each work royalties in the manner and at the rate fixed by the 1[Appellate Board] . 
(3) The rates of royalties for radio br oadcasting shall be different from television broadcasting and the 
1[Appellate Board]  shall fix separate rates for radio broadcasting and television broadcasting.  
(4) In fixing the manner and the rate of royalty under sub -section ( 2), the 1[Appellate Board ] may 
require the broadcasting organi sation to pay an advance to the owners of rights.  
(5) The names of the authors and the principal performers of the work shall, except in case of the 
broadcasting organi sation communicating such work by way of performanc e, be announced with the 
broadcast.  
(6) No fresh alteration to any literary or musical work, which is not technically necessar y for the 
purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be made          
without the  consent of the owners of rights.  
(7) The broadcasting organi sation shall — 
 (a) mai ntain such records and books of account, and render to the owners of rights such reports 
and accounts; and  
(b) allow the owner of rights or his duly authori sed agent or repr esentative to inspect all records 
and books of account relating to such broadcast,  
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of any licence issued or any agreement entered 
into before the commencement of th e Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012  (27 of 2012) .] 
32. Licence to produce and publish translations .—(1) Any person may apply to the 1[Appellate 
Board]  for a licence to produce and publish a translation of a literary or dramatic work in any 
language  2[after a  period of seven years from the first publication of the work].  
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), any person may apply to the 
1[Appellate Board]  for a licence to produce and publish a translation, in printed or analogous forms o f 
reproduction, of a literary or dramatic work, other than an Indian work, in any language in general use in 
India after a period of three years from the first publication of such work, if such translation is required 
for the purposes of te aching, scholars hip or research : 
Provided that where such translation is in a language not in general use in any developed country, 
such application may be made after a period of one year from such publication.  
(2) Every  3[application under this section] shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall 
state the proposed retail price of a copy of the translation of the work.  
(3) Every applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application, deposit with the 
Registrar of Copyrights such fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where an application is made to the 1[Appellate Board]  under this section, it may, after holding 
such inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence , not being an exclusive licence , to 
produce and publish a translatio n of the work in the language mentioned in  4[the application —  
(i) subject to the condition that the applicant shall pay to the owner of the copyright in the work 
royalties in respect of copies of the translation of the work sold to the public, calculated at such rate 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for “such application ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  21 
 as the 1[Appellate Board]  may, in the circumstances of each case, determine in the prescribed manner; 
and 
(ii) where such licence is granted on an application under sub -section ( 1A), subject also to the 
condition that the licence shall not ext end to the  export of copies of the translation of the work outside 
India and every copy of such translation shall contain a notice in the language of such translation that 
the copy is available for distribution only in India:  
Provided that nothing in claus e (ii) shall apply to the export by Government or any authority under 
the Government of copies of such translation in a language other than English, Frenc h or Spanish to any 
country if — 
(1) such copies are sent to citizens of India residing outside India o r to any association of such 
citizens outside India; or  
(2) such copies are meant to be used for purposes of teaching, scholarship or research and not for any 
commercial purpose; and  
(3) in either case, the permission for such export has been given by the Government of  that country :] 
2[Provided further that no licence under this sec tion] shall be granted, unless — 
(a) a translation of the work in the language mentioned in the application has not been published 
by the owner of the copyright in the work or any  person authorised by him,  3[within seven years or 
three years or one year, as the case may be, of the first publication of the work], or if a translation has 
been so published, it has been out of print;  
(b) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the 1[Appellate Board]  that he had requested and 
had been denied authorisation by the owner of the copyright to produce and publish such translation, 
or that  4[he was, after due diligence on his part, unable to find] the owner of the copyright;  
(c) where t he applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright, he had sent a copy of his 
request for  5[such authorisation by registered air mail post to the publisher whose name appears from 
the work, and in the case of an application for a licence under sub -section ( 1)], not less than two 
months before  6[such application];  
7[(cc) a period of six months in the case of an a pplication under sub -section ( 1A) (not being an 
application under the proviso thereto), or nine months in the case of an application under t he proviso 
to that sub -section, has elapsed from the date of making the request under clause ( b) of this proviso or 
where a copy of the request has been sent under clause ( c) of this proviso, from the date of sending of 
such copy, and the translation of th e work in the language mentioned in the application has not been 
published by the owner of the copyright in the work or any person authorised by him within the said 
period of six months or nine months, as the case may be;  
(ccc) in the case of any applicati on made under sub -section ( 1A),— 
(i) the name of the author and the title of the particular edition of the work proposed to be 
translated are printed on all the copies of the translation;  
(ii) if the work is composed mainly of illustrations, the provisions  of section 32 A are also 
complied with;]  
(d) the 1[Appellate Board]  is satisfied that the applicant is competent to produce and publish a 
correct translation of the work and possesses the means to pay to the owner of the copyright the 
royalties payable to him under this section;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 23  of 1983 , s. 13, for “Provided that no such licence ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “within seven years of the first publication of the work ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “he was unable to find ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).   
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “such authori sation to the publisher  whose name appears from the work ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “the application for the licence ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  22 
 (e) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the work; and  
(f) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to the owner of the copyright in 
the work.  
1[(5) Any broadcasting authority may apply to the 2[Appellate Board]  for a licence to produce and 
publish the translati on of — 
(a) a work referred to in sub -section ( 1A) and published in printed or analogous forms of 
reproduction; or  
(b) any text incorporated in audio -visual fixations prepared and publish ed solely for the purpose 
of syste matic instructional activities,  
for broadcasting such translation for the purposes of teaching or for the dissemina tion of the results of 
specialised, technical or scientific research to the experts in any particular fiel d. 
(6) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) in so far as they are relatable to an application under  
sub-section ( 1A), shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the grant of a licence under                   
sub-section ( 5) and such licence sh all not also be granted unless — 
(a) the translation is made from a work lawfully acquired;  
(b) the broadcast is made through the medium of sound and visual recordings;  
(c) such recording has been lawfully and exclusively made for the purpose of broadcastin g in 
India by the applicant or by other broadcasting agency; and  
(d) the translation and the broadcasting of such translation are not used for any commercial 
purposes.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “developed country ” means a country which is not a developing country;  
(b) “developing country ” means a country which is for the time being regarded as such in 
conformity with the practice of the General Assembly of the United Nations;  
(c) “purposes of research ” does not include purposes of industrial research, or purposes of 
research by bodies corporate (not being bodies corporate owned or controlled by Government) or 
other association s or body of persons for commercial purposes;  
(d) “purposes of teaching, research or scholarship ” includes — 
(i) purposes of instructional activity at all levels in educational, institu tions, including 
Schools, Colleges, Universities and tutorial institu tions; and  
(ii) purposes of all other types of organised educational activity.]  
1[32A. Licence to reproduce a nd publish works for certain purposes .—(1) Where, after the 
expiration of the relevant period from the date of the first publication of an edition of a literary , scientific 
or artistic work, — 
(a) the copies of such edition are not made available in India; or 
(b) such copies have not been put on sale in India for a period of six months,  
to the general public, or in connection with systematic instructional activities at a price reasonably related 
to that normally charged in India for comparable works by the owner of the right of reproduction or by 
any person authorised by him in this behalf, any person may apply to the 2[Appellate Board]  for a licence 
to reproduce and publish such work in printed or analogous forms of reproduction at the price at which 
such e dition is sold or at a lower price for the purpose s of systematic instructional activities.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 13 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Subs . by Act 7 of 201 7, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  23 
 (2) Every such application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and shall state the 
proposed retail price of a copy of the work to be reproduced.  
(3) Eve ry applicant for a licence under this section shall, along with his application, deposit w ith the 
Registrar of Copyrights  such fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where an application is made to the 1[Appellate Board]  under this section, it may, after holding 
such inquiry as may be prescribed, grant to the applicant a licence, not being an exclusive licence, to 
produce and publish a reproduction of the work mentioned in the application s ubject to the conditions 
that,— 
(i) the applicant shall pay to the owner of t he copyright in the work royalties in respect of copies 
of the reproduction of the work sold to the public, calculated at such rate as the 1[Appellate Board]  
may, in the circumstances of each case, determine in the prescribed manner;  
(ii) a licence granted  under this section shall not extend to the export of copies of the reproduction 
of the work outside India and every copy of such reproduction shall contain a notice that the copy is 
available  for distribution only in India : 
Provided that no such l icence s hall be granted unless — 
(a) the applicant has proved to the satisfaction of the 1[Appellate Board]  that he had requested 
and had been denied authorisation by the owner of the copyright in the work to reproduce and 
publish such work or that he was, after du e diligence on his part, unable to find such owner;  
(b) where the applicant was unable to find the owner of the copyright, he had sent a copy of 
his request for such authorisation by registered air -mail post to the publisher whose name appears 
from the wor k not less than three months before the application for the licence;  
(c) the 1[Appellate Board]  is satisfied that the applicant is competent to reproduce and publish 
an accurate reproduction of the work and possesses the means to pay the owner of the copyr ight 
the royalties payable to him under this section;  
(d) the applicant undertakes to reproduce and publish the work at such price as may be fixed 
by the 1[Appellate Board] , being a price reasonably related to the price normally charged in India 
for works of the same standard on the same or similar subjects;  
(e) a period of six months in the case of an application for the reproduc tion and publication of 
any work of natural science, physical science, mathematics or technology, or a period of three 
months in  the case of an application for the reproduction and publication of any other work, has 
elapsed from the date of making the request under clause ( a), or where a copy of the request has 
been sent under clause ( b), from the date of sending of a copy, and a r eproduction of the work has 
not been published by the owner of the copyright in the work or any person authorised by him 
within the said period of six months or, three months, as the case may be;  
(f) the name of the author and the title of the particular e dition of the work proposed to be 
reproduced are printed on all the copies of the reproduction;  
(g) the author has not withdrawn from circulation copies of the work; and  
(h) an opportunity of being heard is given, wherever practicable, to the owner of the 
copyright in the work.  
(5) No licence to reproduce and publish the translation of a work shall be granted under this section 
unless such translation has been published by the owne r of the right of translation or  any person 
authorised by him and the transla tion is not in a language in general use in India.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall also apply to the reproduction and publication, or translation 
into a language in general use in India, of any text incorporated in audio -visual fixations prepared and 
published solely for the purpose of systematic instructional activities.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
 24 
 Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, “relevant period ”, in relation to any work, 
means a period of — 
(a) seven years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the application is 
for the reproduction and publication of any work of, or relating to, fiction, poetry, drama, 
music or art;  
(b) three years from the date of the first publication of that work, where the application is 
for the reproduction and publi cation of any work of, or relating to, natural science, physical 
science, mathematics or technology; and  
(c) five years  from the date of the first publication of that work, in any other case.  
32B. Termination of licences issued under this Chapter .—(1) If, at any time after the granting of a 
licence to produce and publish the translation of a work in an y language under sub -section ( 1A) of  
section 32 (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as the licensed work), the owner of the copyright in the 
work or any person authorised by him publishes a translation of such work in the same language and 
which is substantially the same in content at a price reasonably related to the price normally charged in 
India for the translation of works of the same standard on the same or similar subject, the licence  so 
granted shall be terminated : 
Provided that no such termination shall take effect until after the expiry of a period of three months 
from the date of service of a notice in the prescribed manner on the person hold ing such licence by the 
owner of the right of translation intimating the publication of the translation as aforesaid : 
Provided further that copies of the licensed work produced and published by the person holding such 
licence before the termination of the licence takes effect may continue to be sold or distributed until the 
copies already produced and published are exhausted.  
(2) If, at any time after the granting of a licence to produce and publish the reproduction or translati on 
of any work under section 32A, the owner of the right of reproduction or any person authorised by him 
sells or distributes copies of such work or a translation thereof, as the case may be, in the same language 
and which is substantially the same in content at a price reasonably rel ated to the price normally charged 
in India for works of the same standard on the same or similar subject, the licence  so granted shall be 
terminated : 
Provided that no such termination shall take effect until after the expiry of a period of three months 
from the date of service of a notice in the prescribed manner on the person holding the licence by the 
owner of the right of reproduc tion intimating the sale or distribution of the copies of th e editions of work 
as aforesaid : 
Provided further that any copie s already reproduced by the licensee before such termination takes 
effect may continue to be sold or distributed until the copies already produced are exhausted.]  
1[CHAPTER VII  
COPYRIGHT  SOCIETIES  
33. Registration of Copyright society .—(1) No person or ass ociation of persons shall, after coming 
into force of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994  (38 of 1994)  commence or, carry on the business of 
issuing or granting licences in respect of any work in which copyright subsists or in respect of any other 
rights c onferred by this Act except under or in accordance with the registration granted under sub -section 
(3): 
Provided that an owner of copyright shall, in his individual capacity, continue to have the right to 
grant licences in respect of his own works consiste nt with his obligations as a member of t he registered 
copyright society : 
2[Provided  further that the busines s of issuing or granting licence  in respect of literary, dramatic, 
musical and artistic works incorporated in a cinematograph films or sound recordi ngs shall be carried out 
only through a copyright society duly registered under this Act:  
Provided also ] that a perform ing rights society functioning in accordance with the provisions of 
section 33 on the date immediately before the coming into force of th e Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994  
(38 of 1994)  shall be deemed to be a copyright society for the purposes of this Chapter and every such 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38  of 1994, s. 11, for Chapter VII (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 19, for “Provided that ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  25 
 society shall get itself registered within a period of one year form the date of commencement of the 
Copyright (Amendme nt) Act, 1994.  
(2) Any association of persons who  fulfil s such conditions as may be prescribed may apply for 
permission to do the business specified in sub -section ( 1) to the Registrar of Copyrights who shall submit 
the application to the Central Governmen t. 
(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the interests of the authors and other owners of 
rights under this Act, the interest and convenience of the public and in particular of the groups of persons 
who are most likely to seek licences in respec t of the relevant rights and the ability and professional 
competence of the applicants, register such association of persons as a copyright society subject to such 
conditi ons as may be prescribed : 
Provided that the Central Government shall not ordinarily r egister more than one copyright society to 
do business in respect of the same class of works.  
1[(3A) The registration granted to a copyright society under sub -section ( 3) shall be for a period of 
five years and may be renewed from time to time before the e nd of every five years on a request in the 
prescribed form and the Central Government may renew the registration after considering  the report of 
Registrar of Copyright s on the working of the copyright society under section 36:  
Provided that the renewal of the registration of a copyright society shall be subject to the continued 
collective control of the copyright society being shared with the authors of works in their capacity as 
owners of copyrights or of the right to receive royalty:  
Provided further that  every copyright society already registered before the coming into force of the 
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2012  (27 of 2012)  shall get itself registered under this Chap ter within a 
period of one year  from the date of commencement of the Copyright (Amendmen t) Act, 2012.]  
(4) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a copyright society is being managed in a 
manner detrimental to the interests of the 2[authors and other owners of right ] concerned, cancel the 
registration of such society after such inquiry as may be prescribed.  
(5) If the Central Government is of the opinion that in the interest of the 2[authors and other owners of 
right] concerned  1[or for non -compliance of sections 33A, sub -section ( 3) of section 35 and             
section 36 or any change carried out in the instrument by which the copyright society is established or 
incorporated and registered by the Central Government without prior notice to it] , it is necessary so to do 
it may, by order suspend the registration of such society pe nding inquiry for such period not exceeding 
one year as may be specified in such order under sub -section ( 4) and that Government shall appoint an 
administrator to discharge the functions of the copyright society.  
3[33A. Tariff Scheme by copyright societies .—(1) Every copyright society shall publish its tariff 
scheme in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff scheme may appeal to the 4[Appellate Board]  and the 
Board may, it satisfied after holding such inquiry as it ma y consider necessary, make such orders as may 
be required to remove any unreasonable element, anomaly or inconsistency therein:  
Provided that the aggrieved person shall pay to the copyright society any fee as may be prescribed 
that has fallen due before ma king an appeal to the 4[Appellate Board]  and shall continue to pay such fee 
until the appeal is decided, and the Board shall not issue any order staying the collection of such fee 
pending disposal of the appeal:  
Provided further that the 4[Appellate Board]  may after hearing the parties fix an interim tariff and 
direct the aggrieved parties to make the payment according pending disposal of the appeal.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “owner s of rights ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160,  for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f . 26-5-2017) . 26 
 34. Administration of rights of owner by copyright society .—(1) Subject to such co nditions as 
may be presc ribed, — 
(a) a copyright society may accept from an 1[author  and other owners of right ] exclusive 
authorisation to administer any right in any work by issue of licences or collection of licence fees or 
both; and  
(b) an 1[author  and other owners of right ] shall have the right to withdraw such authorisation 
without prejudice to the rights of the copyright society under any contract.  
(2) It shall be competent for a copyright society to enter into agreement with any foreign society or 
organisation administerin g rights corresponding to rights under this Act, to entrust to such foreign society 
or organisation the administration in any foreign country of rights administered by the said copyright 
society in India, or for administering in India the rights administer ed in a foreign country by such foreign 
society or organisation : 
Provided that no such society or organisation shall permit any discrimination in regard to the terms of 
licence or the distribution of fees collected between rights in Indian and other works.  
(3) Subject to such conditions as may be presc ribed, a copyright society may — 
(i) issue licences under section 30 in respect of any rights under this Act;  
(ii) collect fees in pursuance of such licences;  
(iii) distribute such fees among 1[author  and othe r owners of  right ] after making deductions for 
its own expenses;  
(iv) perform any other functions consistent with the provisions of section 35.  
34A. [Payment of re munerations by copyright societ y.] Omitted by the Copyright (Amendment ) Act, 
2012  (27 of 2012 ), s. 22 ( w.e.f. 21-6-2012).  
35. Control over the copyright society by the 2[author and other owners of right ].—(1) Every 
copyright society shall be subject to the collective control of the 2[author and other owners of right ] under 
this Act whose rights it  administers (not being 2[author and other owners of right ] under this Act 
administered by a foreign society  or organisation referred to in  sub-section ( 2) of section 34)  and shall, in 
such manner as may be prescribed, — 
(a) obtain the approval of such 2[author and other owners of right ] for its procedures of collection 
and distribution of fees;  
(b) obtain their approval for the utilisation of any amounts collected as fees for any purpose other 
than distribution to the 2[author and other owners of right ]; and 
(c) provide to such owners regular, full and detailed information concern ing all its activities, in 
relation to the administration of their rights.  
(2) All fees distributed among the 2[author and other owners of right ] shall, as far as may be, be 
distri buted in proportion to the actual use of their works.  
3[(3) Every copyright society shall have a governing body with such number of persons elected from 
among the members of the society consisting of equal number of authors and owners of work for the 
purpo se of the administration of the society as may be specified.  
(4) All members of copyright society shall enjoy equal membership rights and there shall be no 
discrimination between authors and 2[author and other owners of right ] in the distribution of royalt ies.] 
36. Submission of returns and reports .—(1) Every copyright shall submit to the Registrar of 
Copyrights such returns as may be prescribed.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 21, for “owner of rights ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid.,  for “owner s of rights ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  27 
 (2) Any officer duly authorised by the Central Government in this behalf may call for any report and 
also call f or any records of any copyright society for the purpose of satisfying himself that the fees 
collected by the society in respect of rights administered by it are being utilised or distributed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
36A. Rights and li abilities of performing rights societies .—Nothing in this Chapter shall affect any 
rights or liabilities in any work in connection with a 1[copyright  society ] which had accrued or were 
incurred on or before the day prior to the commencement of 2[the Copyri ght (Amendment) Act, 2012           
(27 of 2012 ], or any legal proceedings in respect of any such rights or liabilities pending on that day.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
3[RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING ORGANISATION AND OF PERFORMERS]  
4[37. Broadcast reproduction right .—(1) Every  broadcasting organisation shall have a special right 
to be known as “broadcast reproduction right ” in respect of its broadcasts.  
(2) The broadcast reproduction right shall subsist until twenty -five years from the beginning of the 
calendar year next follow ing the year in which the broadcast is made.  
(3) During the continuance of a broadcast reproduction right in relation to any broadcast, any person 
who, without the licence of the owner of the right does any of the following acts of the broadcast or  any 
substantial part thereof, — 
(a) re-broadcast the broadcast; or  
(b) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen by the public on payment of any charges; or  
(c) makes any sound recording or visual recording of the broadcast; or  
(d) makes any reproduction of such so und recording or visual recording where such initial 
recording was done without licence or, where it was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged by such 
licence; or  
5[(e) sells or  gives on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such rental, any such so und 
recording or visual recording referred to in clause ( c) or clause ( d)].] 
6[38. Performer ’s right .—(1) Where any performer appears or  engages in any performance, he shall 
have a special right to be known as the “performer ’s right ” in relation to such pe rformance.  
(2) The performer ’s right shall subsist until 7[fifty  years ] from the beginning of the calendar year next 
following the year in which the performance is made.  
8*   *   *   *   *] 
9[38A. Exclusive right of performers .—(1) Without prejudice to the  rights conferred on authors, the 
performer ’s right  which is an exclusive right subject to the provisions of this Act to do or authori se for 
doing any of the following acts in respect of the performance or any substantial part thereof, namely: — 
(a) to make  a sound recording or a visual recording of the performance, including — 
 (i) reproduction of it in any material form including the storing of it in any medium by 
electronic or any other means;  
(ii) issuance of copies  of it to the public not being copies al ready in circulation;  
(iii) communication of it to the public;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 24, for “performing r ights society ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1994 (38 of 1994) ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 12, for “RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING AUTHORITIES ” (w.e.f.  10-5-1995).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for  section 37  (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by  Act 27 of 2012,  s. 25, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 14, for section 38 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
7. Subs. by 49 of 1999, s.  4, for “twenty -five years ” (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  
8. Omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 26 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
9. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  28 
 (iv) selling or giving it on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial r ental any 
copy or the recording;  
(b) to broadcast or communicate the performance to the public except where t he performance is 
already broadcast.  
(2) Once a performer has, by written agreement, consented to the incorporation of his performance in 
a cinematograph film he shall not, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, object to the enjoyment 
by the  producer of the  film of the performer ’s right in the same film:   
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub -section, the performer shall be entitled 
for royalties in case of making of the performances for commercial use.  
38B. Moral rights of  the performer. —The performer of a performance shall, independently of his 
right after assignment, either wholly or partially of his right, have the right, — 
(a) to claim to be identified as the performer of his performance except where omission is 
dictated  by the manner  of the use of the performance; and  
(b) to restrain or claim damage in respect of any distortion, mutilation or other modification of his 
performance that would be prejudicial to his reputation.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this clause, it is already clarified that mere removal of any portion 
of a performance for the purpose of editing, or to fit the recording within a limited duration, or any other 
modification required for purely technical reasons shall not  be deemed to be prejudicial to the 
performer ’s reputation. ] 
1[39. Acts not infringing broadcast reproduction right or performer ’s right .—No broadcast 
reproduction right or performer's right shal l be deemed to be infringed by — 
(a) the making of any sound recording or visual recording for the private use of the person 
making such recording, or solely for purposes of bona fide  teaching or research; or  
(b) the use, consistent with fair dealing, of excerpts of a performance or of a broadcast in the 
reporting of current events or for bona f ide review, teaching or research; or  
(c) such other acts, with any necessary adaptations and modifications, which do not constitute 
infringement of copyright under section 52.  
2[39A. Certain provisions to apply in case of broadcast reproduction right and p erformer ’s 
rights .—Sections 18, 19, 30, 30A, 33, 33A, 34, 35, 36, 53, 55, 58, 63, 64, 65, 65A, 65B and 66 shall, 
with necessary adaptations and modifications, apply in relation to the broadcast repro duction right in any 
broadcast and the performer's right  in any performance as they apply in relation to copyright in a work : 
Provided that where copyright to performer ’s right subsists in respect of any work or performance 
that has been broadcast, no licence to reproduce such broad cast, shall  be given withou t the consent of the 
owner of right  or performer, as t he case may be, or both of them:  
Provided further that the broadcast reproduction right or performer ’s right shall not subsist in any 
broadcast or performance if that broadcast or performance is an infr ingement of the copyright in any 
work.  
 (2) The broadcast reproduction right or the performer ’s right shall not affect the separate copyright in 
any work in respect of which, the broadcast or the performance, as the case may be, is made. ] 
CHAPTER IX  
INTERN ATIONAL COPYRIGHT  
 40. Power to extend copyright to foreign works .—The Central Government may, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any provisions  of this Act shall apply — 
(a) to work first published in any territory outside India  to which the order relates in like manner 
as if they were first published within India;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 15, for section 39 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 28, for section 39A (w.e.f . 21-6-2012).  29 
 (b) to unpublished works, or any class thereof, the authors whereof were at the time of the making 
of the work, subjects or citizens of a foreign country to which the order relates, in like manner as if 
the authors were citizens of India;  
(c) in respect of domicile in any territory outside India to which the order relates in like manner as 
if such domicile were in India;  
(d) to any work of which the author was at the da te of the first publica tion thereof, or, in a case 
where the author was dead at that date, was at the time of his death, a subject or citizen of a foreign 
country to which the order relates in like manner as if the author was a citizen of India at that da te or 
time;  
and thereupon, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and of th e order, this Act shall apply accordingly :  
Provided that — 
(i) before making an order under this section in respect of any foreign country (other than a 
country with which India has entered into a treaty or which is a party to a convention relating to 
copyright to which India is also a party), the Central Government shall be satisfied  that the foreign 
country has made, or has undertaken to make, such provisions if any, as it appea rs to the Central 
Government expedient to require for the protection in that country of works entitled to copy right 
under the provisions of this Act;  
(ii) the order may provide that  the  provisions of this Act shall apply either generally or in relation 
to such classes of works or such classes of cases as may be specified in the order;  
(iii) the order may provide that the term of copyright in India shall not exceed that conferred by 
the law of the country to which the order relates  1[but such a term or cop yright shall not exceed the 
term of copyright provided under this Act] ; 
(iv) the order may provide that the enjoyment of the rights conferred by this Act shall be subject 
to the accomplishment of such conditions and formalities, if any, as may be prescribe d by the order;  
(v) in applying the provisions of this Act as to ownership of copyright, the order may make such 
exception s and modifications as appear necessary, having regard to the law of the foreign country;  
(vi) the order may provide that this Act or any part thereof shall not apply to works made before 
the commencement of the order or that this Act or any part thereof shall not apply to works first 
published before the commencement of the order.  
2[40A. Power of Central  Government to apply Chapter VIII  to broadcastin g organisations and 
performers  in certain other coun tries.—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that a  foreign 
country (other than a country with which India has entered into a treaty or which is a party to a 
convention relating to ri ghts of broadcastin g organisations and performers  to which India is also a party) 
has made or has undertake n to make such provisions, if any, as it appears to the Central Government 
expedient to require, for the protection in that foreign country, of the r ights of broadcasting organisations 
and performers as is available under this Act, it may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct 
that the provisions of Chapter VII I shall apply — 
(a) to broadcasting organisation whose headquarters is situated i n a country to which the order 
relates or, the broadcast wa s transmitted from a transmitter  situated in a country to which the order 
relates as if the headquarters of such organisation were situated in India or such  broadcast were made 
from India;  
(b) to p erformances that took place outside India to which the order relates in like manner as if 
they took place in India;  
(c) to performance s that are incorporated in a sound recording published in  a country to which 
the order relates as if it were published in  India;  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 29 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  30 
 (d) to performances not fixed on a sound recording broadcast by a broadcasting organisation the 
headquarters of which is located in a country to which the order relates or where the broadcast i s 
transmitted from a transmitter  which is situated in a  country to which the order r elates as if the 
headquarters of  such organisation were situated in India or such broadcast were made from India.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that — 
(i) the provisions of Chapter VII I, shall apply eith er generally or in relation to such class or 
classes o f broadcasts or performances or such other class o r classes o f cases as may be specified in 
the order;  
(ii) the term of the rights of broadcasting organisations and performers in India shall not exceed 
such term as is conferred by the law of the country to which the order relates;  
(iii) the enjoyment of the rights conferred by Chapter VIII shall be subject to the accomplishment 
of such conditions and formalities, if any, as may be specified in that order ; 
(iv) Chapter VIII o r any part thereof shall not apply to broadcast and performances made before 
the commencement of the order or that Chapter VIII or any part thereof shall not apply to broadcasts 
and performances broadcast or performed before the commen cement of the order;  
(v) in case of ownership of rights o f broadcasting organisations and performers, the provisions of 
Chapter VII I shall apply with such exceptions and  modifications as the Central Government may, 
having regard to the law of the foreign country, consider necessary.]  
41. Provisions as to works of certain international organisations .—(1) Where — 
(a) any work is made or first publ ished by or under the direction  or control of any organisation to 
which this section applies, and  
(b) there would,  apart from this section, be no copyright in the work in India at the time of the 
making or, as the case may be, of the first publication thereof, and  
(c) either — 
(i) the work is published as aforesaid in pursuance of an agreement in that behalf with the 
author, being an agreement which does not reserve to the author the copyright, if any, in the 
work, or  
(ii) under section 17 any copyright in the work would belong to the organisation;  
there shall, by virtue of this section, be copyright in the work through out India.  
(2) Any organisation to which this section applies which at the material time had not the legal 
capacity of a body corporate shall have and be deemed at all material times to have had the legal capacity 
of a body corporate for the purpose of hol ding, dealing with, and enforcing copyright and in connection 
with all legal proceedings relating to copyright.  
(3) The organisations to which this section applies are such organisations as the Central Government 
may, by order published in the Official Gaz ette, declare to be organisations of which one or more 
sovereign powers or the Government or Governments thereof are members to which it is expedient that 
this section shall apply.  
42. Power to restrict rights in works of foreign authors first published in  India .—If it appears to 
the Central Government that a foreign country does not give or has not undertaken to give adequate 
protection to the works of Indian authors, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, direct that such of the provisions of this Act as confer copyright on works first published in India 
shall not apply to works, published after the date specified in the order, the authors whereof are subjects 
or citizens of such foreign country and are not domiciled in Ind ia, and thereupon those provisions shall 
not apply to such works.  31 
 1[42A. Power to restrict rights of foreign broadcasting org anisations and performers. —If it 
appears to the Central Government that a foreign country does not give or has not undertaken to gi ve 
adequate protection to rights of broadcasting organisations or performers, the Central Government may, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that such of the provisions of this Act as confer right t o 
broadcasting organisations or performers , as the case may be, shall not apply to broadcasting 
organisation s or performers whereof are based or incorporated in such foreign country or are subjects or 
citizens of such foreign country and are not inc orporated or domiciled in India,  and thereupon th ose 
provisions shall not apply to such broadcasting organisations or performers :] 
2[Provided that it does not exceed the period provided under this Act.]  
43. Orders under this Chapter to be laid before Parliament .—Every order made by the Central 
Government  under this Chapter shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament and shall be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following.  
CHAPTE R X 
REGISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT  
44. Register of Copyrights .—There shall be kept at the Copyright Office a register in the prescribed 
form to be called the Register of Copyrights in which may be entered the names or titles of works and the 
names and addresses  of authors, publishers and owners of copyright and such other particulars as may be 
prescribed.  
45. Entries in register of Copyrights .—(1) The author o r publisher of, or the owner of  or other 
person interested in the copyright in, any work may make an app lication in the prescribed form 
accompanied by the prescribed fee to the Registrar of Copyrights for entering particulars of the wor k in 
the Register of Copyrights : 
3[Provided that in respect of an artistic work which is used or is capable of being used in  4[relation to 
any goods  or services] , the application shall include a statement to that effect and shall be accompanied 
by a certificate from the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in 5[section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 
(47 of 1999)] , to the effect  that no trade mark identical with or deceptively similar to such artistic work 
has been registered under that Act in the name of, or that no application has been made under that Act for 
such registration by, any person other than the applicant.]  
(2) On re ceipt of an application in respect of any work under sub -section ( 1), the Registrar of 
Copyrights may, after holding such inquiry as he may deem fit, enter the particulars of the work in the 
Register of Copyrights.  
46. Indexes .—There shall be also kept at the Copyright Office such indexes of the Register of 
Copyrights as may be prescribed.  
47. Form and inspection of register .—The Register of Copyrights and indexes thereof kept under 
this Act shall at all reasonable times be open to inspection, and any perso n shal l be entitled to take copies 
of, or make extracts from, such register or indexes on payment of such fee and subject to such conditions 
as may be prescribed.  
 48. Register of Copyrights to be prima facie  evidence of particulars entered therein .—The 
Register of Copyrights shall be prima facie  evidence of the particulars entered therein and documents 
purporting to be copies of any entries therein, or extracts therefrom, certified by the Registrar of 
Copyrights and s ealed with the seal of the Copy right Of fice shall be admissible in evidence in all courts 
without further proof or production of the original.  
49. Correction of entries in the Register of Copyrights .—The Registrar of Copyrights may, in the 
prescribed cases and subject to the prescribed conditio ns, amend or alter  the Register of Copyrights by — 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 30 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. The proviso added by Act 23 of 1983, s. 16 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 31, for “relation to any good s” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  32 
 (a) correcting any error in any name, address or particulars; or  
(b) correcting any other error which may have arisen therein by accidental slip or omission.  
50. Rectification of Register by 1[Appellate Boa rd].—The 1[Appellate Board] , on application of the 
Registrar of Copyrights or of any person aggrieved, shall order the rectification of  the Register of 
Copyrights by — 
(a) the making of any entry wrongly omitted to  be made in  the register, or  
(b) the expun ging of any entry wrongly made in, or remaining on, the register, or  
(c) the correction of any error or defect in the register.  
2[50A. Entries in the Register of Copyrights, etc., to be published .—Every entry made in the 
Register of Copyrights or the parti culars of any work entered under section 45, the correction of every 
entry made in such register under section 49, and every rectification ordered under section 50 , shall be 
published by the Registrar of Copyrights in the Official Gazette or in such other manner as he may deem 
fit.] 
CHAPTER XI  
INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT  
51. When copyright infringed .—Copyright in a work s hall be deemed to be infringed — 
(a) when any person, without a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or the Registrar of 
Copyrights under this Act or in contraven tion of the conditions of a licence so granted or of any 
condition imposed by a comp etent authority under this Act — 
(i) does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon the owner of 
the copyright, or 
3[(ii) permits for profit any place to be used for the communication of the work to the public 
where s uch communication constitutes an  infringement of the copyright in the work, unless he 
was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that suc h communi cation to the public 
would be an infringement of copyright; or]  
(b) when any person — 
(i) makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displays or offers for 
sale or hire, or  
(ii) distributes either for the purpose of trad e or to such an extent as to affect prejudicially 
the owner of the copyright, or  
(iii) by way of trade exhibits in public, or  
(iv) imports  4*** into India,  
any infringing copies of the work : 
5[Provided that nothing in sub -clause ( iv) shall apply to the im port of one copy of any work for the 
private and domestic use of the importer.]  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this section, the reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical or 
artistic work in the form of a cinematograph film shall be deemed to be an “infringing copy ”. 
52. Certain acts not to be infringement of copyright .—(1) The following acts shall not constitute 
an infr ingement of copyright, namely, — 
6[(a) a fair dealing with any work, not being a computer programme, for the purpose s of— 
 (i) private  or personal use, including resea rch; 
 (ii) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work;  
                                                             
1. Subs . by Act 7 of 2017 , s. 160, for “Copyright B oard” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 17 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984). 
3. Subs.  by Act 38 of 1994, s. 1 6, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
4. The brackets  and words “(except for the private and domestic use of the importer) ” omitted by Act 65 of 1984 , s. 3                 
(w.e.f. 8 -10-1985).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 1 6, for the proviso  (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  33 
 (iii) the reporting of current events and current affairs, including the reporting o f a lecture 
delivered in public.  
Explanation .—The storing of any  work in any electronic medium for the purposes mentioned 
in this clause, including the incidental storage of any computer programme which is not itself an 
infringing  copy for the said purposes, shall not constitute infringement of copyright. ] 
1[(aa) the m aking of copies or adaptation of a computer programme by the lawful possessor of a 
copy of such comp uter programme, from such copy — 
(i) in order to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it was supplied; or  
(ii) to make back -up copies pur ely as a temporary protection against loss, destruction or 
damage in order only to utilise the computer programme for the purpose for which it was 
supplied;]  
2[(ab) the doing of any act necessary to obtain information essential for operating                    
inter-operability  of an independently  created computer programme  with other programme  by a 
lawful possessor of a computer programme provided that such information is not otherwise readily 
available ; 
(ac) the observation, study or test of functioning of  the computer programme in order to 
determine the ideas and principles which underline any elements of the programme while 
performing such acts necessary for the functions for which the computer programme was supplied;  
(ad) the making of copies or adapt ation of the computer programme  from a personally legally 
obtained copy for non -commercial personal use;]  
3[(b) the transient or incidental storage of a work or performance purely in the technical process 
of electronic transmission or communication to the pub lic; 
(c) transient or incidental storage of a work or perfo rmance for the purpose of providing 
electronic links, access or integration, where such links, access  or integration has not been expressly 
prohibited by the right holder, unless the  person respons ible is aware or has reasonable grounds f or 
believing that such storage is of an infringing copy : 
Provided that if the person responsible for the storage of the copy has received a written 
complaint from the owner of copyright in the work, complaining that  such transient or incidental 
storage is an infringement, such person responsible for the storage shall refrain from facilitating such 
access for a period of twenty -one days or till he receives an order from the competent court refraining 
from facilitation  access and in case no such order is received before the expiry of such period of 
twenty -one days, he may continue to provide the facility of such access;  
(d) the reproduction of any work for the purpose of a judicial proceeding or for the purpose of a 
report of a judicial proceeding ; 
(e) the reproduction or publication of any work prepared by the Secretariat o f a Legislature or, 
where the legislature  consists of two Houses, by the Secretariat of either House of the Legislature, 
exclusively for the use of t he members of that Legislature;  
(f) the reproduction of any work in a certified copy made or supplied in accordance with any law 
for the time being in force;  
(g) the reading or recitation in public of reasonable extracts from a published literacy or dramat ic 
work;  
(h) the publication in a collection, mainly composed of non -copyright matter, bona fide  intended 
for instruction use, and so described in the title and in any advertisement issued by or on behalf of the 
publisher, of short passages from published literary or dramatic works, not themselves published for 
such use in which copyright subsists:  
                                                             
1. Ins. by  Act 38 of 1994,  s. 17 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).   
2. Ins. b y Act 49 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for clauses ( b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and ( j) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  34 
 Provided that not more than two such passages from works by the same author are published by 
the same publisher during any period of five years.  
Explanation. —In the case of a work of joint authorship, reference s in this clause  to passages from 
works shall include reference s to passages from works by any one or more of the authors of those 
passages or by any one or more of those authors in collaboration with any ot her person;  
(i) the reproduction of any work — 
(i) by a teacher or a pupil in the course of instruction; or  
(ii) as part of the question to be answered in an examination; or  
(iii) in answers to such question s; 
1[(j) the performance, in the course of the act ivities of an educational institution, of a literary, 
dramatic or musical work by the staff and students of the institution, or of a cinematograph film or a 
sound recording if the audience is limited to such staff and students, the parents and guadians of the 
students and persons connected with the activities of the institution or the communication to such an 
audience of a cinemat ograph film or sound recording; ] 
(k) the causing of a recording to be he ard in public by utilising it, — 
(i) in an enclosed room o r hall meant for the common use of residents in any residential 
premises (not being a hotel or similar commercial establishment) as part of the amenities 
provided exclusively or mainly for residents therein; or  
(ii) as part of the activities of a club or s imilar organisation which is not established or 
conducted for profit;]  
(l) the performance of a literary, dramatic or musical work by an amateur, club or society, if the 
performance is given to a non -paying audience, or for the benefit of a religious insti tution;  
(m) the reproduction in a newspaper, magazine or other periodical of an article on current 
economic, political, social or religious topics, unless the author of such article has expressly reserved 
to himself the right of such reproduction;  
2[(n) the storing of a work in any medium by  Electronic means by  a non -commercial public 
library, for preservation if the library already possesses a non -digital copy of the work ;] 
(o) the making of not more than three copies of a book (including a pamphlet, sheet  of music, 
map, chart or plan) by or under the direction of the person in charge of a 3[non-commercial public 
library]  for the use of the library if such book is not available for sale in India;  
(p) the reproduction, for the purpose of research or private study or with a view to publication, of 
an unpublished literary, dramatic or musical work kept in a library, museum or other institution  to 
which the public has access : 
Provided that where the identity of the author of any such work or, in the case of a wo rk of joint 
authorship, of any of the authors is known to the library, museum or other institution, as the case may 
be, the provisions of this clause shall apply only if such reproduction is made at a time more than 
4[sixty  years ] from the date of the deat h of the author or, in the case of a work of joint authorship, 
from the death of the author whose identity is known or, if the identity of more authors than one is 
known from the death of such of those aut hors who dies  last; 
(q) the reproduction or publica tion of — 
(i) any matter which has been published in any Official Gazette except an Act of a 
Legislature;  
(ii) any Act of a Legislature subject to the condition that such Act is reproduced or 
published together with any commentary thereon or any other origi nal matter;  
(iii) the report of any committee, commission, council, board or other like body appointed 
by the Government if such report has been laid on the Table of the Legislature, unless the 
reproduction or publication of such report is prohibited by th e Government;  
                                                             
1.  Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17, for clauses ( j) and ( k) (w.e.f. 10-5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “public library ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Subs. by Act 49 of 1999, s. 7, for “fifty years ” (w.e.f. 15 -1-2000).  35 
 (iv) any judgment or order of a court, tribunal or other judicial authority, unless the 
reproduction or publication of such judgment or order is prohibited by the court, the tribunal 
or other judicial authority, as the case may be;  
(r) the pr oduction or publication of a translation in any Indian language of an Act of a 
Legislature and of any rules or orders  made thereunder — 
(i) if no translation of such Act or rules or orders in that language has been previously 
been produced or published by t he Government; or  
(ii) where a translation of such Act or rules or orders in that language has been produced 
or published by the Government, if the translation is not a vailable for sale to the public : 
Provided that such translation contains a statement at a prominent place to the effect that the 
translation has not been authorised or accepted as authentic by the Government;  
1[(s) the making or publishing of a painting, drawing, engraving or photograph of a work of 
architecture or the display of a work of ar chitecture;]  
(t) the making or publishing of a painting, drawing, engraving or photograph of a sculpture, or 
other artistic work falling under sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of section 2, if such work is permanently 
situate in a public place or any premise s to which the public has access;  
(u) the inclus ion in a cinematograph film of — 
(i) any artistic work permanently situate in a public place or any premises to which the public 
has access; or   
(ii) any other artistic work, if such inclusion is only by way o f back ground or is otherwise 
incidental to the principal matters represented in the film;  
(v) the use by the author of an artistic work, where the author of such work is not the owner of the 
copyright therein, of any mould, cast, sketch, plan, model or st udy made by him for the purpose of  the 
work : 
Provided that he does not thereby repeat or imit ate the main design of the work ; 
2[(w) the making of a three -dimensional object from a two -dimensional artistic work, such as a 
technical drawing, for the purposes  of industrial application of any purely functional part of a useful 
device;]  
(x) the reconstruction of a building or structure in accordance with the architectural drawings or 
plans by reference to which the building or struc ture was originally constructe d: 
Provided that the original construction was made with the consent or licence of the owner of the 
copyright in such drawings and plans;  
(y) in relation to a literary, 3[dramatic , artistic or] musical work recorded or reproduced in any 
cinematograph film,  the exhibition of such film after the expiration o f the term of copyright therein : 
Provided that the provisions of sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a), sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) and 
clauses ( d), (f), (g), (m) and ( p) shall not apply as respects any act unles s that act is ac companied by 
an acknowledgment — 
(i) identifying the work by its title or other description; and   
(ii) unless the work is anonymous or the author of the work has previously agreed or required 
that no acknowledgment of his name should be made , also identifying the author;  
4[(z) the making of an ephemeral recording, by a broadcasting organisation using its own facilities 
for its own broadcast by a broadcasting organisa tion of a work whic h it has the right to broadcast ; and 
the retention of suc h recording for archival purposes on the ground of its exceptional documentary 
character;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17, for clause ( s) (w.e.f. 9 -8-1995 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32, for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “dramatic or ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 17 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1995).  36 
 (za) the performance of a literary, dramatic or musical work or the communi cation to the public 
of such work or of a sound recording in the course of any bona fide  religious ceremony or an official 
ceremony held by the Central Government or the State Government or any local authority.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, religious ceremony including  a marriage procession 
and other social festivities associated  with a marriage ;] 
1[(zb) the adapt ation, reproduction, issue of copies or communication to the public of any work in 
any accessible format, by — 
(i) any person to facilitate persons with disability to access to works including sharing with 
any person with disability of such accessible format for private or personal use, educational 
purpose or research; or  
(ii) any organisation working for the benefit of the persons with disabilities in case the normal 
format prevents the enjoyment of such works by such pers ons: 
Provided that the copies of the works in such accessible format are made available to the 
persons with disabilities on a non -profit basis but to recover only the cost of production:  
Provided further that the organisation shall ensure that the copies o f works in such accessible 
format as used only by persons with disabilities and takes reasonable steps to prevent its entry 
into ordinary channels of business.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “any organisation ” includes and organisation 
registered under section 12A of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and working for the benefit of  
persons with disability or reco gnised under Chapter X of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal 
Opportunities, Protection or Rights and full Participation) Ac t, 1995 (1 of 199 6) or  receiving grants 
from the Government for facilitati ng access to persons with disabilities or an educational institution 
or library or archives recogni sed by the Govern ment;  
(zc) the importation of copies of  any literary or artistic  work, such as labels, company logos or 
promotional or explanatory material, that is purely incidental to other goods or products being 
imported .] 
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply to the doing of any act in relation to the translation of 
a literary, dramatic or musical work or the adaptation of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work as 
they apply in relation to the work itself.  
2[52A. Particulars to be included in records  and video films.—(1) No person shall publish 
a 3[sound record ing] in respect of any work unless the following particulars are displayed on the  3[sound 
recording] and on any container thereof, namely: — 
(a) the name and address of the person who has made the record;  
(b) the name and address of the owner of the copyrig ht in such work; and  
(c) the year of its first publication.  
(2) No person shall publish a video film in respect of any work unless the following particulars are 
displayed in the video film, when exhibited, and on the video cassette or other container there of,            
namely: — 
(a) if such work is  a cinematograph film required to be certified for exhibition under the 
provisions of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952), a copy of the certificate granted by the 
Board of Fil m Certification under section 5 A of that Act in respect of such work;  
(b) the name and address of the person who has made the video film and a declaration by him that 
he has obtained the necessary licence or consent from the owner of the copyright, in such work for 
making such video film ; and  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 32 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act  65 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  37 
 (c) the name and address of the owner for the copyright in such work.]   
 52B. [Accounts and audit .] Omitted by the Copyright Act,  2012 (27 of 2012), s. 33 (w.e.f.  21-6-2012).  
1[53. Importation of infringing copies .—(1) The owner of any right conferre d by this act in respect 
of any work or any performance embodied in  such work, or his duly authori sed agent, may give notice in 
writing to the Commissioner of Customs, or to any other officer authori sed in this behalf by the Central 
Board of Excise and Cus toms, — 
(a) that he is the owner of the said right, with proof thereof, and  
(b) that he request s the Commissioner for a period specified in the notice, which shall not exceed 
one year, to treat infringing copies of the work as prohibited goods, and that in fringing copies of the 
work are expected to arrive in India at a time and a place specified in the notice.  
(2) The Commissioner, after scrutiny of the evidence furnished by the owner of the right and on being 
satisfied may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), treat infringing copies of the work as prohibited 
goods that have been imported into India, excluding goods in transit:  
Provided that the owner of the work deposits such amount as the Commissioner may require as 
security having regard to the likely expenses on demurrage, cost of storage and compensation to the 
importer in case it is found that the works are not infringing copies.  
(3) When any goods treated as prohibited under sub -section ( 2) have been detained, the Customs 
Officer detaining th em shall inform the importer as well as the person who gave notice under                      
sub-section ( 1) of the detention of  such goods within forty -eight hours of their detention.  
(4) The Customs Officer shall relea se the goods, and they shall no  longer be treated as prohibited 
goods, if the person who gave notice under sub -section ( 1) does not produce any order from a court 
having jurisdiction as to the temporary or permanent disposal of such goods within fourteen days from the 
date of their detentio n.] 
2[53A. Resale share right in original copies .—(1) In the case of resale for a price exceeding ten 
thousand rupees, of the original copy of a painting, sculpture or drawing, or of the original manuscript of 
a literary or dramatic work or musical work, t he author of such work if he was the fir st owner of rights 
under s ection 17 or his legal heirs shall, notwithstanding any assignment of copyright in such work, have 
a right to share in the resale price of such original copy or manuscript in accordance with  the provisions 
of this section : 
Provided that such right shall cease to exist on the expiration of the term of copyright in the work.  
(2) The share referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be such as the 3[Appellate Board]  may fix and the 
decision of the 3[Appellate Board]  in this behalf shall be final : 
Provided that the 3[Appellate Board]  may fix different share s for different classes of work : 
Provided further that in no case shall the share exceed ten per  cent.  of the resale price.  
(3) If any dispute arises regarding the right conferred by this section, it shall be referred to the 
3[Appellate Board]  whose decision shall be final.]  
CHAPTER XII  
CIVIL REMEDIES  
54. Definition .—For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
expression  “owner of copyright ” shall include — 
(a) an exclusive licensee;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 34, for section 53 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 1 9 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 38 
 (b) in the case of an anonymous or pseudonymous literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, the 
publisher of the work, until the identity of the author or, in the case of an anonymous work o f joint 
authorship, or a work of joint authorship published under names all of which are pseudonym ous, the 
identity of any of the authors, is disclosed publicly by the author and the publisher or is otherwise  
establish ed to the satisfaction of the 1[Appel late Board]  by that author or his legal representatives.  
55. Civil remedies for infringement of copyright .—(1) Where copyright in any work has been 
infringed, the owner of the copyright shall, except as otherwise provided by this Act, be entitled to all 
such remedies by way of injunction, damages, accounts and otherwise as are or may be conferred by law 
for the infringement of a right : 
Provided that if the defendant proves that at the date of the infringement he was not aware and had no 
reasonable ground fo r believing that copyright subsisted in the work, the plaintiff shall not be entitled to 
any remedy other than an injunction in respect of the infringement and a decree for the whole or part of 
the profits made by the defendant by the sale of the infringin g copies as the court may in the 
circumstances deem reasonable.  
(2) Where, in the case of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, 2[or, subject to the provisions 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 13, a cinematograph film or sound recording, a name purp orting to be that of 
the author, or the publisher, as the case may be, of that work, appears]  on copies of the work as published, 
or, in the case of an artistic work, appeared on the work when it was made, the person whose name so 
appears or appeared shall , in any proceeding in respect of infringement of copyright in such work, be 
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to be the author or the publisher of the work, as the case may be.  
(3) The costs of all parties in any proceedings in respect of the infri ngement of copyright shall be in 
the discretion of the court. 
56. Protection of separate rights .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, where the several rights 
comprising the copyright in any work are owned by different persons, the owner of any such righ t shall, 
to the extent of that right, be entitled to the remedies provided by this Act and may individually enforce 
such right by means of any suit, action or other proceeding without making the owner of any other right a 
party to such suit, action or proc eeding.  
57. Author ’s special right s.—3[(1) Independently of the author ’s copyright and even after the 
assignment either wholly or partially of the said copyright, the author of a work shall have the right — 
(a) to claim authorship of the work; and  
(b) to re strain or claim damages in respect of any distortion, mutilation, modi fication  or other act 
in relation to the said work 4*** if such distortion, mutilation, modi fication or other act would be 
prejudic ial to his honour or reputation : 
Provided that the au thor shall not have any right to restrain or claim damages in respect of any 
adaptation of a computer programme to which clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 1) of section 52 applies.  
Explanation .—Failure to display a work or to display it to the satisfaction of th e author shall not be 
deemed to be an infringement of the rights conferred by this section.]  
(2) The right conferred upon an author of a work by sub -section ( 1), 5***, may be exercised by the 
legal representatives of the author.  
58. Rights of owner against  persons possessing or dealing with infringing copies .—All infringing 
copies of any work in which copyright subsists, and all plates used or intended to be used for the 
production of such infringing copies, shall be deemed to be the property of the owner o f the copyright, 
who accordingly may take proceedings for the recovery of possession thereof or in re spect of the 
conversion thereof : 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act  27 of 2012, s. 35, for “a name purporting to be , as the case may be, appear ” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 20, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).   
4. The words “which is done be fore the expiration of the term  of copyright ” omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 36 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. The words “other than the right to claim authorship of the work ” omitted by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  39 
 Provided that the owner of the copyright shall not be entitled to any remedy in respect of the 
conversion of any infringin g copies , if the opponent proves — 
(a) that he was not aware and had no reasonable ground to believe that copyright subsisted in the 
work of which such copies are alleged to be infringing copies; or  
(b) that he had reasonable grounds for believing that such  copies or plates do not involve 
infringement of the copyright in any work.  
59. Restriction on remedies in the case of works of architecture .—(1) Not withstanding anything 
contained in  1[the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963)], where the construction o f a building or other 
structure which infringes or which, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some other work has 
been commenced, the owner of the copyright shall not be entitled to obtain an injunction to restrain the 
construction of such buildi ng or structure or to order its demolition.  
(2) Nothing in Section 58 shall apply in respect of the construction of a building or other structure 
which infringes or which, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some other work.  
60. Remedy in the cas e of groundless threat of legal proceedings .—Where any person claiming to 
be the owner of copyright in any work, by circulars, advertise ments or otherwise, threatens any other 
person with any legal proceedings or liability in respect of an alleged infring ement of the copyright , any 
person aggrieved thereby may, notwithstanding anything contained  2[in section 34 of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1963 (47 of 1963)], institute a declaratory suit that the alleged infringe ment to which the threats 
related was not in  fact an infringement of any legal rights of the person making such threats and  may in 
any such suit — 
(a) obtain an injunction against the continuance of such threats; and  
(b) recover such damages, if any, as he has sust ained by reason of such threats : 
Provided that this section shall not apply if the person making such threats, with due diligence, 
commences and prosecutes an action for infringement of the copyright claimed by him.  
61. Owner  of copyright to be party to the proceeding .—(1) In every civil sui t or other proceeding 
regarding infringement of copyright instituted by an exclusive licensee, the owner of the copyright shall, 
unless the court otherwise directs, be made a defendant and where such owner is made a defendant, he 
shall have the right to di spute the claim of the exclusive licensee.  
(2) Where any civil suit or other proceeding regarding infringement of copyright instituted by an 
exclusive licensee is successful, no fresh suit or other proceeding in respect of the same cause of action 
shall li e at the instance of the owner of the copyright.  
62. Jurisdiction of court over matters arising under this Chapter .—(1) Every suit or other civil 
proceeding arising under this Chapter in respect of the infringement of copyright in any work or the 
infringem ent of any other right conferred by this Act shall be instituted in the district court having 
jurisdiction.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), a “district court having jurisdiction ” shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Proced ure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , or any other law for the time being 
in force , include a district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time of the institution 
of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or other proceeding  or, where there are more 
than one such persons, any of them actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally 
works for gain.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES  
63. Offence  of infringement of copyright or other rights conferred by this Act .—Any per son who 
knowingly infringe s or abets the infringement of — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 2 0, for “the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877) ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 1, ibid., for “ in section 42 the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1 877)” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  40 
 (a) the copyright in a work, or  
(b) any other right conferred by this Act  1[except the right conferred by section 53 A],  
2[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less th an six months but which 
may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which 
may extend to two lakh rupees] : 
Provided that  1[where the infringement has not been made for gain in the course of trade or busines s] 
the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.]  
Explanation .—Construction of a building or other structu re which infringes or which, if completed, 
would infringe the copyright in some other work shall not be an offence under this section.  
3[63A. Enhanced penalty on second and subsequent convictions .—Whoever having already been 
convicted of an offence under section 63 is again convicted of any such offence shall be punishable for 
the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
one year but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be le ss than one lakh rupees 
but whic h may extend to two lakh rupees : 
Provided that  4[where the infringement has not been made for gain in the course of trade or business] 
the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned  in the judgment, impose a  sentence of 
imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fi ne of less than one lakh rupees : 
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction 
made before the commencement of the Copyright (Amendme nt) Act, 1984 (65 of 1984).]  
5[63B. Knowing use of infringing copy of computer programme to be an offence .—Any person 
who knowingly makes use on a computer of an infringing copy of a computer programme shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which  shall not be less than seven days but which may extend to 
three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but whic h may extend to two 
lakh rupees : 
Provided that where the computer programme has not been used for gain or in the  course of trade or 
business, the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, not impose 
any sentence of imprisonment and may impose a fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.]  
64. Power of police to seize infringing  copies .—6[(1) Any police officer, not below the rank of a 
sub-inspector, may , if he is satisfied that an offence under section 63 in respect of the infringement of 
copyright in any work has been, is being, or is likely to be, committed, seize without warr ant, all copies of 
the work, and all plates used for the purposes of making infringing copies of the work, wherever found, 
and all copies and plates so seized shall, as soon as practicable be produced before a Magistrate.]  
(2) Any person having an interest  in any copies of a work  7[, or plates] seized under sub -section ( 1) 
may, within fifteen days of such seizure, make an application to the Magistrate for such copies  7[, or 
plates] being restored to him and the Magistrate, after hearing the applicant and th e complainant and 
making such further inquiry as may be necessary, shall make such order on the application as he may 
deem fit.  
65. Possession of plates for purpose of making infringing copies .—Any person who knowingly 
makes, o r has in his possession, any plate for the purpose of making infringing copies of any work in 
which copyright subsists shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to  8[two years and 
shall also be liable to fine.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 21 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 5, for “shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or w ith 
both” (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
4. Ins. b y Act 38 of 1994, s. 22 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
5. Ins. by s. 23 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 65 of 1984, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
7. Ins. by  s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
8. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “one year, or with fin e, or with both ” (w.e.f. 8 -10-1994).  41 
 1[65A. Protection of technological measures .—(1) Any person w ho circumvents an effective 
technological measure  applied for the purpose of protecting any of the rights conferred by this Act, with 
the intention of infringing such rights, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prevent any person from, — 
(a) doing anything referred to therein for a purpose not expressly prohibited by this Act:  
Provided that any person facilitating circumvention by another person of a techno logical measure 
for such a purpose shall maintain a complete record of such other person including his name, address 
and all relevant particulars necessary to identify him and the purpose for which he has been 
facilitated ; or  
(b) doing anything necessary to conduct encryption research using a lawfully obtained encrypted 
copy; or  
(c) conducting any lawful  investigation; or  
(d) doing anything necessary for the purpose of testing the security of a computer system or a 
computer network with the authori sation o f its owner; or  
(e) operator; or  
(f) doing anything necess ary to circumvent technological measures intended for identification or 
surveillance of a user; or  
(g) taking measures necessary in the interest of national security.  
65B. Protection of Rights Man agement Information. —Any person, who knowingly,  — 
(i) removes or alters any rights management information without authority, or  
(ii) distributes, imports for distribution, broadcasts or communicates to the public, without 
authority, copies of any work, or performance knowing that electronic rights management 
information has been removed  or altered without authority,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that if the rights management i nformation has been t ampered with in any work, the owner of 
copyright in such work may also avail of civil remedies provided under Chapter XII against the persons 
indulging in such acts.]  
66. Disposal of infringing copies or plates for purpose of making in fringing copies .—The Court 
trying any offence under this Act may, whether the alleged offender is convicted or not, order that all 
copies of the work or all plates in the possession of the alleged offender, which appear to it to be 
infringing copies, or pl ates for the purpose of making infringing copies, be delivered up to the owner of 
the copyright  2[or may make such order as it may deem fit regarding the disposal of such copies o r 
plates] . 
67. Penalty for making false entries in register, etc., for produc ing or tendering false             
entries .—Any person who, — 
(a) makes or causes to be made a false entry in the Register of Copyright s kept under this Act, or  
(b) makes or causes to be made a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of any entry in such 
register, or  
(c) produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered as evidence any such entry or 
writing, knowing the same to be false,   
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
68. Penalty for ma king false statements for the purpose of deceiving or influencing any 
authority or officer .—Any person who ,— 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 37 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
2. Ins. by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  42 
 (a) with a view to deceiving any authority or officer in the execution of the provisions of this Act, 
or 
(b) with a view to procuring or influencin g the doing or omission of anything in relation to this 
Act or any matter thereunder,  
makes a false statement or representation knowing the same to be false, shall be punish able with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
1[68A. Penalty for contravention of section 52A .—Any person who publishes a  2[sound recording] 
or a video film in contravention of the provisions of section 52 A shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.]  
69. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to the company  for, the conduct of the business of , the company, as well as the company  shall be deemed 
to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any person liable to any punishment, 
if he p roves that the offence was committed without his know ledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a  company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other o fficer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of  persons; and  
(b) “director ”,  in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
 70. Cognizance of offences .—No Court inferior to that of  3[a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence under this Act.  
CHAPT ER XIV  
APPEALS  
71. Appeals against certain orders of Magistrate .—Any person aggrieved by an order made under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 64 or section 66 may, within thirty days of the date of such order , appeal to the 
Court to which appeals from the court making the order ordinarily lie, and such appellate court may direct 
that execution of the order be stayed pending disposal of the appeal.  
72. Appeals against orders of Registrar of Copyrights and 4[Appellate Board] .—(1) Any person 
aggrieved by any final d ecision or order of the Registrar of Copyrights may, within three months from the 
date of the order or decision, appeal to the 4[Appellate Board] . 
(2) Any person aggrieved by any final decision or order of the 4[Appellate Board] , not being a 
decision or or der made in an appeal under sub -section ( 1), may, within three months from the date of such 
decision or order, appeal to the High Court within whose jurisdiction the appellant actually and 
voluntarily resides or carries on busine ss or personally works for gain: 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 65 of 1984,  s. 9 (w.e.f. 8 -10-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 22, for “a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class ” (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  
4.  Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
 43 
 Provided that no such appeal shall lie against a decision of the 1[Appellate Board]  under section 6.  
(3) In calculating the period of three months provided for an appeal under this section, the time taken 
in granting a certified copy of the order or  2[sound recording ] of the decision appealed against shall be 
excluded.  
73. Procedure for appeals .—The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act as to the 
procedure to be followed in respect of appeals made to it under section 72.  
CHAPTER XV  
MISCE LLANEOUS  
74. Registrar of Copyrights and 1[Appellate Board]  to possess certain powers of civil              
courts .—The Registrar of Copyrights and the 1[Appellate Board]  shall have the powers of a civil court 
when trying a suit under the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following 
matters, namely, — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) requisitioning any public 2[sound recording ] or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of enforcing the att endance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Registrar of Copyrights or the 1[Appellate Board] , as the case may be, shall be the 
limits of the territory of India.  
75. Orders for payment of money passed by Registrar of Copyrights and 1[Appellate Board]  to 
be executable as a decree .—Every order made by the Registrar of Copyrigh ts or the 1[Appellate Board]  
under this Act for the payment of any money or by the High Court in any appeal against any such order of 
the 1[Appellate Board]  shall, on a certificate issued by the Registrar of Copyrights, the 1[Appellate Board]  
or the Registrar of the High Court, as the case may be, be deemed to be a decree of a civil court and shall 
be executable in the same manner as a decree of such court. 
76. Prote ction of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
77. Certain persons to be public servants .—Every officer  appointed under this Act and every 
member of the 1[Appellate Board]  shall be deemed to be  a public servant within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
78. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government 
may make rules to provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
3*                        *                          *     *   * 
 (b) the form of complaints and applications to be made, and the licences to be granted, under this 
Act; 
(c) the procedure to be followed in connection with any proceeding before the Registr ar of 
Copyrights;  
4[(cA) the form and manner in which an organisation may apply to the 1[Appellate Board]  for 
compulsory licence for disabled and the fee which may accompany such application under                   
sub-section (1) of 31B;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, for “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for “record ” (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
3. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 27 of 2012, s. 39 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  44 
 (cB) the manner i n which a person making sound recording may give prior notice of his intention 
to make sound recording under sub -section ( 2) of section 31C ; 
(cC) the register and books of account and the details of existing stock which a person making 
sound recording may maintain under sub -section ( 5) of section 31C;  
(cD) the manner in which prior notice may be given by a broadcasting organisation under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 31D;  
(cE) the reports and accounts which may be maintained under clause ( a), and  the inspection of 
records and books of account which may be made under clause ( b) or sub -section ( 7) of section 31D ]; 
1[(ca) the conditions for submission of application under sub -section ( 2) of section 33;  
(cb) the conditions subject to which a copyright  society may be registered under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 33;  
(cc) the inquiry for cancellation of registration under sub -section ( 4) of section 33;  
 1[(ccA) the manner in which a copyright society may publish its Tariff Scheme under                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 33A;  
(ccB) the fee which is to be paid before filing an appeal to the 2[Appellate Board]  under                     
sub-section ( 2) of section 33A;  
(ccC) the form of application for renewal of registration of a copyright society  and the fee which 
may accompany such application under sub -section ( 3A) of section 33; ] 
(cd) the conditions subject to which the copyright society may accept authorisation under             
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 34 and the conditions su bject to which owners o r rights have 
right to withdraw such authorisation under clause ( d) of that sub -section;  
(ce) the conditions subject to which a copyright society may issue licences, collect fees and 
distribute such fees amongst owners of rights unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 34; ] 
(cf) the manner in which the approval of the owners of rights regarding collection and distribution 
of fees, approval for utilisation of any amount collected as fees and to provide to such owners 
information concerning act ivities in relation to the administration of their rights under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 35;  
(cg) the returns to be filed by copyright societies to the Registrar of Copyrights under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 36;]  
(d) the manner  of determining any royalties payable under this Act, and the security to be taken 
for the payment of such royalties;  
3[(da) the manner of payment of royalty under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 52;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
 (e) the form of Register of Copyr ights to be kept under this Act and the particulars to be entered 
therein;  
(f) the matters in respect of which the Registrar of Copyrights and the 2[Appellate Board]  shall 
have powers of a civil court;  
(g) the fees which may be payable under this Act;  
(h) the regulation of business of the Copyright Office and of all things by this Act placed under 
the direction or control of the Registrar of Copyrights.  
5[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more  successive session , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 24 (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.160, “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Ins. by  Act 38 of 1994, s. 24  (w.e.f. 10 -5-1995).  
4. Clause ( db) omitted by Act 27 of 2012, s. 3 9 (w.e.f. 21 -6-2012).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1983, s. 23, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -8-1984).  45 
 following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the  rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such m odification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
79. Repeals, savings and transitional provisions .—(1) The Indian Copyright Act, 1914 (3 of 1914) , 
and the Copyright Act of 1911 passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom as modified in its 
application to India by the Indian Copyright Act, 1914  are hereby repealed.  
(2) Where any person has, before the commencement of this Act, taken any action whereby he has 
incurred any expenditure or liabi lities in connection with the reproduction or performance of any work in 
a manner which at the time was lawful or for the purpose of or with a view to the reproduction or 
performance of a work at a time when such reproduction or perfor mance would, but for the coming  into 
force of this Act, have been lawful, nothing in this section shall diminish or prejudice any rights or 
interests arising from or in connection with such action which are subsisting and valuable at the said date, 
unless the person who, by vi rtue of this Act, becomes entitled to restrain such reproduction or 
performance agrees to pay such compensation as, failing agreement , may be determined by the 
1[Appellate Board] . 
(3) Copyright shall no t subsist by virtue of this Act  in any work in which c opyright did not subsist 
immediately before the commencement of this Act under any Act repealed by sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where copyright subsisted in any work immediately before the commence ment of this Act, the 
rights comprising such copyright shall, as f rom the date of such commencement, be the rights specified in 
section 14 in relation to the class of works to which such work belongs, and where any new rights are 
conferred by that section, the  owner of such rights shall be — 
(a) in any case where copyrigh t in the work was wholly assigned before the commencement of 
this Act, the assignee or his successor -in-interest;  
(b) in any other case, the person who was the first owner of the copyright in the work under any 
Act repealed by sub -section ( 1) or his legal representatives.  
(5) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, where any person is entitled immediately before the 
commencement of this Act to copyright in any work or any right in such copyright or to an interest in any 
such right, he shall continue to be  entitled to such right or interest for the period for which he would have 
been entitled thereto if this Act had  not come into force.  
(6) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to render any act done before its commencement an 
infringement of copyri ght if that act would not otherwise have constituted such an infringement.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this section, nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the 
application of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with respe ct to the effect of repeals.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.160, “Copyright Board ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Development Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT  ACT, 19 57                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJECTS  
3. The Delhi Development Authority.  
4. Staff of the Authority.  
5. Advisory Council.  
5A. Constitution of committees.  
6. Objects of the Authority.  
CHAPTER III  
MASTER PLAN AND ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS  
7. Civic survey of, and master plan for, Delhi.  
8. Zonal development plans.  
9. Submission of plans to the Central Government for approval.  
10. Procedure to be followed in the preparation and approval of plans.  
11. Date of operation of plan.  
CHAPTER IIIA  
MODIFICATIONS TO THE MASTER PLAN AND THE ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN  
11A. Modifications to plan.  
CHAPTER IV  
DEVELOPMENT OF LANDS  
12. Declaration of development areas and development of land in those and other areas.  
13. Application for permission.  
14. User of land and buildings in contravention of plans.  
CHAPTER V  
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND  
15. Compulsory acquisition of land.  
16. [Omitted. ] 
17. [Omitted. ] 
18. [Omitted. ] 
19. [Omitted. ] 
20. [Omitted. ] 2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Disposal of land by the Authority or the local authority concerned.  
22. Nazul lands.  
22A. Power of Authority to develop land in non -development area.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
23. Fund of the Authority.  
24. Budget of the Authority.  
25. Accounts and audit.  
26. Annual report.  
27. Pension and provident  funds.  
CHAPTER VII  
SUPPLEMENTAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
28. Powers of entry.  
29. Penalties.  
30. Order of demolition of building.  
31. Power to stop development.  
31A. Power to seal unauthorised development.  
31B. Appellate Tribunal.  
31C. Appeals.  
31D. Appeals against orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
31E.Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
32. Offences by companies.  
33. Fines when realised to be paid to Authority or local authority concerned.  
34. Composition of offences.  
34A. Certain offences to be cognizable.  
35. Default powers of the Authority.  
36. Power of Authority to require local authority to assume responsibility for amenities in certain 
cases.  
37. Power of Authority to levy betterment charges.  
38. Assessment of betterment charge by Authority.  
39. Settleme nt of betterment charge by arbitrators.  
40. Payment of betterment charge.  
40A. Mode of recovery of moneys due to Authority.  
41. Control by Central Government.  
42. Returns and inspection.  
43. Service of notices, etc.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
44. Public notice  how to be made known.  
45. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time.  
46. Authentication of orders and documents of the Authority.  
47. Members and officers to be public servants.  
48. Jurisdiction of courts.  
49. Sanction of prosecution.  
50. Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced penalties.  
51. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
52. Power to delegate.  
53. Effect of other laws.  
53A. Restriction on power of a local authority to make rules, regulations or bye -laws in respect of 
certain matters.  
53B. Notice to  be given of suits.   
54. Savings.  
55. Plans to stand modified in certain cases.  
56. Power to make rules.  
57. Power to make regulations.  
58. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.  
59. Dissolution of the Authority.  
60. Repeal, etc., and savings.   4 
 THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1957  
[27th December, 1957 .] 
An Act to provide for the development of Delhi according to plan and for matters ancillary 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Development     
Act, 1957.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the  1[National Capital Territory of Delhi] . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “amenity ” includes road, water supply, street lighting, drainage, sewerage, public works and 
such other convenience as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify to be an amenity for the purposes of this Act;  
(b) “building ” include s any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection which is 
intended to be used for residential, industrial, commercial or other purposes, whether in actual use or 
not; 
(c) “building operations ” includes rebuilding operations, structural altera tions of or additions to 
buildings and other operations normally undertaken in connection with the construction of buildings;  
(d) “development ” with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of building, 
engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land or the making of any material 
change in any building or land and includes redevelopment;  
(e) “development area ” means any area declared to be a development area under sub -section (1) 
of section 12;  
(f) “engineering operations ” includes the formation or laying out of means of access to a road or 
the laying out of means of water supply;  
(g) “means of access ” includes any means of access whether private or public, for vehicles or for 
foot passengers, and includes a road;  
(h) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act by the Delhi Development Authority 
constituted under section 3;  
(i) “rule” means a rule made under this Act by the Central Government;  
(j) “to erect ” in relation to any building includes — 
(i) any  material alteration or enlargement of any building,  
(ii) the conversion by structural alteration into a place for human habitation of any building 
not originally constructed for human habitation,  
(iii) the conversion into more than one place for human hab itation of a building originally 
constructed as one such place,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
2. 30th December, 1957, vide notification No. S. R. O. 120, dated 30th December, 195 7, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,       
Part. II, sec. 3.  5 
 (iv) the conversion of two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of such 
places,  
(v) such alterations of a building as affect an alteration of its drainage or sanitary 
arran gements, or materially affect its security,  
(vi) the addition of any rooms, buildings, houses or o ther structures to any building , and  
(vii) the construction in a wall adjoining any street or land not belonging to the owner of the 
wall, of a door opening o n to such street or land;  
(k) “zone ” means any one of the divisions in which Delhi may be divided for the purposes of 
development under this Act;  
1[(l) the expression “land” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).]  
CHAPTER II  
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS OBJECTS  
3. The Delhi Development Authority .—(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, 
the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this 
Act an authority to be called the Delhi Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority).  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by  the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to 
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following m embers, namely: — 
(a) a chairman who shall be the  2[Lieutenant Governor] of the  3[National Capital Territory of 
Delhi], ex officio ; 
(b) a vice -chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) a finance and accounts member to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(d) an engineer member to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(e) as and when the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is established, two representatives of that 
Corporation to be elect ed by the councillors and aldermen of the Corporation from among 
themselves;  
4[(f) three representatives of the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
to be elected by means of a single transferable vote by the members of the Legis lative Assembly from 
among themselves of which two shall be from among the ruling party and one from the party in 
opposition to the Government : 
Provided that no member of the Council of Ministers for the Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi shall be eligible to be elected to the Authority.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “ruling party ” and “party in opposition to 
Government ” shall mean the ruling party and the party in opposition to the Government recognised as 
such by the Speak er of the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;]  
5[(g) three other persons to be nominated by the Central Government, of whom one shall be a 
person with experience of town planning or architecture; and]  
(h) the Commisioner of the  Municipal Corporation of Delhi, ex officio . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 2, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 3, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  6 
 1[(3A) The appointment of the vice -chairman may be either whole -time or part -time as the Central 
Government may think fit but the appointment of the finance and accounts member and the engineer 
member shall be w hole-time.]  
2[(4) The vice -chairman, if he is a whole -time member, the finance and accounts member and the 
engineer member shall be entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority such salaries and such 
allowances, if any, and governed by such conditions of service as may be determined by rules made in 
this behalf.  
(5) The vice -chairman, if he is a part -time member, and other members specified in clause ( e),     
clause ( f) and clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) may be paid from the funds of the Autho rity such allowances, 
if any, as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf.]  
(6) The vice -chairman, the finance and accounts member, the engineer member and the  3[three 
members] referred to in clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) shall hold office dur ing the pleasure of the Central 
Government  4***. 
5[(7) An elected member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his election to the 
Authority and shall be eligible for re -election:  
Provided that such term shall come to an end as soon a s the member ceases to be a member of the 
body from which he was elected.]  
(9) A member other than an ex officio  member may resign his office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government but shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that 
Government.  
(10) No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid by reason of the existence of any vacancy 
in, or defect in the constitution of, the Authority.  
4. Staff of the Authority .—(1) The Central Government may appoint two suitable persons 
respectively as the secretary and the chief accounts officer of the Authority who shall exe rcise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by regulations or delegated to them by the 
Authority or the chairman.  
(2) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules, the Authority may appoint 
such number of other officers and employees (including experts for technical work) as may be necessary 
for the efficient performance of its functions and may determine their designations and grades.  
(3) The secretary, chief accounts officer and other officers and employees of the Authority shall be 
entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority such salaries and such allowances, if any, and shall be 
governed by such conditions of service as may be determined by regulations made in this behalf.  
5. Advisory Council .—(1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, constitute an advisory council for 
the purpose of advising the Authority on the preparation of the master plan and  6[on such other matters 
relating to the planning of development, or] arising out of, or in connection wit h, the administration of 
this Act as may be referred to it by the Authority.  
(2) The advisory council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the chairman of the Authority, ex officio , who shall be the president;  
(b) two  persons with knowledge of town planning or architecture to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “two members” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
4. Certain words , brackets and letter  omitted by Act 19 of 1966, s. 36 (w.e.f. 7 -9-1966).  
5. Subs. by s. 36, ibid.,  for sub -section s (7) and (8) (w.e.f. 7 -9-1966).  
6. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  7 
 (c) one representative of the Health Services of Delhi administration to be nominated by the 
Central Government;  
(d) four representatives of the Municipal C orporation of Delhi to be elected by the councillors 
and aldermen from among themselves;  
1[(e) two persons representing the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and the Delhi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Committee of the said Corporation, of whom — 
(i) one  shall be elected by the members of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee from among 
themselves; and  
(ii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee from among themselves ; 
(ee) one representative of the Delhi Transport Corporation to be nominated by the Central 
Government;]  
(f) three persons to be nominated by the Central Government of whom one shall represent s the 
interests of comme rce and industry and one, the interests of labour, in Delhi;  
(g) four persons f rom the technical departments of the Central Government to be nominated by 
that Government; and  
(h) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be members of the House of the People and 
one shall be a member of the Council of States to be elected respect ively by the members of the 
House of the People and the members of the Council of States.  
(3) The Council shall meet as and when necessary and shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(4) An elected member shall hold office for a term of four years from the date of his election to the 
council and shall be eligible for re -election:  
Provided that such term shall come to an end as soon as the member ceases to be a member of the 
body from which he was elected.  
2[5A. Constitution of committees .—(1) The Authority may constitute as many committees 
consisting wholly of members or wholly of other persons or partly of members and partly of other persons 
and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit.  
(2) A committee constituted under this section sh all meet at such time and place and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be determined by 
regulations made in this behalf.  
(3) The members of a committee (other than the members of the Author ity) shall be paid such fees 
and allowances for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the Authority, as may be 
determined by regulations made in this behalf.]  
6. Objects of the Authority .—The objects of the Authority shall be to pro mote and secure the 
development of Delhi according to plan and for that purpose the Authority shall have the power to 
acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land and other property, to carry out  building, engineering, mining 
and other operations, to execute works in connection with supply of water and electricity, disposal of 
sewage and other services and amenities and generally to do anything necessary or expedient for purposes 
of such development and for purposes incidental thereto:  
Provided that save as pr ovided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as 
authorising the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 12-53-1985). 
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  8 
 CHAPTER III  
MASTER PLAN AND ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS  
7. Civic survey of, and master plan for, Delhi .—(1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, carry 
out a civic survey of, and prepare a master plan for, Delhi.  
(2) The master plan shall — 
(a) define  the various zones into which Delhi may be divided for the purposes of development 
and indicate the manner in which the land in each zone is proposed to be used (whether by the 
carrying out thereon of development or otherwise) and the stages by which any s uch development 
shall be carried out; and  
(b) serve as a basic pattern of frame -work within which the zonal development plans of the 
various zones may be prepared.  
1[(3) The master plan may provide for any other matter which is necessary for the proper 
development of Delhi.]  
8. Zonal development plans .—(1) Simultaneously with the preparation of the master plan or as soon 
as may be thereafter, the Authority shall proceed with the preparation of a zonal development plan for 
each of the zones into which Delhi may be divided.  
(2) A zonal development plan may — 
(a) contain a site -plan and use -plan for the development of the zone and show the approximate 
locations and extents of land -uses proposed in the zone for such things as public buildings and other 
public works and utilities, roads, housing, recreation, industry, business, markets, schools, hospitals 
and public and private open spaces and other categories of public and private uses;  
(b) specify the standards of population density and building density;  
(c) show every area in the zone which may, in the opinion of the Authority, be required or 
declared for development or redevelopment; and  
(d) in particular, contain provisions regarding all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the division of any site  into plots for the erection of buildings;  
(ii) the allotment or reservation of land for roads, open spaces, gardens, recreation grounds, 
schools, markets and other public purposes;  
(iii) the development of any area into a township or colony and the restri ctions and conditions 
subject to which such development may be undertaken or carried out;  
(iv) the erection of buildings on any site and the restrictions and conditions in regard to the 
open spaces to be maintained in or around buildings and height and cha racter of buildings;  
(v) the alignment of buildings on any site;  
(vi) the architectural features of the elevation or front  age of any building to be erected on    
any site;  
(vii) the number of residential buildings which may be erected on any plot or site;  
(viii) the amenities to be provided in relation to any site or buildings on such site whether 
before or after the erection of buildings and the person or authority by whom or at whose expense 
such amenities are to be provided;  
(ix) the prohibitions or res trictions regarding erection of shops, workshops, warehouses or 
factories or buildings of a specified architectural feature or buildings designed for particular 
purposes in the locality;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  9 
 (x) the maintenance of walls, fences, hedges or any other structural or architectural 
construction and the height at which they shall be maintained;  
(xi) the restrictions regarding the use of any site for purposes other than erection of    
buildings; and  
(xii) any  other matter which is necessary for the proper development of the zone or any area 
thereof according to plan and for preventing buildings being erected haphazardly in such zone or 
area.  
9. Submission of plans to the Central Government for approval .—(1) In this section and in 
sections 10, 11, 12 and 14 the word “plan” means the master plan as well as the zonal development plan 
for a zone.  
(2) Every plan shall, as soon as may be after its preparation, be submitted by the Authority to the 
Central Government f or approval and that Government may either approve the plan without modifications 
or with such modifications as it may consider necessary or reject the plan with directions to the Authority 
to prepare a fresh plan according to such directions.  
10. Procedure to be followed in the preparation and approval of plans .—(1) Before preparing any 
plan finally and submitting it to the Central Government for approval, the Authority shall prepare a plan 
in draft and publish it by making a copy thereof available  for inspection and publishing a notice in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf inviting objections and suggestions 
from any person with respect to the draft plan before such date as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) The  Authority shall also give reasonable opportunities to every local authority within whose local 
limits any land touched by the plan is situated, to make any representation with respect to the plan.  
(3) After considering all objections, suggestions and repr esentations that may have been received by 
the Authority, the Authority shall finally prepare the plan and submit it to the Central Government for its 
approval.  
(4) Provisions may be made by rules made in this behalf with respect to the form and content of  a 
plan and with respect to the procedure to be followed and any other matter, in connection with the 
preparation, submission and approval of such plan.  
(5) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section the Central Government may direct the 
Authority  to furnish such information as that Government may require for the purpose of approving any 
plan submitted to it under this section.  
11. Date of operation of plan .—Immediately after a plan has been approved by the Central 
Government, the Authority shall publish in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations a notice 
stating that a plan has been approved and naming a place where a copy of the plan may be inspected at all 
reasonable hours and upon the date of the first publication of the aforesaid notic e the plan shall come into 
operation.  
1[CHAPTER IIIA  
MODIFICATIONS TO THE MASTER PLAN AND THE ZONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN  
11A. Modifications to plan .—(1) The Authority may make any modifications to the master plan or 
the zonal development plan as it thinks fit,  being modifications which, in its opinion, do not effect 
important alterations in the character of the plan and which do not relate to the extent of land -uses or the 
standards of population density.  
(2) The Central Government may make any modifications to  the master plan or the zonal 
development plan whether such modifications are of the nature specified in sub -section ( 1) or otherwise.  
(3) Before making any modifications to the plan, the Authority or, as the case may be, the Central 
Government shall publi sh a notice in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this 
behalf inviting objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the proposed modifications 
before such date as may be specified in the notice and shall consider all o bjections and suggestions that 
may be received by the Authority or the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 7 (w. e.f. 30 -12-1963).  10 
 (4) Every modification made under the provisions of this section shall be published in such manner as 
the Authority or the Central Government, as the case may be, ma y specify and the modifications shall 
come into operation either on the date of the publication or on such other date as the Authority or the 
Central Government may fix.  
(5) When the Authority makes any modifications to the plan under sub -section ( 1), it shall report to 
the Central Government the full particulars of such modifications within thirty days of the date on which 
such modifications come into operation.  
(6) If any question arises whether the modifications proposed to be made by the Authority are 
modifications which effect important alterations in the character of the plan or whether they relate to the 
extent of land -uses or the standards of population density, it shall be referred to the Central Government 
whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(7) Any reference in any other Chapter, except Chapter III, to the master plan or the zonal 
development plan shall be construed as a reference to the master plan or the zonal development plan as 
modified under the provisions of this section.]  
CHAPTER IV  
DEVEL OPMENT OF LANDS  
12. Declaration of development areas and development of land in those and other             
areas .—1[(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare any area in Delhi to be a development area for the purposes of 
this Act:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made unless a proposal for such declaration has been 
referred by the Central Government to the Authority and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi for 
expressing their views thereon within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the reference or within 
such further period as the Central Government may allow and the period so specified or allowed has 
expired.]  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority shall not undertake or carry out any 
development of land in any area which is not a development area.  
(3) After the commencement of this Act no development of land shall be undertaken or carried out in 
any area by any person or body  (including a department of Government) unless, — 
(i) where that area is a development area, permission for such development has been obtained in 
writing from the Authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(ii) where that area is an area other than a development area, approval of, or sanction for, such 
development has been obtained in writing from the local authority concerned or any officer or 
authority thereof empowered or authorised in this behalf, in accord ance with the provisions made by 
or under the law governing such authority or until such provisions have been made, in accordance 
with the provisions of the regulations relating to the grant of permission for development made under 
the Delhi (Control of Bu ilding Operations) Act, 1955 (53 of 1955), and in force immediately before 
the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the local authority concerned may  2[subject  to the provisions of section 53A] amend 
those regulations in their application to such area . 
(4) After the coming into operation of any of the plans in any area no development shall be 
undertaken or carried out in that area unless such development is also in accordance with such plans.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 3) and  (4) development of any land begun by 
any department of Government or any local authority before the commencement of this Act may be 
completed by that department or local authority without compliance with the requirements of those      
sub-sections.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 8, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  11 
 13. Application for permission .—(1) Every person or body (including a department of Government) 
desiring to obtain the permission referred to in section 12 shall make an application in writing to the 
Authority in such form and containing such particulars in r espect of the development to which the 
application relates as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by 
rules:  
Provided that no such fee shall be necessary in the case of an application made by a department of the 
Government.  
(3) On the receipt of an application for permission under sub -section ( 1), the Authority after making 
such inquiry as it considers necessary in relation to any matter specified in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of 
section 8 or in relation to any other matter, shall, by order in writing, either grant the permission, subject 
to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order or refuse to grant such permission:  
Provided that before making an order refusing such permission, the applicant shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity to show cause why the permission should not be refused.  
(4) Where permission is refused, the grounds of such refusal shall be recorded in writing and 
communicated to t he applicant in the manner prescribed by regulations.  
(5) The Authority shall keep in such form as may be prescribed by regulations a register of 
applications for permission under this section.  
(6) The said register shall contain such particulars including  information as to the manner in which 
applications for permission have been dealt with as may be prescribed by regulations and shall be 
available for inspection by any member of the public at all reasonable hours on payment of such fee not 
exceeding rupee s five as may be prescribed by regulations.  
(7) Where permission is refused under this section, the applicant or any person claiming through him 
shall not be entitled to get refund of the fee paid on the application for permission but the Authority may, 
on an application for refund being made within three months of the communication of the grounds of the 
refusal under sub -section ( 4) direct refund of such portion of the fee as to it may seem proper in the 
circumstances of the case.  
14. User of land and buil dings in contravention of plans .—After the coming into operation of any 
of the plans in a zone no person shall use or permit to be used any land or building in that zone otherwise 
than in conformity with such plan:  
Provided that it shall be lawful to continue to use upon such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed by regulation s made in this behalf any land or building for the purpose and to the extent for 
and to which it is being used upon the date on which such plan comes into force.  
CHAPTER V  
ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND  
1[15. Compulsory acquisition of land .—(1) If in the opinion of the Central Government, any land is 
required for the purpose of development, or for any other purpose, under this Act, the Central 
Government may acquire such land  under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
(2) Where any land has been acquired by the Central Government, that Government may, after it has 
taken possession of the land, transfer the land to the Authority or any local authority for the purpose for 
which the land has been acquired on payment by the Authority or the local authority of the compensation 
awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with the 
acquisition.]  
16. [Compensation for compulsory acquisition of land.] Omitted  by the Delhi Development 
(Amendment ) Act, 1960 (5 6 of 1963), s. 10 (w.e.f . 30-12-1963). 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 9, for section 15 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  12 
 17. [Appeal to the district judge against decision of the collector .] Omitted by the Delhi Development 
(Amendment ) Act, 196 3 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (w.e.f . 30-12-1963). 
18. [Disputes as to apportionment of the compensation .] Omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f . 30-12-1963). 
19. [Payment of compensation or deposit of the same in court .] Omitted by s . 10, ibid.                 
(w.e.f . 30-12-1963). 
20. [Investment of the amount of compensation deposited in court .] Omitted by s . 10, ibid.            
(w.e.f . 30-12-1963). 
21. Disposal of land by the Authority or the local authority concerned .—(1) Subject to any 
directions given by the Central  Government under this Act, the Authority or, as the case may be, the local 
authority concerned may dispose of — 
(a) any land acquired by the Central Government and transferred to it, without undertaking or 
carrying out any development thereon; or  
(b) any  such land after undertaking or carrying out such development as it thinks fit,  
to such persons, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as it considers expedient for 
securing the development of Delhi according to plan.  
(2) The powers of th e Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned with respect to 
the disposal of land under sub -section ( 1) shall be  so exercised as to secure, so far as practicable, that 
persons who are living or carrying on business or other activities on the land shall, if they desire to obtain 
accommodation on land belonging to the Authority or the local authority concerned and are willing to 
comply with any requirements of the Authority or the local authority concerned as to its development and 
use, h ave an opportunity to obtain thereon accommodation suitable to their reasonable requirements on 
terms settled with due regard to the price at which any such land has been acquired from them:  
Provided that where the Authority or the local authority concerne d proposes to dispose of by sale any 
land without any development having been undertaken or carried out thereon, it shall offer the land in the 
first instance to the persons from whom it was acquired, if they desire to purchase it subject to such 
requireme nts as to its development and use as the Authority or the local authority concerned may think fit 
to impose.  
(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as enabling the Authority or the local authority concerned 
to dispose of land by way of gift, mortgage o r charge, but subject as aforesaid reference in this Act to the 
disposal of land shall be construed as reference to the disposal thereof in any manner, whether by way of 
sale, exchange or lease or by the creation of any easement right or privilege or other wise.  
22. Nazul lands .—(1) The  Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and upon 
such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between that Government and the  Authority, place at 
the disposal of the Authority all or any developed and undeveloped lands in Delhi vested in the Union 
(known and hereinafter referred  to as “nazul lands ”) for the purpose of development in accordance  with 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No  development of any nazul land shall be undertaken or carried out ex cept by, or  under the 
control and supervision of, the Authority after such land has been  placed at the disposal of the Authority 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) After any such nazul land has been developed by, or under the control and  supervision of, the 
Author ity, it shall be dealt with by the Authority in  accordance with rules made and directions given by 
the Central Government in  this behalf.  
(4) If any nazul land placed at the disposal of the Authority under sub -section ( 1) is required at any 
time thereafter  by the Central Government, the Authority shall,  by notification in the Official Gazette, 
replace it at the disposal of that Government upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon 
between that Government and the Authority.  13 
 1[22A. Power of Authority to develop land in non -development area .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 12, the Authority may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient to do 
so, undertake or carry out any development of any land which has been transferred to it or placed at its 
disposal under section 15 or section 22 even if such land is situate in any area which is not a development 
area.]  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
23. Fund of the Authority .—(1) The Authority shall have and maintain its own fund to which shall 
be credited — 
(a) all moneys received by the Authority from the Central Government by way of grants, loans, 
advances or otherwise;  
2[(aa) all moneys borrowed by the Authority from sources other than the Central Governmen t by 
way of loans or debentures;]  
(b) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act;  
(c) all moneys received by the Authority from the disposal of lands, buildings and other 
properties, movable and immovable; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Authority by way of rents and profits or in any other manner or 
from any other source.  
(2) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses incurred by the Authority in the 
administration of this Act and for no other purposes.  
(3) The Authority m ay keep in current account of the State Bank of India or any other bank approved 
by the Central Government in this behalf such sum of money out of its fund as may be prescribed by rules 
and any money in excess of the said sum shall be invested in such mann er as may be approved by the 
Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, 
make such grants, advances and loans to the Authority as that Government may deem necessary for the 
performan ce of the functions of the Authority under this Act; and all grants, loans and advances made 
shall be on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine.  
2[(5) The Authority may borrow money by way of loans or debentures from such sources  (other than 
the Central Government) and on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Central 
Government.  
(6) The Authority shall maintain a sinking fund for the repayment of moneys borrowed under         
sub-section ( 5), and shall pay every year  into the sinking fund such sum as may be sufficient for 
repayment within the period fixed of all moneys so borrowed.  
(7) The sinking fund or any part thereof shall be applied in, or towards, the discharge of the loan for 
which such fund was created, and u ntil such loan is wholly discharged it shall not be applied for any other 
purpose.]  
24. Budget of the Authority .—The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time every year 
as may be prescribed by rules a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Authority and shall forward to the Central Government such number of 
copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.  
25. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts a nd other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 30-12-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  14 
 (2) The accounts of the Auth ority shall be subject to audit annually by the Comptroller and         
Auditor -General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Co mptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of accounts of the Authority shall have the same right, privilege and authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of Indi a has in connection with the audit of the 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shal l cause a copy of the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
26. Annual report .—The Authority shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that 
year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be 
prescribed by rules, and that Government shall cause a copy of the report to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
27. Pension and provident funds .—(1) The Authority shall constitute for the benefit of its        
whole -time paid members and of its officers and other employees in such manner and subject to such 
conditions, as may be prescribed by rules, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Centra l Government may 
declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund as if it 
were a Government Provident Fund.  
CHAPTER VII  
SUPPLEMENTAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
28. Powers of entry .—The Authority may aut horise any person to enter into or upon any land or 
building with or without assistants or workmen for the purpose of — 
(a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or survey or taking levels of such land or 
building;  
(b) examining  works under construction and ascertaining the course of sewers and drains;  
(c) digging or boring into the sub -soil; 
(d) setting out boundaries and intended lines of work;  
(e) making such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and cutting trenches;  
(f) ascertaining whether a ny land is being or has been developed in contravention of the master 
plan or zonal development plan or without the permission referred to in section 12 or in contravention 
of any condition subject to which such permission has bee n granted; or  
(g) doing any other thing necessary for the efficient administration of this Act:  
Provided that — 
(i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset and without 
giving reasonable notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the land or 
building;  
(ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every instance be given to enable women (if any) to 
withdraw from such land or building;  
(iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be compatible with the e xigencies of the 
purpose for which the entry is made, to the social and religious usages of the occupants of the 
land or building entered.  
  15 
 29. Penalties .—(1) Any person who whether at his own instance or at the instance of any other 
person or any body  (including a department of Government) undertakes or carries out development of any 
land in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the permission, approval or 
sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any con dition subject to which such permission, 
approval or sanction has been granted,  1[shall be punishable, — 
(a) with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to three years, if such development relates to 
utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any land with a view to the setting up of a colony without a 
lay out plan; and  
(b) with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees, or with both, in any case, other than those referred to in clause ( a).] 
(2) Any person who uses any land or building in contravention of the provisions of section 14 or in 
contravention of any terms and conditions prescribed by regulations under the proviso to that section shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to fi ve thousand rupees  2[and in the case of a continuing 
offence, with further fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees for every day during which 
such offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the offence].  
(3) Any person who  obstructs the entry of a person authorised under section 28 to enter into or upon 
any land or building or molests such person after such entry shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend t o one thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
30. Order of demolition of buildin g.—3[(1) Where any development has been commenced or is 
being carried on or has been completed in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or 
without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any 
conditions subject to which such permission, approval or sanction has been granted, — 
(i) in relation to a development area, any officer of the Authority empowered by it in this behal f, 
(ii) in relation to any other area within the local limits of a local authority, the competent 
authority thereof,  
may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, make an order , directing that 
such development shall be removed by demolition, filling or otherwise by the owner thereof or by the 
person at whose instance the development has been commenced or is being carried out or has been 
completed, within such period (not being less than five days and more than fifteen days from the date on 
which a copy of the order of removal, with a brief statement of the reasons therefor, has been delivered to 
the owner or that person) as may be specified in the order and on his failure to comply with the order, the 
officer of the Authority or,  as the case may be, the competent authority may remove or cause to be 
removed the development and the expenses of such removal shall be recovered from the owner or the 
person at whose instance the development was commenced or was being carried out or was completed as 
arrears of land revenue:  
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner or the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity to show cause why the order should not be made.  
(1A) If any development in an area other than a  development area has been commenced or is being 
carried on or has been completed in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or 
without the approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to 
which such approval or sanction has been granted and the competent authority has failed to remove or 
cause to be removed the development within the time that may be specified in this behalf by the  
4[Lieutenant Governor] of the  5[National capital territory o f Delhi], the  4[Lieutenant Governor] may, after 
observing such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, direct any officer to remove 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 12 -3-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 13 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
4. Su bs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  16 
 or cause to be removed such development and that officer shall be bound to carry out such direction and 
any expenses of such removal may be recovered from the owner or the person at whose instance the 
development was commenced or was being carried out or was completed as arrears of land revenue.]  
 1*                                   *                                    *                                 *                                  *  
2[(2A) Any person aggrieved by the direction of the  3[Lieutenant Governor] under sub -section ( 1A) 
may appeal to the Central Government within thirty days from the date thereof, and the Central 
Government may after giving an opportunity of hearing to the person aggrieved, either allow or dismiss 
the appeal or may reverse  or vary any part of the direction.]  
4[(3) The decision of  5[the Central Government on the appeal and subject only to such decision], the 
direction under sub -section ( 1A), shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provision 
relating to demolition of buildings contained in any other law for the time being in force.]  
6[31. Power to stop development .—(1) Where any development in any area has been commenced in 
contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the permission, approval or 
sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such permission, 
approval or sanction has been granted, — 
(i) in relation to a development area, the Authority or any officer of the Authority empowered by 
it in this behalf,  
(ii) in relation to any other area within the local limits of a local authority, the competent 
authority thereof,  
may, in addition to any  prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, make an order requiring the 
development to be discontinued on and from the date of the service of the order, and such order shall be 
complied with accordingly.  
(2) Where such development is not discontinu ed in pursuance of the order under sub -section ( 1), the 
Authority or the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be, may require any 
police officer to remove the person by whom the development has been commenced and all his ass istants 
and workmen from the place of development  7[or to seize any construction material, tool, machinery, 
scaffolding or other things used in such development] within such time as may be specified in the 
requisition and such police officer shall comply w ith the requisition accordingly.  
7[(2A) Any of the things caused to be seized by the Authority or the officer of the Authority or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 2) shall, unless the owner thereof turns up to 
take back such things and pays to the Authority, the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as 
the case may be, the charges for the removal or storage of such things, be disposed of by it or him by 
public auction or in such other manner and within such time  as the Authority, the officer of the Authority 
or the competent authority thinks fit.  
(2B) The charges for the removal and storage of the things sold under sub -section ( 2A) shall be paid 
out of the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, sha ll be paid to the owner of the things sold 
on a claim being made therefor within a period of one year from the date of sale, and if no such claim is 
made within the said period, shall be credited to the fund of the Authority or the competent authority, as 
the case may be.]  
  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 38 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -5-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 14 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
4. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 14, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 4, for certain words , brackets and figure  (w.e.f. 12 -5-1985).  
6. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 15, for section 31 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
7. Ins. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  17 
  
(3) If any development in an area other than a development area has been commenced in 
contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the approval or sanction referred to 
in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such approval or sanction has been 
granted and the competent authority has failed to make an order under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may 
be, a requisition under sub -section ( 2), within the time that may be specified in this behalf by the  
1[Lieutenant Governor] of the  2[National Capital Territory of Delhi], the  1[Lieutenant Governor] may, 
after observing such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, direct any officer to 
make the order or requisition, as th e case may be, and that officer shall be bound to carry out such 
direction and the order or requisition made by him in pursuance of the direction shall be complied with 
accordingly.  
(4) After the requisition under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) has bee n complied with,                  
the Authority or the competent authority or the officer to whom the direction was issued by the  
1[Lieutenant Governor] under sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, may depute by a written order a police 
officer or an officer  or employee of the Authority or local authority concerned to watch the place in order 
to ensure that the development is not continued.  
(5) Any person failing to comply with an order under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, under 
sub-section ( 3), shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day 
during which the non -compliance continues after the service of the order.  
(6) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any damage which he may sustain in 
consequ ence of the removal of any development under section 30 or the discontinuance of the 
development under this section.  
3*                                  *                                        *                                     *                             * 
(8) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provision 
relating to stoppage of building operations contained in any other law for the time being in force.]  
4[31A. Power to seal unauthorised develop ment .—(1) It shall be lawful for the Authority or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, at any time, before or after making an order for the removal or 
discontinuance of any development under section 30 or section 31, to make an order directing the sealing 
of such development in the manner prescribed by rules, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and extent of such development.  
(2) Where any development has been sealed, the Authori ty or the competent authority, as the case 
may be, may, for the purpose of removing or discontinuing such development order the seal to be 
removed.  
(3) No person shall remove such seal except — 
(a) under an order made by the Authority or the competent autho rity under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) under an order of the Appellate Tribunal or the  1[Lieutenant Governor] of the  2[National 
Capital Territory of Delhi], ma de in an appeal under this Act.  
31B. Appellate Tribunal .—The Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals constituted under      
section 347A of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 , (66 of 1957) shall be deemed t o be the 
Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals for deciding appeals under section 31C, and the  provisions of 
section 347A and section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, and the rules made 
thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they appl y for the purposes of 
that Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
3. Omitted by Act 38 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  18 
 31C. Appeals .—(1) Any  person aggrieved by any of the following orders made under this Act, may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) an order of the Authority granting or refusing to grant permission for development under    
sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
(b) an order of the Authority or the local authority disposing of any land under section 21;  
(c) an order of the Authority in the course of dealing with any nazul land developed by it under 
section 22;  
(d) an order of an officer of the Authority or the compe tent authority made under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 30, for the removal of any development;  
(e) an order of the Authority or an officer of the Authority, or the competent authority made under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 31, for discontinuing any developmen t; 
(f) an order of the Authority or the competent authority made under section 31A, directing the 
sealing of any development.  
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order appealed 
against:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such form and sh all be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by such fees  as may be prescribed by rules.  
31D. Appeals against orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the  1[Lieutenant 
Governor] of the  2[National Capital Territory of Delhi] against an order of the Appellate Tribunal, 
confirming, modifying or annulling an order of the Authority, officer of the Authority, local authority or 
competent authority, as the case may be, under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and (3) of section 31C and the provisions of section 347C of 
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section as they apply to the  filing and 
disposal of an appeal under the said section 31C.  
(3) An order of the  1[Lieutenant Governor] on an appeal under this section, and subject only to such 
order, an order of the Appellate Tribunal under section 31C and subject to such orders of the  1[Lieutenant 
Governor] or an Appellate Tribunal, an order of the Authority, officer of the Authority, local authority or 
competent authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) of that section shall be final.  
Explanation. —In sections 30, 31, 31A and 31D, “comp etent authority ” in relation to a local authority 
means any authority or officer of that local authority empowered or authorised to order demolition or 
stoppage of buildings or works, in accordance with the provisions made by or under the law governing 
such local authority.  
31E.  Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—(1) After the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi 
Development (Amendment) Act,  1984  (38 of 1984) , no court shall entertain any suit, application or other 
proceedings in respect of any order appealable under section 31C, and no such order shall be called in 
question otherwise than by preferring an appeal under that section.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), every suit, application or other proceeding 
pending in any court immediately before the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi Development 
(Amendment) Act, 1984  (38 of 1984) , in respect of any order, appealable under section 31C shall 
continue to be dealt with and disposed  of by that court as if the said section h ad not been brought into 
force.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  19 
 32. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
every person, who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liabl e to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the compan y, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporat e and includes a firm or other association of         
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
33. Fines when realised to be paid to Authority or local authority concerned .—All fines realised  
in connection with prosecutions under this Act shall be paid to the Authority or, as the case may be, the 
local authority concerned.  
34. Composition of offences .—1[(1) Any  offence made punishable by or under this Act may, either 
before or after the institution of proceedings, be compounded — 
(i) in the case of an offence referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 49, by the  2[Lieutenant 
Governor] of the  3[National Capital territory of Delhi] or any officer authorised by him in this behalf 
by general or special order; and  
(ii) in any other case, by the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned or any 
person authorised by the Authority or such local authority by general or special order in this behalf.]  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence compounded.  
4[34A. Certain offences to be cognizable .—The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
shall apply to an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 as if it were a cognizable offence, — 
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence, and  
(ii) for the purposes of all matters other than — 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and  
(2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of, or upon information received from :— 
(a) such  officer of the Authority not below the rank of a Director as may be appointed by 
the 2[Lieutenant Governor] of the  3[National capital territory of Delhi], if the offence is 
committed in relation to a development area;  
(b) such officer of the Municipal Cor poration of Delhi not below the rank of a Deputy 
Commissioner as may be appointed by the  2[Lieutenant Governor] of the  3[National capital 
territory of Delhi], if the offence is committed in relation to any area within the local limits of 
that Corporation; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 16, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 7 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  20 
 (c) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Committee, if the offence is committed in 
relation to any area within the local limits of that Committee:  
Provided that no offence which relates to any deviation from the permission, approval or sanction 
given under section 12 and which could be compounded under the provisions of this Act, shall be 
cognizable.]  
1[35. Default powers of the Authority .—(1) If the Authority, after holding a local enquiry or upon 
report from any of its officers or other information i n its possession, is satisfied that any amenity in 
relation to any land in a development area has not been provided in relation to that land which in the 
opinion of the Authority is to be provided, or that any development of the land for which permission, 
approval or sanction has been obtained under this Act has not been carried out, it may, after affording a 
reasonable opportunity to show cause, serve upon the owner of the land or upon the person providing or 
responsible for providing the amenity a notice requiring him to provide the amenity or carry out the 
development within such time as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) If any amenity is not provided or any such development is not carried out within the time 
specified in the notice, then the Authority may itself provide the amenity or carry out the development or 
have it provided or carried out through such agency as it deems fit:  
Provided that before taking any action under this sub -section, the Authority shall afford reasonable 
opportunity to the owne r of the land or to the person providing or responsible for providing the amenity to 
show cause as to why such action should not be taken.  
(3) All expenses incurred by the Authority or the agency employed by it in providing the amenity or 
carrying out the development together with interest at such rate as the Central Government may by order 
fix from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until payment may be recovered by the 
Authority from the owner or the person providing or responsible for provid ing the amenity as arrears of 
land revenue.]  
36. Power of Authority to require local authority to assume responsibility for amenities in 
certain cases .—Where any area has been developed by the Authority, the Authority may require the local 
authority within  whose local limits the area so developed is situated, to assume responsibility for the 
maintenance of the amenities which have been provided in the area by the Authority and for the provision 
of the amenities which have not been provided by the Authority but which in its opinion should be 
provided in the area, on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Authority and that local authority; 
and where such terms and conditions cannot be agreed upon, on terms and conditions settled by the 
Central Governmen t in consultation with the local authority on a reference of the matter to that 
Government by the Authority.  
2[37. Power of Authority to levy betterment charges .—(1) Where, in the opinion of the Authority, 
as a consequence of any development having been executed by the Authority in any development area, 
the value of any property in that area or in any area other than the development area, which has been 
benefited by the development, has increased or will increase, the Authority shall be entitled to levy u pon 
the owner of the property or any person having an interest therein a betterment charge in respect of the 
increase in value of the property resulting from the execution of the development:  
Provided that no betterment charge shall be levied in respect of  lands owned by Government within 
Delhi:  
Provided further that where any land belonging to Government has been let out by Government to 
any person, then that land and any building situate thereon shall be subject to a betterment charge under 
this section.  
(2) Such betterment charge shall be an amount — 
(i) in respect of any property situate in a development area, equal to one -third of the amount, and  
(ii) in respect of property situate in any other area, not exceeding one -third of the amount,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 17, for section 35 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for section 37 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  21 
 by which the va lue of the property on the completion of the execution of the development scheme 
estimated as if the property were clear of buildings exceeds the value of the property prior to such 
execution estimated in like manner:  
Provided that in levying betterment ch arge on any property under clause ( ii), the Authority shall have 
regard to the extent and nature of benefit accruing to the property from the development and such other 
factors as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf.]  
38. Assessment of bettermen t charge by Authority .—(1) When it appears to the Authority that any 
particular development scheme is sufficiently advanced to enable the amount of the betterment charge to 
be determined, the Authority may, by an order made in this behalf, declare that for  the purpose of 
determining the betterment charge the execution of the scheme shall be deemed to have been completed 
and shall thereupon give notice in writing to the owner of the property or any person having an interest 
therein that the Authority propose s to assess the amount of the betterment charge in respect of the 
property under section 37.  
(2) The Authority shall then assess the amount of betterment charge payable by the person concerned 
after giving such person an opportunity to be heard and such person shall, within three months from the 
date of receipt of the notice in writing of such assessment from the Authority, inform the Authority by a 
declaration in writing that he accepts the assessment or dissents from it.  
(3) When the assessment proposed  by the Authority is accepted by the person concerned within the 
period specified in sub -section ( 2) such assessment shall be final.  
(4) If the person concerned dissents from the assessment or fails to give the Authority the information 
required by sub -section ( 2) within the period specified therein the matter shall be determined by 
arbitrators in the manner provided in section 39.  
39. Settlement of betterment charge by arbitrators .—(1) For the determination of the matter 
referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 38, the Central Government shall appoint three arbitrators of 
whom one at least shall have special knowledge of the valuation of land.  
(2) The arbitrators shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf.  
1[(2A) The arb itrators shall, for the purpose of determining any matter referred to them, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) when trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) administ ering to any party to the arbitration such interrogatories as may, in the op inion of the 
arbitrators, be ne cessary.]  
(3) In the event of any difference of opinion among the arbitrators the decision of the majority shall 
prevail and that decision shall be the award of the arbitrators.  
(4) If any arbitrator dies, resigns, or is removed under sub -section ( 5) or re fuses, or neglects in the 
opinion of the Central Government, to perform his duties or becomes incapable of performing the same, 
then the Central Government shall forthwith appoint another fit person to take the place of such arbitrator.  
(5) If the Central Government is satisfied after such inquiry as it thinks fit — 
(a) that an arbitrator has misconducted himself, the Central Government may remove him from 
his office;  
(b) that the award of the arbitrators has been improperly procured or that any arbitrator h as 
misconducted himself in connection with such award, the Central Government may set aside the 
award.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 19 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  22 
 (6) An Award which has not been set aside by the Central Government under clause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 5) shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(7) The provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), shall not apply to arbitration under this 
section.  
40. Payment of betterment charge .—(1) The betterment charge levied under this Act shall be 
payable in such number of i nstalments and each instalment shall be payable at such time and in such 
manner as may be fixed by regulations made in this behalf.  
(2) Any arrear of betterment charge shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.  
1[40A. Mode of recovery of moneys due to Authority .—Any money due to the Authority on 
account of fees or charges, or from the disposal of lands, buildings or other properties , movable or 
immovable, or by way of rents and profits may, if the recovery thereof is n ot expressly provided for in 
any other provision of this Act, be recovered by the Authority as arrears of land revenue.]  
41. Control by Central Government .—(1) The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
(2) If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the 
Authority under this Act, any dispute arises between the Authority and the Central Governmen t the 
decision of the Central Government on such dispute shall be final.  
2[(3) The Central Government may, at any time, either on its own motion or on application made to it 
in this behalf, call for the records of any case disposed of or order passed by th e Authority for the purpose 
of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed or direction issued and may pass such 
order or issue such direction in relation thereto as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not  pass an order prejudicial to any person without 
affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]  
3[42. Returns and inspection .—(1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government such 
reports, returns and other information as that Gov ernment may from time to time require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government or any officer 
authorised  by the Central Government in this behalf, may call for reports, returns and other information 
from the Authority or local authority in regard to the implementation of the master plan.  
(3) Any person authorised  by the Central Government or the officer referred to in sub -section ( 2) may 
enter into or upon any land with or without assistants or workmen for ascertaining whether the provisions 
of the master plan are being or have been implemented, or whether the dev elopment is being or has been 
carried out in accordance with such plan.  
(4) No such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset and without giving 
reasonable notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the lan d or building.]  
43. Service of notices, etc. —(1) All notices, orders and other documents required by this Act or any 
rule or regulation made thereunder to be served upon any person shall, save as otherwise provided in this 
Act or such rule or regulation, b e deemed to be duly served — 
(a) where the person to be served is a company if the document is addressed to the secretary of 
the company at its registered office or at its principal office or place of business and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal office or place of business of the 
company;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 20 (w.e.f. 30-12-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for section 42 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  23 
 (b) where the person to be served is a partnership, if the document is addressed to the partnership 
at its principal place of business, identifying it b y the name or style under which its business is carried 
on, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the said place of business;  
(c) where the person to be served is a public body or a corporation or society or other body, if the 
document is addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, corporation or 
society at its principal office, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at that office;  
(d) in any other case, if the document is addr essed to the person to be served and — 
(i) is given or tendered to him, or  
(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some conspicuous part of his last known 
place of residence or business, if within the  1[National captial  territory of Delhi] or is given or 
tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or 
building to which it relates, or  
(iii) is sent by registered post to that person.  
(2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or occupier of any land 
or building may be addressed “the owner ” or “the occupier ”, as the case may be, of that land or building 
(naming that land or building) without further name or description, and shall be deemed to  be duly 
served— 
(a) if the document so addressed is sent or delivered in accordance with clause ( d) of               
sub-section ( 1); or 
(b) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is delivered to some person on 
the land or building o r, where there is no person on the land or building to whom it can be delivered, 
is affixed to some conspicuous part of the land or building.  
(3) Where a document is served on a partnership in accordance with this section, the document shall 
be deemed to b e served on each partner.  
(4) For the purpose of enabling any document to be served on the owner of any property the secretary 
to the Authority may by notice in writing require the occupier (if any) of the property to state the name 
and address of the owner thereof.  
(5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a minor, the service upon his guardian or 
any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be service upon the minor.  
(6) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section.  
44. Public notice how to be made known .—Every public notice given under this Act shall be in 
writing over the signature of the secretary to the Authority and shall be widely made known in the locality 
to be affected thereby by affixing cop ies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality, or 
by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in local newspaper or by any two or more of 
these means, and by any other means that the secretary may think fit.  
45. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time .—Where any notice, order or other document issued or 
made under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder requires anything to be done for the doing 
of which no time is fixed in this Act or the rule or regulation, the notice, order or other document shall 
specify a reasonable time for doing the same.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  24 
 46. Authentication of orders and documents of the Authority .—All permissions, orders, decisions, 
notices and other documents of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the secretary to 
the Authority or any other officer authorised by the Authority in this behalf.  
47. Members and officers to be public servants .—Every member and every officer and other 
employee of the Authority shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
48. Jurisdiction of courts .—No court inferior to that of a  1[Metropolitan Magistrate] shall try an 
offence punishable under this Act.  
49. Sanction of prosecution .—2[(1)] No pro secution for any offence punishable under this Act  
3[other than an offence referred to in sub -section ( 2)] shall be instituted except with the previous sanction 
of the Authority or as the case may be, the local authority concerned or any officer authorised  by the 
Authority or such local authority in this behalf.  
3[(2) No prosecution for any offence for failure to comply with the order of the officer referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) of section 31 and punishable under sub -section ( 5) of that section shall be in stituted except 
with the previous sanction of the  4[Lieutenant Governor] or any officer authorised by him in this behalf.]  
50. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties .—Notwithstanding anything contained        
in 5[section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any court of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate] to pass any sentence authorised by this Act in excess of its powers under the 
said section.  
 51. Protection of action taken in g ood faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule or regulation made thereunder.  
52. Power to delegate .—6[(1)] The Authority may , by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
any power exercisable by it under this Act except the power to make regulations may also be exercised by 
such officer or local authority  7[or committee constituted under section 5A] as may be mentioned  therein, 
in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein.  
7[(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power 
exercisable by it under this Act, except the power to make rules, may also be exercised by such officer as 
may be mentioned therein, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
therein.  
(3) The  4[Lieutenant Governor] of the  8[National capital territory of Delhi] may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by him under this Act  9[, except the power to hear 
appeals,] may also be exercised by such officer as may be mentioned therein, in such cases and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified th erein.]  
53. Effect of other laws .—(1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Slum Areas 
(Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 (6 of 1956).  
(2) 10[Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4) of section 30 or sub -section ( 8) of section 31 or 
sub-section ( 1) of this section], the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 8, for “magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 12 -3-1985).  
2. Section 49 renumbered as sub-section ( 1) of that section by Act 56 of 1963, s. 23 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21-12-1996).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 9, for certain words  and figures  (w.e.f. 12 -3-1985).  
6. Section 52 renumbered as sub-section ( 1) of that section by Act 56 of 1963, s. 23 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
7. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
8. Subs.  by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
9. Ins. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 10 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  
10. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 25, for “Save as aforesaid” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  25 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any such other law— 
(a) when permission for development in respect of any land has been obtained under this Act 
such development shall not be deemed to be unlawfully undertaken or carried out by reason only of 
the fact that permission, approval or sanction required  under such other law for such development has 
not been obtained;  
(b) when permission for such development has not been obtained under this Act, such 
development shall not be deemed to be lawfully undertaken or carried out by reason only of the fact 
that p ermission, approval or sanction required under such other law for such development has been 
obtained.  
1[53A. Restriction on power of a local authority to make rules , regulations or bye -laws in 
respect of certain matters .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, no rule, regulation or bye -law shall be made or amended by a local authority in respect of matters 
specified in sub -section ( 2) unless the Authority, upon consideration of such rule, regulation or bye -law, 
certifies that it does not contravene any of the provisions of the master plan or the zonal development 
plan.  
(2) The matters referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) water supply, drainage and sewage disposal;  
(b) erection and re -erection of buildings, including grant of building permissions, licences and 
imposition of restrictions on use and sub -division of buildings;  
(c) sub -division of land into building sites, roads and lanes, recreational sites and sites for 
community facilities;  and 
(d) development of land, improvement schemes, and housing and rehousing schemes.  
53B. Notice to be given of suits .—(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Authority, or any 
member thereof, or any of its officers or other employees, or any person acting under the directions of the 
Authority or any member or any officer or other employee of the Authority in respect of any act done or 
purporting to have been done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder until the 
expiration of two months after notice in writing has been, in the case of the Authority, left at its office, 
and in any other case, delivered to, or left at the office or place of abode of, the person to be sued and 
unless such notice states explicitly the cause of a ction, the nature of relief sought, the amount of 
compensation claimed and the name and place of residence of the intending plaintiff and unless the plaint 
contains a statement that such notice has been so left or delivered.  
(2) No suit such as is describe d in sub -section ( 1) shall, unless it is a suit for recovery of immovable 
property or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the expiry of six months from the date on 
which the cause of action arises.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief 
claimed is an injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the 
postponement of the institution of the suit.]  
54. Savings .—Nothing in this Act shall apply to — 
(a) the carrying out of works for the maintenance, improvement or other alteration of any 
building, being works which affect only the interior of the building or which do not materially affect 
the external appearance of the building;  
(b) the carrying out b y any local authority or by any department of Government of any works for 
the purpose of inspecting, repairing or renewing any drains, sewers, mains, pipes, cables or other 
apparatus including the breaking open of any street or other land for that purpose;  
(c) the erection of a building, not being a dwelling house if such building is required for the 
purposes subservient to agriculture;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 26 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  26 
 (d) the erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph or of a wall enclosing a graveyard, 
place of worship, cenotaph or samadhi  on land which at the commencement of this Act is occupied 
by or for the purpose of such worship, tomb, cenotaph, graveyard or samadhi ; 
(e) the excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary course of agricultural operations; and  
(f) the construction of unmetalled road intended to give access to land solely for agricultural 
purposes.  
55. Plans to stand modified in certain cases .—(1) Where any land situated in any area in Delhi is 
required by the master plan or a zonal development plan to be kept as an open space or unbuilt upon or is 
designated in any such plan as subject to compulsory ac quisition, then, if at the expiration of ten years 
from the date of operation of the plan under section 11 or where such land has been so required or 
designated by any amendment of such plan, from the date of operation of such amendment, the land is not 
compulsorily acquired  1***, the owner of the land may  2[serve on the Central Government a notice] 
requiring his interest in the land to be so acquired.  
(2) 3[If the Central Government] fails to acquire the land within a period of six months from the date 
of receipt of the notice, the master plan or, as the case may be, the zonal development plan shall have 
effect, after the expiration of the said six months as if the land were not required to be kept as an open 
space or unbuilt upon or were not designated as subject to compulsory acquisition.  
56. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Authority, may 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that consultation with the Authority shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the 
making of rules under this section, but the Central Government shall take into consideration any 
suggestions which the Authority may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after the y are 
made.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of election of representatives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi under        
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the qualifications and disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being, members of the 
Authority or the Advisory Council;  
(c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the whole -time p aid members of the 
Authority;  
4[(cc) travelling and other allowances of the members of the Advisory Council except those of the 
ex officio  member and such other members as are Government servants;]  
(d) the control and restrictions in relation to appointment of officers and other employees;  
5[(dd) the stages by which the development of any particular features of a zone may be carried 
out;]  
(e) the form and content of the master plan and a zonal development p lan and the procedure to be 
followed in connection with the preparation, submission and approval of such plans and the form, and 
the manner of publication, of the notice relating to any such plan in draft;  
(f) the local inquiries and other hearings that ma y be held before a plan is approved;  
  
                                                           
1. Certain words omitted by Act 56 of 1963, s. 27 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid.,  for “serve on the authority a notice” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid.,  for “If the authority for the time being charged with the development of the area” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
4. Ins. by Act 4 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 28 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  27 
 1[(g) the form and manner in which notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 11A shall be 
published;]  
(h) the fee to be paid on an application for permission under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 and the 
factors and circumstances to be taken into consideration in determining such fee;  
2*                               *                                  *                                     *                               * 
(j) the manner in which nazul  lands shall be dealt with after development;  
3[(jj) the procedure to be observed by the 4[ Lieutenant Governor ] under section 30 or section 31;  
(jjj) the factors to be taken into consideration in determining the rate of betterment charge in 
respect of pro perty situate in any area outside the development area;]  
5[(ja) the manner in which the sealing of any development under sub -section ( 1) of section 31A 
shall be made;  
(jb) the form in which an appeal shall be made to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 31C and the fees that shall accompany such appeal;]  
(k) the procedure for referring any matter to the Central Government under section 36 for 
settlement of terms and conditions subject to which a local authority may be required t o assume 
responsibility for amenities in any area;  
(l) the procedure to be followed by arbitrators in the determination of betterment charge;  
(m) the sum of money that may be kept in current account;  
3[(mm) the procedure to be followed for borrowing moneys  by way of loans or debentures and 
their repayment;]  
(n) the form of the budget of the Authority and the manner of preparing the same;  
(o) the form of the balance -sheet and statement of accounts;  
(p) the form of the annual report and the date on or before which it shall be submitted to the 
Central Government;  
(q) the manner of constitution of the pension and provident funds for whole -time paid members 
and officers and other employees of the Authority and the conditions subject to which such funds may 
be con stituted;  
(r) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by rules.  
57. Power to make regulations .—(1) 6[The Authority , with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette , make regulations] consistent with this Act and 
the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of 
this power, such regulations may provide for — 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Authority, the time and place where such 
meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the number of members 
necessary to form a quorum thereat;  
7[(aa) the summoning and holding of meetings of a committee constituted under section 5A, the 
time and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings, and the 
number of members necessary to form a quorum thereat and the fees and allowances payable to the 
members for attending the meetings or any other wor k of the Authority;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 28, for clause (g) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Omitted by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Administrator” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
5. Ins. by Act 38 of 1984, s. 11 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1986).  
6. Subs. b y Act 4 of 1976, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -1-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 56 of 1963, s. 29 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  28 
 (b) the powers and duties of the secretary and chief accounts officer of the Authority;  
(c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the secretary, chief accounts officer and 
other officers and employees;  
(d) the procedure  for the carrying out of the functions of the Authority under Chapter III;  
(e) the form in which any application for permission under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 shall be 
made and the particulars to be furnished in such application;  
(f) the terms and con ditions subject to which user of lands and buildings in contravention of plans 
may be continued;  
1*                                   *                                       *                           *                             * 
(h) the manner of communicating the grounds of refusal of permission for development;  
(i) the form of the register of applications for permission and the particulars to be contained in 
such register;  
(j) the management of the properties of the Authority;  
(k) the time and manner of payment of betterment charge; and  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by regulations.  
(2) Until the Authority is established under this Act, any regulation which may be made under        
sub-section ( 1) may be mad e by the Central Government; and any regulation so made may be altered or 
rescinded by the Authority in exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
2[58. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after such rule or regulation is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befo re the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or re gulation 
shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule or regula tion.]  
59. Dissolution of the Authority .—(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the purposes 
for which the Authority was established under this Act have been substantially achieved so as to render 
the continued existence of the Authority in the  opinion of the Central Government unnecessary, that 
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette declare that the Authority shall be dissolved with 
effect from such date as may be specified in the notification; and the Authority shall be deemed to be 
dissolved accordingly.  
(2) From the said date — 
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or realisable by, the Authority shall vest in, 
or be realisable by the Central Government;  
(b) all nazul  lands placed at the disposal of the Authority shall revert to the Central Government;  
(c) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Authority shall be enforceable against the 
Central Government; and  
(d) for the purpose of carrying out any developm ent which has not been fully carried out by the 
Authority and for the purpose of realising properties, funds and dues referred to in clause ( a), the 
functions of the Authority shall be discharged by the Central Government.   
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 56 of 1963, s. 29 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1976, s. 4, for section 58 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1976).  29 
 60. Repeal, etc., and savings .—(1) As from the date of constitution of the Authority, — 
(a) the United Provinces Town Improvement Act, 1919 (U.P. Act VIII of 1919), shall cease to 
have effect in the  1[National capital territory of Delhi]; and  
(b) the Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Act, 1955 (53 of 1955), shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) every officer and other employee serving under the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi 
Development (Provisiona l) Authority immediately before the date of the constitution of the Authority 
shall, on and from such date, be transferred to and become an officer or other employee of the 
Authority with such designations as the Authority may determine and shall hold offi ce by the same 
tenure, at the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have 
held the same if the Authority had not been constituted, and shall continue to do so unless and until 
such tenure, remuneration and terms and c onditions are duly altered by the Authority:  
Provided that any service rendered by any such officer or other employee before the constitution 
of the Authority shall be deemed to be service rendered under it:  
Provided further that the Authority may employ a ny such officer or other employee in the 
discharge of such functions under this Act as it may think proper and every such officer or other 
employee shall discharge those functions accordingly;  
(b) anything done or any action taken (including any appointmen t, delegation, notification, order, 
scheme, permission, rule, bye -law, regulation or form made, granted or issued) under any of the 
aforesaid Acts, shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force 
and be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act unless and until it is 
superseded by anything done or any action taken under the said provisions ; 
(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with or for the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development 
(Provisional) Authority shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, 
with or for the Authority;  
(d) all properties movable and im movable vested in the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi 
Development (Provisional) Authority shall vest in the Authority;  
(e) all rents, fees and other sums of money due to the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi 
Development (Provisional) Authority shall be deemed to be due to the Authority;  
(f) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been  
instituted by, for or against the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) 
Authority may be continued or instituted b y, for or against the Authority.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1996, s. 2, for “Union territory of Delhi” (w.e.f. 21 -12-1996).  
--------------------------The Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957--------------------------
1 THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CORPORATION  
Constitution of the Corporation  
3. Establishment of the Corporation.  
3A. Division of Delhi into zones.  
4. Duration of the Corporation.  
Election of councillors and aldermen  
5. Delimitation of wards.  
5A. [ Omitted .] 
6. Power to alter or amend  delimitation orders.  
7. Elections to the Corporation.  
7A. Electoral roll for every ward.  
7B. Electoral registration officers.  
7C. Assistant electoral registration officers.  
7D. Registration of Electors.  
7E. Preparation and revision of electoral rolls.  
7F. Correction of entries in electoral roll.  
7G. Inclusion of names in electoral roll.  
7H. Appeal.  
7-I. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
8. Qualifications for councillorship.  
9. Disqualifications for membership of Corporation.  
10. Right to vote.  
11. Gener al elections of council lors. 
12. Filling of casual vacancies in councillorship.  
13. [Omitted .] 
14. Publication of result of election.  
Disputes regarding elections  
15. Election petitions.  
16. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner.  
17. Grounds for declaring elections to be void.  
18.  Procedure to be followed by the district judge.  2 SECTIONS  
19.  Decision of the district judge.  
20. Procedure in case of equality of votes.  
21. Finality of decisions.  
Corrupt practices and electoral offences  
22. Corrupt practices.  
23. Maintenance of secrecy of voting.  
24. Officers, etc., at elections not to act for candidates or to influence voting.  
25. Prohibition of canvassing in or near polling station and of public meeting on election  day. 
26. Penalty for disorderly c onduct in or near polling station.  
27. Penalty for misconduct at the polling station.  
28. Breaches of official duty in connection with election.  
29. Removal of ballot papers  from polling station to be an offence.  
30. Other offences and penalties therefor.  
Power to make rules  
31. Power to make rules regulating the election of councillors and aldermen.  
Councillors and aldermen  
32. Oath or affirmation.  
32A. Declaration of assets.  
32B. Vacation of seats in case of multiple membership.  
33. Vacation of seats.  
33A. Powers of Election Commission.  
33B. Statements made by persons to the Election Commission.  
33C. Procedure to be followed by the Election Commission.  
33D. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
34. Payment of allowances to  councillors  and alderm en. 
Mayor and Deputy Mayor  
35. Annual election of Mayor and Deputy Mayor.  
36. Term of office of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor and facilities and privileges of the  Mayor.  
37. Discharge of functions of the Mayor by the Deputy Mayor.  
38. Resignation of Mayor and Dep uty Mayor.  
Committees of the Corporation  
39. Rural Areas Committee and Education Committee.  3 SECTIONS  
40. Special and adhoc  committies and ward committees, etc.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
41. General powers of the Corporation.  
42. Obligatory functions of the Corporation.  
43. Discretionary functions of the Corporation.  
CHAPTER IV  
MUNICIPAL  AUTHORITIES  UNDER THE CORPORATION  
Municipal authorities  
44. Enumeration of municipal authorities.  
The Standing Committeee  
45. Constitution of the Standing Committee.  
46. Casual vacancies.  
47. Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee.  
48. Resignation of Chairman and members of the Standing Committee.  
49. Functions of the Standing Committee.  
The Wards Committee  
50. Constitution of the Wards Committee.  
51. Application of sections 47 and 48.  
52. Powers and functions of the Wards Committee.  
The Commissioner  
54. Appointment, etc., of the Commissioner.  
55. Salary and allowances of the Commissioner.  
56. Leave of absence of Commissioner . 
57. Appoint ment of officiating Commissioner in case of death, resignation or removal of 
Commissioner.  
58. Service regulations of Commissioner.  
59. Functions of the Commissioner.  
60. [Omitted .] 
61. [Omitted .] 
62. [Omitted .] 
63. [Omitted .] 
64. [Omitted .] 
Miscellaneous provisions relating to the various municipal authorities  
65. Appointment of sub -committees by the various committees.  
66. Commissioner and General Manager s not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the 
Corporation.  
67. Vacation of seats by members o f committees.  
68. Committees to continue in office till new committees are constituted.  4 SECTIONS  
69. Power of Corporation to call for extracts of proceedings from the Committees.  
70. Power of Corporation to require the Commissioner , etc., to produce documents and furnish 
returns, reports, etc.  
71. Exercise of powers to be subject to sanction.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
Transaction of business by the C orporation  
72. Meetings.  
73. First meeting of the Corporation after general election.  
74. Notice of meetings and business.  
75. Quorum.  
76. Presiding officer.  
77. Presiding officer at meeting for the election of Mayor.  
78. Method of deciding questions.  
79. Maintenance of order at , and admission of public to, meeting s; withdrawal and suspension of 
councillors and a lderman . 
80. Councillors or aldermen not to vote on matter in which they are interested.  
81. Right to attend meetings of the Corporation and its committees, etc., and right of councillors and 
aldermen to ask questions in relation to the municipal governmen t of Delhi.  
82. Power to make regulations.  
Transaction of business by Standing and other committees  
83. Presiding officers at meetings of the Standing and other committees.  
84. Conduct of business at meetings of Standing and other committees.  
Minutes and r eports of proceedings  
85. Keeping of minutes and proceedings.  
86. Circulation of minutes and inspection of minutes and reports of proceedings.  
87. Forwarding minutes and reports of proceedings to the Administrator.  
Validation  
88. Validation of proceedings,  etc. 
CHAPTER VI  
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES  
89. Appointment of certain officers.  
90. Schedule of permanent posts and creation of temporary posts.  
91. Restriction on employment of permanent officers and other employees.  
92. Power to ma ke appointments.  
92A. Recruitment to category B and category C posts.  5 SECTIONS  
93. Officers and other employees not to undertake any extraneous work.  
94. Officers and other employees not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the Corporation.  
95. Punishment for municipal officers and other employees.  
96. Consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.  
97. Power of Commission to make regulations and reference to the Central Government in case of 
difference between the Commission and the Corpo ration.  
98. Power of Corporation to make regulations.  
CHAPTER VII  
REVENUE  AND EXPENDITURE  
The Municipal Fund  
99. Constitution of the Municipal Fund.  
100. Municipal Fund to be kept in the State Bank of India.  
101. Operation of the Accounts.  
102. Payments not to be made unless covered by a budget -grant.  
103. Duty of persons signing cheques.  
104. Procedure when money not covered by a budget -grant is expended.  
105. Application of Municipal Fund.  
106. Temporary payments from the Municipal Fund for works urgent ly required for the public 
service.  
107. Investment of surplus moneys.  
107A. Constitution of Finance Commission.  
Special funds  
108. Constitution of special funds.  
Budget estimates  
 109. Adoption of budget estimates.  
110. Power of Corporation to alter budget estimates.  
111. Power of Corporation to re -adjust income and expenditure during the year.  
112. Provisions as to unexpended budget -grant.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TAXATION  
Levy of taxes  
113. Taxes to be imposed by the Corporation under this Act.  
Property taxes  
114. Components and rates of property tax.  
115. Premises in respect of which property taxes are to be levied.  
116. Determination of re teable value of lands and buildings assessable to property taxes . 
117. [Omitted .] 6 SECTIONS  
118. [Omitted .] 
119. Taxation of  Union properties.  
120. Incidence of property taxes.  
121. Apportionment of liability for property taxes when the premises assessed are let or sub -let. 
122. Recovery of property taxes from occupiers.  
123. Property taxes a first charge on premises on which t hey are assessed.  
124. Assessment list.  
125. Evidential value of assessment list.  
126. Amendment of assessment list.  
127. Preparation of new assessment list.  
128. Notice of transfers.  
129. Notice of erection of building , etc. 
130. Notice of demolition or removal of building.  
131. Power of Commissioner to call for information and returns and to enter and inspect premises.  
132. Premises owned by, or let to, two or more persons in severalty to be ordinarily assessed as one 
property.  
133. Assessment in case of  amalgamation of premises.  
134. Power of Commissioner to assess separately out -houses and portions of buildings.  
135. Power of Commissioner to employ valuers.  
Tax on vehicles and animals  
136. Tax on certain vehicles and animals and rates thereof.  
137. The tax on whom leviable.  
138. Tax when payable.  
139. Power of Commissioner to compound with livery stable keeper, etc., for tax.  
Theatre -tax 
140. Theatre -tax. 
141. Liability to pay theatre -tax. 
Tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers  
142. Tax on advertisements.  
143. Prohibition of advertisements without written permission of the Commissioner.  
144. Permission of the Commissioner to become void in certain cases.  
145. Presumption in case of contravention.  
146. Power of Commissioner in case of contravention.  
Duty on transfer of property  
147. Duty on transfer of property  and method of assessment there of. 
148. Provisions applicable on the introduction of transfer duty.  
Tax on buildings payable along with the application for  sanction of building plans  
149. Tax on building applications.  
Other taxes  
150. Imposition of other taxes.   
Supplementary taxation  
151. Supplementary taxation . 7 Payment and recovery of taxes  
SECTIONS  
152. Time and manner of payment of taxes . 
153. Presentation of bill.  
154. Notice of demand and notice -fee. 
155. Penalty in case of default of payment of taxes.  
156. Recovery of tax.  
157. Distress.  
158. Disposal of distrained property and attachment and sale of immovable property.  
159. Recovery from a p erson about to leave Delhi.  
160. Power to institute suit for recovery.  
161. Power of seizure of vehicles and animals in case of non -payment of tax thereon . 
162. Occupiers may be required to pay rent towards satisfaction of property taxes . 
Remission and Refund  
163. Demolition, etc., of buildings.  
164. Remission  or refund of tax . 
165. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings.  
166. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed.  
167. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant.  
168. Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant land or building.  
Appeals  
169. Appeal against assessment, etc.  
170. Conditions of right to appeal.  
171. Finality of appellate orders.  
Miscellaneous provisions relating to taxation  
172. Power to inspect for purposes of determining rateable  value or tax . 
173. Composition.  
174. Irrecoverable debts.  
175. Obligation to disclose liability.  
176. Immaterial error not to affect liability.  
177. General power of exemption.  
Terminal taxes on goods  
178. Terminal tax on goods carried by railway or road . 
179. Recovery of terminal taxes.  
180. Payment by the Central Government to the Corporation and other local authorities.  
181. Power of exemption.  
182. Powers and liabilities of persons authorised to collect terminal taxes.  8 SECTIONS  
183. Power to make rules.  
Taxes on entertainment and betting  
184. Proceeds of entertainment tax.   
CHAPTER IX  
BORROWING  
185. Power of Corporation to borrow . 
186. Time for repayment of money borrowed under section 185.  
187. Form and effect of debenture s. 
188. Payment to survivors of joint payees.  
189. Receipt by joint holders for interest or dividend.  
190. Maintenance and investment of sinking funds.  
191. Application of sinking funds.  
192. Annual statement b y Commissioner . 
193. Power of Corporation to consolid ate loans . 
194. Priority of payments for interest and repayment of loans over other payments . 
195. Attachment of Municipal Fund for recovery of money borrowed from Government.  
196. Power to make regulati ons. 
CHAPTER X  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
Property  
197. Acquisition of property.  
198. Acquisition of immovable property by agreement.  
199. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement.  
200. Disposal of property.  
Contracts  
201. Contracts by  the Corporation.  
202. Procedure for making contracts.  
203. Mode of executing contracts.  
CHAPTER XI  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
Scrutiny and audit of accounts  
204. Accounts to be kept . 
205. Scrutiny of accounts by Municipal Chief Auditor and by the Standing Committee.  
206. Report by the Municipal Chief Auditor.  
207. Special audit at the direction of the  Central  Government.  9 Powers and duties of the Municipal Chief Auditor  
SECTIONS  
208. Procedure to be followed by the Municipal Chief Auditor.  
209. Power of Municipal Chief Auditor to make queries, etc. , and call for returns, etc.  
CHAPTER XII  
WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
General  
210-273. [ Repealed .] 
CHAPTER XIII 
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY  
274-286. [ Repealed .] 
CHAPTER XIV  
TRANSPORT SERVICES  
287-297 [Repealed .] 
CHAPTER XV  
STREETS  
Construction, maintenance and improvement of streets  
298. Vesting of public streets in the Corporation.  
299. Functions of Commissioner in respect of public streets.  
300. Disposal of land forming site of public streets permanently closed . 
301. Power to make new public streets.  
302. Minimum width of new public streets . 
303. Power to prohibit use of public streets for certain kind of traffic . 
304. Power to acquire lands and buildings for public streets and for public parki ng places.  
305. Defining the regular line of streets . 
306. Setting back building to regular line of street . 
307. Compulsory setting back of building to regular line of street.  
308. Acquisition of open land and land occupied by platforms, etc., within the r egular line of street.  
309. Acquisition of the remaining part of a building and land after their portions within a regular line 
of street have been acquired . 
310. Setting forward of buildings to the regular line of street.  
311. Compensation to be paid in c ertain cases of setting back or setting forward of buildings, etc.  
312. Owner’s obligation when dealing with land as building sites.  
313. Lay -out plans. 
314. Alteration or demolition of street made in breach of section 313 . 
315. Power of Commissioner to or der work to be carried out or to carry it out himself in default.  
316. Right of owners to require streets to be declared public . 
Encroachments on streets  
317. Prohibition of projections upon streets, etc.  10 SECTIONS  
318. Projections over streets may be permitted in certain cases . 
319. Ground floor doors, etc., not to open outwards on streets . 
320. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which cause obstruction in streets . 
321. Prohibition of deposit, etc., of things in streets.  
322. Power to remove anythin g deposited or exposed for sale in contravention of this Act.  
323. Prohibition of the tethering of animals and milking of cattle . 
Provision concerning execution of works in or near to streets  
324. Precautions during repair of streets . 
325. Streets not to b e opened or broken up and building materials not to be deposited thereon without 
permission . 
326. Disposal of things removed under this Chapter . 
Naming and numbering of streets and numbering of buildings  
327. Naming and numbering of streets . 
Repair s or enclosure of dangerous places  
328. Commissioner to take steps for repairing or enclosing dangerous places . 
Lighting of streets  
329. Measures for lighting . 
330. Prohibition of removal, etc., of lamps.  
CHAPTER XVI  
BUILDING REGULATIONS  
330A. General superintendence etc., of the Central Government.  
331. Definition.  
332. Prohibition of building without sanction.  
333. Erection of building.  
334. Applications for additions to, or repairs of, buildings.  
335. Conditions of valid notice . 
336. Sanction or refu sal of building or work.  
337. When building or work may be proceeded with . 
338. Sanction accorded under misrepresentation.  
339. Buildings at corners of streets . 
340. Provisions as to buildings and works on either side of new streets . 
341. Period for completion of building or work . 
342. Prohibition against use of inflammable materials for building, etc. , without permission.  
343. Order of demolition and stoppage of buildings and works in certain cases and appeal . 
344. Order of stoppage of buildings or w orks in certain cases.  
345. Power of Commissioner to require alteration of work.  
345A. Power to seal unauthorised constructions . 
346. Completion certificate s. 11 SECTIONS  
347. Restrictions on use r of buildings . 
347A. Appellate Tribunal . 
347B. Appeals against certain orders or notices issued under the Act.  
347C. Procedure of the Appellate Tribunal.  
347D. Appeal against orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
347E. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
348. Removal of dangerous buildings.  
349. Power to order building to be vacat ed in certain circumstances . 
349A. Power of Central Government to make bye -laws. 
CHAPTER XVII  
SANITATION AND PUBLIC HEALTH  
Conservancy and sanitation  
350. Provision for daily cleansing of streets and removal of rubbish and filth . 
351. Rubbish, etc., to be the property of the Corporation.  
352. Provision or appointment of receptacles, depots and places for rubbish, etc.  
353. Duty of owners and occupiers to collect and deposit rubbish, etc.  
354. Collection and removal of filth and polluted matter.  
355. Collect ion and removal of filth and polluted matter through municipal agency.  
356. Removal of rubbish , etc., accumulated on premises used as factories, workshops, etc.  
357. Prohibition against accumulation of rubbish, etc.  
358. Commissioner’s power to get premises scavenged and cleansed.  
359. Public latrines, urinals, etc.  
Latrines and urinals  
360. Construction of latrines and urinals . 
361. Latrines and urinals, etc., in new buildings.  
362. Latrines and urinals for labourers, etc.  
363. Provision of latrines  and urinals for markets, etc.  
364. Other provisions as to private latrines . 
Removal of congested buildings and buildings unfit for human habitation  
365. Removal of congested buildings.  
366. Power of Commissioner to require improvement of buildings unfit for human habitation . 
367. Enforcement of notice requiring execution of works of improvement.  
368. Power of Commissioner to order demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation.  
369. Insanitary huts and sheds.  
Regulation of washing by washermen  
370. Pr ohibition against washing by washermen . 12 Prevention of dangerous diseases  
SECTIONS  
371. Obligation to give information of dangerous disease.  
372. Removal to hospital of patients suffering from dangerous disease . 
373. Disinfection of buildings and articles . 
374. Destruction of infectious huts or sheds.  
375. Means of disinfection . 
376. Special measures in case of outbreak of dangerous or epidemic diseases . 
377. Infected clothes not to be sent to washerman or to laundry . 
378. Contamination and disinfection of p ublic conveyance.  
379. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry persons suffering from dangerous disease.  
380. Disinfection of buildings before letting the same . 
381. Disposal of infected articles without disinfection.  
382. Prohibition of making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes by infected persons.  
383. Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink.  
384. Control over wells and tanks, etc.  
385. Duty of persons suffering from dangerous disease.  
386. Disposal of infectious corpses where any  person has died from any dangerous disease.  
Special conditions regarding essential services  
387. Conditions of service of sweepers and certain other class of persons employed in municipal 
service.  
388. Conditions of service of sweepers employed for doing house scavenging  
Burning and burial grounds  
389. Power to call for information regarding burning and burial grounds . 
390. Permission for use of new burning or burial ground . 
391. Power to require closing of burning and burial grounds . 
392. Removal of corps es. 
Disposal of dead animals  
393. Disposal of dead animals.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
VITAL STATISTICS  
394. Appointment of Chief Registrar and registrars.  
395. Duties of registrar.  
396. Information of births and deaths.  
CHAPTER XIX  
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
Nuisances  
397. Prohibition of nuisances.  
398. Power of Commissioner to require removal or abetment of nuisance.  13 Dogs  
SECTIONS  
399. Registration and control of dogs . 
Prevention of fire, etc.  
400. Stacking or collecting inflammable materials . 
401. Care of naked lights.  
402. Discharging fireworks, fire -arms, etc.  
403. Power to require buildings, wells, etc. , to be rendered safe.  
404. Enclosure of waste land used for improper purposes.  
CHAPTER XX  
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER HOUSES, TRADE AND OCCUPATIONS  
Maintenance and regulation of markets and slaughter houses  
405. Provisions of municipal markets and slaughter houses.  
406. Use of municipal markets.  
407. Private markets and slaughter houses.  
408. Conditions of grant of licence for private market.  
409. Pro hibition of keeping market open without licence, etc.  
410. Prohibition of use of un licenced markets.  
411. Prohibition of business and trade near a market.  
412. Levy of stallages, rents and fees.  
413. Stallages, rents, etc., to be published.  
414. Power to expel  lepers and disturbers, etc. from markets.  
415. Butcher’s, fish -monger’s and poulter’s licence  
Trades and Occupations  
416. Factory, etc., not to be established without permission of the Commissioner.  
417. Premises not to be used for certain purposes w ithout licence.  
418. Seizure of certain animals . 
419. Power of Commissioner to prevent use of premises in particular area s for purposes referred to in 
section 417.  
420. Licences for hawking articles, etc.  
421. Eating houses, etc. , not to be used without licence from the Commissioner . 
422. Licensing and control of theatres, circuses and places of public amusement.  
423. Power of Commissioner to stop use of premises used in contravention of licences.  
Inspection of places of sales, etc . 
424. Power of Commissioner to inspect places where unlawful slaughter of animals, etc., is 
suspected . 
CHAPTER XXI  
IMPROVEMENT  
425. Improvement scheme . 
426. Matters to be provided for in an improvement scheme.  14 SECTIONS  
427. Submission of improvement schem e to the Corporation for approval and to the Central 
Government for sanction.  
428. Rehousing scheme . 
429. Improvement scheme and rehousing scheme to comply with the master plan and zonal 
development plan.  
CHAPTER XXII  
POWERS, PROCEDURE, OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
Licences and written permissions  
430. Signature, conditions, duration, suspension, revocation, etc., of licences and written permissions . 
Entry and inspection  
431. Powers of entry and inspection.  
432. Power to enter land adjoining land in relatio n to any work.  
433. Breaking into buildings.  
434. Time of making entry.  
435. Consent ordinarily to be obtained.  
436. Regard to be had to social or religious usages.  
437. Prohibition of obstruction or molestation in execution of work.  
Public notices and adv ertisements  
438. Public notices how to be made known.  
 439. Newspaper in which advertisements or notices to be published.  
Evidence  
440. Proof of consent etc., of Commissioner, General Managers, etc.  
Notices, etc.  
441. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time.  
442. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamp ed. 
443. Notices, etc., by whom to be served or issued.  
444. Service of notices, etc.  
445. Service of bills for tax or notice of demand by ordinary post.  
446. Powers in case of non -compliance with notice, etc.  
Recovery of expenses  
447. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner.  
448. Execution of work by occupier in default of owner and deduction of expenses from rent.  
449. Relief to agents and trustees.  
Payment of compensation  
450. General power to pay co mpensation . 
451. Compensation to be paid by offenders for damage caused by them . 
Recovery of expenses or compensation in case of dispute  
452. Reference to the court of the district judge in certain cases.  
453. Application to the Court of the district judge  in other cases . 15 SECTIONS  
454. Power to sue for expenses o r compensation . 
Recovery of certain dues  
455. Mode of recovery of certain dues . 
Obstruction of owner by occupier  
456. Right of owner to apply to the court of the district judge in case of obstructio n by occupier.  
Proceedings before the court of the district judge  
457. General powers and procedure of the court of the district judge . 
458. Fees in proceedings before the court of the district judge.  
459. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing.  
 460. Power of the court of the district judge to delegate certain powers and to make rules.  
Offences and penalties  
461. Punishment for certain offences.  
462. Punishment for acquiring share or interest in contract, etc., with the Corporation.  
463. Punishment for offences relating to terminal tax . 
464. Penalty for evasion of terminal taxes . 
465. General penalty . 
466. Offences by companies.  
466A. Certain offences to be cognizable . 
467. Prosecutions . 
468. Composition of offences.  
Magistrates and proce edings before magistrates  
469. Municipal magistrates.  
470. Cognizance of offences . 
471. Limitation of time for prosecution.  
472. Power of magistrate to hear cases in absence of accused when summoned to appear.  
473. Complaints concerning nuisances and procedure therefor . 
Powers and duties of police officers  
474. Arrest of offenders.  
475. Duties of police officers.  
Legal proceedings  
476. Power to institute, etc., legal proceedings and obtain legal advice.  
477. Protection of action of the Corporation, etc. 
478. Notice to be given of suits.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
RULES, REGULATIONS AND BYE-LAWS  
479. Supplemental provisions respecting rules.  
480. Supplemental provisions respecting regulations.  16 SECTIONS  
481. Power to make bye -laws.  
481A. Regulations and bye -laws to  be laid before Parliament . 
482. Penalty for breaches of bye -laws.  
483. Supplemental provisions respecting bye -laws.  
484. Bye -laws to be available for inspection and purchase.  
CHAPTER XXIV  
CONTROL  
485. Power of Central Government to require production of d ocument s. 
486. Inspection.  
487. Directions by Central Government.  
488. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 487.  
489. Power of Central Government to give directions in relation to primary schools, etc.  
490. Dissolution of the Corporation . 
CHAPTER XXV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
490A. Delegation of power by the Central Government . 
491. Power to delegate functions of Commissioner.  
492. Validity of notices and other documents.  
493. Admissibility of document or entry as evidence.  
494. Evidence of Municipal officer or employee.  
495. Prohibition against obstruction of Mayor or any municipal authority, etc.  
496. Prohibition against removal of mark.  
497. Prohibition against removal or obliteration of notice.  
498. Prohibition against unauthorised dea lings with public place or materials.  
499. Liability of Commissioner, etc., for loss, waste or mis -application of Municipal Fund or 
property.  
 500. Councillors and municipal officers and employees to be public servants.  
501. Annual administration report.  
502. Other laws not to be disregarded.  
503. Exemption of diplomatic or consular missions from payment of tax etc.  
504. Construction of references.  
505. [ Repealed .] 
506. [ Repealed .] 
507. Special provisions as to rural areas.  
508. Special provisions as to Red  Fort area.  
508A. Corporation to undertake work on agency basis . 
CHAPTER XXVI  
SUPPLEMENTAL AND TRANSITIONAL  PROVISIONS  
509. [Repealed .] 
510. Provisions relating to existing local authorities in Delhi till the establishment of the Corporation.  
511. Provisions as to employees of bodies and local authorities whose functions are taken over by the 
Corporation . 17 SECTIONS  
511A. Temporary provision with respect to electri city, water, sewage, etc.  
511B. Special provision as to transferred functions.  
512. Special provisions as to the area transferred from New Delhi to Delhi.  
513. Expenditure in connection with the Municipal Affairs from the commencement of this Act to the 
adoption of the budget by the Corporation.  
514. Limits of New Delhi Municipality.  
514A . Transitory provision . 
515. Power to remove difficulties.  
516. Repeal, etc., and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE . 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE . 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE TWEL FTH SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTEENTH SCHEDULE . 18 THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1957  
  [28th December , 1957 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Municipal Government of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, it extends only to Delhi.  
(3) The provisions of this Act, except this section which shall come into force at once, shall come into 
force on such  date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoints:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be co nstrued as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
2[(1) “Administrator ” means the Lieutenant  Governor of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;]  
3[(1A) “Appellate Tribunal” means an Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 347A ;] 
(2) “budget -grant ” means the total sum entered on the expenditure side of  a budget estimate under 
a major head and adopted by the Corporation and  includes any sum by which such budget -grant may 
be increased or reduced by  transfer from or to other heads in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the regulations made thereunder;  
(3) “building ” means a house, out -house, stable, latrine, urinal, shed,  hut, wall (other than a 
boundary wall) or any other structure, whether of  masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other 
material but does not include any  portable shelter;  
(4) “bye-law” means a bye -law made under this Act, by notification in the  Official Gazette;  
(5) “casual vacancy ” means a vacancy occu rring otherwise than by efflux of  time in the office of 
a council lor an alderman or in any other elective  office;  
(6) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of the Corporation;  
(7) “Corporation ” means the Municipal Corporation of Delhi established  under this Act;  
(8) “corrupt practice ” means any of the practices specified in section  22; 
(9) “dangerous disease ” means— 
(a) cholera, plague, chicken -pox, small -pox, tuberculosis, leprosy, enteric feve r, crebrospinal 
meningitis and diphtheria; and  
                                                 
1. 2nd January, 1958, vide notification No. F. 20/3/58/SR (R), dated 31st December, 1957, in respect of S. 2, Chap. II,                 
ss. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 89 and 97, Chap. XXIII, ss. 485, 487, 488, 491, 500, 509, 513 and 515, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part IV.  
15th February, 1958, vide notification No. F. 20/3/58/SR (R), dated 11th February, 1958, in respect of S. 510, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part IV.  
7th April, 1958, vide notification No. F. 20/3/58/SR (R), dated 5th April, 1958, in respect of All t he provisions of the 
Act (other than those which have already been brought into force), see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part IV.  
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 2, for clause ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  19 (b) any other epidemic, endemic or infectious disease which the Commissioner may,  by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a dangerous disease for  the purposes of this Act;  
(10) “Delhi ” means the entire area of the Union territory of Delhi except  New Delhi and Delhi 
Cantonment;  
(11) “Delhi Cantonment ” means the area for the time being within the local  limits of the Delhi 
Cantonment Board;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2*   *   *   *  * 
3*   *   *   *  * 
4*                                     *    *   *  * 
(15) “drain ” includes a sewer, a house drain, a drain of any other  description, a tunnel, a culvert, a 
ditch, a channel and any other device for  carrying off sewage, offensive matter, polluted water,  waste 
water, rain water  or sub -soil water;  
5[(15A) “Election Commission ” means the Election  Commission of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi referred to in section 7.  
(15B) “Election Commissioner ” means the Election Commissioner of the  National Capital 
Territory of Delhi appointed by the Administrator under  section 7;]  
(16) “entertainment ” includes any exhibition, performance, amusement, game  or sport to which 
persons are ordinarily admitted on payment;  
(17) “factory ” means a factory as defined in the Factories Act, 1948 (63  of 1948);  
(18) “filth” includes offensive matter and sewage;  
6*   *   *   *  * 
7*   *   *   *  * 
(21) “goods ” includes animals;  
8[(21A) “Government ” means the Government of  the National Capital Territory of Delhi;]  
(22) “house -gully ” or “service passage ” means a passage or strip  of land constructed, set apart or 
utilised for the purpose of serving as or  carrying a drain or affording access to a latrine, urinal, 
cesspool or other  receptacle for filth or other polluted matter, by municipal employees or other  
persons employed in the cleansing thereof or in the removal of such matter  therefrom;  
(23) “hut” means any building which is constructed principally of wood,  bamboo, mud, leaves, 
grass, cloth or thatch and includes any structure of  whatever material made which the Corporation 
may declare to be a hut for the  purposes of this Act;  
(24) “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, things attached to the  earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth and rights  created by law over any street;  
(25) “licensed architect ”, “licensed draughtsman ”, “licensed engineer ”, “licensed plumber ”, 
“licensed  surveyor ” and “licensed town planner ” mean respectively a person  licensed under the 
provisions of this Act as an architect, draughtsman,  engineer, plumber, surveyor and town planner;  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
3. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4.  Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993)  
5. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
8. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   20 (26) “market ” includes any place where persons assemble for the sale of,  or for the purpose of 
exposing for sale, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables,  animals int ended for human food or any other articles 
of human food whatsoever,  with or without the consent of the owner of such place notwithstanding 
that there may be no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers and  whether or not 
any control is exercised over the business of, or the persons  frequenting, the market by the owner of 
the place or by any other person;  
(27) “member ” in relation to the Corporation means a councillor  1***; 
(28) “municipal authority ” means any of the municipal authorities  specified in section 44;  
(29) “municipal market ” means a market vested in or managed by the  Corporation;  
(30) “municipal slaughter house ” means a slaughter house vested in or  managed by the 
Corporation;  
2*  *   *   *   *  
(32) “New Delhi ” means the area within the boundaries described in the  First Schedule;  
(33) “nuisance ” includes any act, omission, place, animal or thing which  causes or is likely to 
cause injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense  of sight, smell, or hearing or disturbance to 
rest or sleep, or which is or may  be dangerous to life or injurious to health or property;  
(34) “occupier ” includes— 
(a) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the owner  the rent or any 
portion of the tent of the land or building in respect of which  such rent is paid or is payable;  
(b) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or building;  
(c) a rent free tenant of any land or building;  
(d) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and  
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and occupation of  any 
land or building;  
(35) “offensive matter ” includes animal carcases,  kitchen or stable refuse, dung, dirt and putrid or 
putrefying substances other  than sewage;  
(36) “Official Gazette ” means the Official Gazette of the Union Territory  of Delhi;  
(37) “owner ” includes a person who for the time being is receiving or is  entitled to receive, the 
rent of any land or building whether on his own  account or on account of himself  and others or as an 
agent, trustee, guardian  or receiver for any other person or who should so receive the rent or be  
entitled to receive it if the land or building or part thereof were let to a  tenant and also includes — 
(a) the custodian of evacuee prope rty in respect of evacuee property vested in him  under the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act 1950 (31 of 1950); and  
(b) the  estate officer to the Government of India, the Secretary of the Delhi  Development 
Authority, constituted under the Delhi Develo pment Act, 1957 (61 of  1957); the General 
Manager of a railway and the head of a Government  department, in respect of properties under 
their respective control;  
                                                 
1. The words “or an alderman thereof” omitted b y Act 67 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  21 (38) “premises ” means any land or building or part of a building and  includes— 
(a) the garden, ground and out -houses, if any, appertaining to a building or part  of a building; 
and 
(b) any fittings affixed to a building or part of a building for the more  beneficial enjoyment 
thereof;  
(39) “private street ” means any street,  which is not a public stree t and includes any passage 
securing access to two or  more places belonging to the same or different owners;  
(40) “private market ” means a market which is not a municipal market;  
(41) “private slaughter house ” means a slaughter house which is not a  municipal slaughter house;  
(42) “public place ” means any place which is open to the use and enjoyment  of the public, 
whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not;  
(43) “public securities ” means any securities of the Central Government or  a State Government or 
any securities guaranteed by the Central Government or a  State Government or any securities issued 
under this Act or any debentures  issued by the Bombay, Calcutta or Madras Municipal Corporation;  
(44) “public street ” means any street whi ch vests in the Corporation as a  public street or the soil 
below the surface of which vest in the Corporation or  which under the provisions of this Act 
becomes, or is declared to be, a public  street;  
(45) “railway administration ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian  Railway Act, 1890, (9 
of 1890);  
(46) “rate layer ” means a person liable to pay any rate, tax, cess or  licence fee under this Act;  
(47) “rateable value” means the value of any land or building fixed in accordanc e with the 
provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder for the purpose of assessment to property 
taxes;  
(48) “regulation ” means a regulation made  1[by the Corporation] under this Act, by notification in 
the Official Gazette;  
(49) “reside ”— 
(a) a person shall be deemed to “reside ” in any dwelling house which or  some portion of 
which he sometimes, although not uninterruptedly, uses as a  sleeping apartment, and  
(b) a person shall not be deemed to cease to “reside ” in any such dwelling  house merely 
because he is absent from it or has elsewhere another dwelling  house in which he resides, if there 
is the liberty of returning to it at any  time and no abandonment of the intention of returning to it;  
(50) “rubbish ” includes ashes, broken  bricks, broken gl ass, dust, malba , mortar and refuse of any 
kind which is not  filth;  
(51) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government under this Act, by  notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(52) “rural areas ” means the areas of Delhi which immediately before the  establishment of the 
Corporation are situated within the local limits of the  District Board of Delhi established under the 
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883,  (Punjab Act XX of 1883), but shall not include such portion 
thereof as may, by  virtue of a notifica tion under section 507, cease to be included in the rural  areas as 
herein defined;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  22 (53) “Scheduled Caste ” means any of the Scheduled Castes specified in Part  I of the Scheduled to 
the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories)  Order, 1951;  
(54) “sewage ” means night -soil and other contents of latrines, urinals,  cesspools or drains, and 
polluted water from sinks, bathrooms, stables, cattle  sheds and other like places, and includes trade 
effluents and discharges from  manufactories of all kinds;  
(55) “shed” means a slight or temporary structure for shade or shelter;  
(56) “slaughter house ” means any place ordinarily used for the slaughter  of animals for the 
purpose of selling the flesh thereof for human consumption;  
(57) “street ” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, gully,  passage, whether a 
thoroughfare or not and whether built upon or not, over  which the public have a right of way and also 
the roadways or footway over any  bridge or causeway;  
(58) “trade effluent ” means any liquid either with or without particles of  matter in suspension 
therein, which is wholly or in part produced in the course  of any trade or industry carried on at trade 
premises, and in relation to any  trade premises means any such liquid as afore said which is so 
produced in the  course of any trade or industry carried on at those premises, but does not  include 
domestic sewage;  
(59) “trade premises ” means any premises used or intended to be used for  carrying on any trade 
or industry;  
(60) “trade ref use” means the refuse of any trade or industry;  
(61) “urban areas ” means the areas of Delhi which are not rural areas;  
(62) “vehicle ” includes a carriage, cart, van, dray, truck, hand -cart, bicycle, tricycle, cycle -
rickshaw, auto -rickshaw, motor vehicle and every wheeled  conveyance which is used or is capable of 
being used on a street;  
(63) “ward ” means a municipal ward provided by order made under section 5  for the purpose of 
election of councillors;  
1[(63A) “Wards Committee ” means the Wards  Committee referred to in section 50;]  
(64) “water course ” includes any river, stream or channel whether natural  or artificial;  
2*   *   *  *   *  
(66) “workshop ” means any premises (including the precincts thereof) other  than a factory, 
wherein any industrial process is carried on;  
(67) “year” means a year commencing on the 1st day of April;  
1[(68) “Zone ” means a Zone referred to in section  3A.] 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act  67 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by s. 2 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  23 CHAPTER II  
THE CORPORATION  
Constitution of the Corporation  
3. Establishment of the Corporation .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be a Corporation charged with the 
Municipal Government of Delhi, to be known as the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body c orporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
1[(3) (a) The Corporation shall be composed  of the councillors;  
(b) the following persons shall be represented in the Corporation, namely: — 
(i) ten persons, who are not less than 25 years of age and who have special knowledge or 
experience in municipal administration, to be nominated by the Adminis trator:  
Provided that the persons nominated under this sub -clause shall not have the right to vote in the 
meetings of the Corporation;  
(ii) members of the House of the People representing constituencies which comprise wholly or 
partly the area of the Corpo ration and the members of the Council of States registered as electors 
within the area of the Corporation;  
(iii) as nearly as possible one -fifth of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi representing constituenci es which comprise wholly or partly the area of the 
Corporation to be nominated by the Speaker of that Legislative Assembly , by rotation every year:  
Provided that while nominating such members by rotation the Speaker shall ensure that as far as 
possible all  the members are given an opportunity of being represented in the Corporation at least 
once during the duration of the Corporation;  
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees, if any, Constituted under sections 39, 40 and 45, if they 
are not councillors.]  
(4) Councillors shall be chosen by direct election on the basis of adult suffrage from various wards 
into which Delhi shall be divided in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  2***. 
(5) The total number of councillors shall at the establishment of the C orporation be eighty :  
Provided that twelve out of the eighty seats of councillors shall be reserved for the members of the 
Scheduled Castes.  
3[(6) Upon the completion of each census after the establishment of the Corporation the number of 
seats shall be on the basis of the population of Delhi as ascertained at th at census and shall be determined 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette  and the number of seats to be reserved 
for the members of the Scheduled Castes shall, as nearly as may be, bear the same ratio to the total 
number of seats as the population of Scheduled Castes bears to the total population of Delhi:  
Provided that the total number of seats shall in no case be more than one hundred and thirty -four or 
less than eighty:  
Provided further that the determination of seats as aforesaid shall not affect the then composition of 
the Corporation until the expiry of the duration of the Corporation:  
Provided also that for the first election to the Corporation to be held immediately  after the 
commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993 the provisional population 
figures of Delhi as published in relation to 1991 census shall be deemed to be the population of Delhi as 
ascertained in that census:  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Certain words omitted by s. 3 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  24 Provided also that the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes may be allotted by rotation to different 
wards in such manner as the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct.]  
1[(7) Seats shall be reserved for women belonging to the Sche duled Castes, from among the seats  
reserved  for the Scheduled Castes, the number of such seats being determined by the Central Government 
by order published in the Official Gazette which shall not be less than one -third of the total number of 
seats reserve d for the Scheduled Castes.]  
2[(8) Seats shall be reserved for women, the number of such seats being determined by order 
published in Official Gazette by the Central Government which shall not be less than the one -third of total 
number of seats other than those reserved for the Scheduled Castes:  
Provided that such seats reserved for women shall be allotted by rotation to different wards in such 
manner as the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf.]  
3[3A. Di vision of Delhi into zones .—(1) Delhi shall be divided into the number of zones specified in 
column (1) of the Fourteenth Schedule and each zone shall be known by the name specified in column 2 
of that Schedule and each zone shall extend to the areas comprised in the wards specified against that 
zone in column 3 of the said Schedule.  
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Government, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, alter the names, increase or diminish t he area or any zone specified in 
column (3) of the Fourteenth Schedule.]  
4[4. Duration of the Corporation .—(1) The Corporation, unless sooner dissolved under section 490, 
shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no lo nger:  
(2) An election to constitute the Corporation shall be completed — 
(i) before the expiry of its duration specified in sub -section ( 1); 
(ii) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution :  
Provided that where the rema inder of the period for which the dissolved Corporation would have 
continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this sub -section for 
constituting the Corporation for such period.]  
Election of councillors and alder man 
5[5. Delimitation of wards .—6[(1) For the purposes of election of councillors, Delhi shall be divided 
into single -Member wards in such manner that the population of each of the wards shall, so for as 
practicable, be the same throughout Delhi.]  
(2) The Central Government shall, by order in th e Official Gazette, determine, — 
(a) the number of wards;  
(b) the extent of each ward;  7*** 
(c) the wards in which seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;]  
8[(d) The wards in which seats shall be reserved for women; and  
(e) The manner in which seats shall be rotated under sub -sections ( 6) and ( 8) of section 3.]  
5A. [Special provision as to delimitation, etc .]—Omitted by the Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Amendment Act  1993 (67 of 1993), s. 7 (w.e.f.  1-10-1993).  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 3, for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f 1-10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by s. 4,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid. for section 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
6.  Subs. by Act 55 of 1974,  s. 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
7. The word “and” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
8. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  25 6. Power to alter or amend delimitation orders .—The Corporation, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government may, from time to time by order in the Official Gazette, alter or amend any order 
made under section 5.  
1[2[7. Elections to the Corporation .—(1) The  superintendence, direction and control of the 
preparation of electoral rolls  for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Corporation shall be vested in  the 
Election Commission of the National Capital Territory of Delhi consisting  of an Election Commissioner 
to be appointed by the Administrator.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislative Assembly of the  National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, the conditions of service and tenure of  office of the Election Commissi oner shall be 
such as the Administrator may by  rules determine:  
Provided that the Election Commissioner shall not be  removed from office except in a like manner 
and on the like grounds as a Judge of  a High Court and the conditions of service of the Election 
Commissioner  shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
(3) The  Administrator shall, when so requested by the Election Commission make  available to that 
Commission such staff which the Administrator considers  necessary for disc harge of the functions 
conferred on the Election Commission  by sub -section ( 1).] 
7A. Electoral roll for every ward .—For every ward there shall be an electoral roll which shall be 
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made the reunder.]  
7B. Electoral registration officers .—(1) The electoral roll for each ward shall be prepared and 
revised by an electoral registration officer who shall be such officer of Government or the Corporation as  
3[the Election Commission may, in consultation with the Government ,] designate or nomin ate in this 
behalf.  
(2) To assist the electoral registration officer in the discharge of his functions under sub -section ( 1) 
the 4[Election Commission may employ such person s as it thinks fit].  
7C. Assis tant electoral registration officers .—(1) 5[The Election Commission] may appoint one or 
more persons as assistant electoral registration officer s to assist any electoral registration officer in the 
performance of his functions.  
(2) Every assistant electoral registration officer shall, subject to the control of the electoral 
registration officer, be competent to perform all or any of the functions of the electoral registration 
officer.  
7D. Registration of Electors .—The persons entitled to be registered as electors in the electoral roll 
of 6[an assembly constituency ] in Delhi as relates to the area comprised within a ward shall be entitled to 
be so registered in the electoral roll of that ward and the provisions in this behalf in  the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) shall apply to the registration of electors in the electoral roll of a ward 
as they apply to the registration of electors in the electoral roll of  6[an assembly constituency ]. 
Explanation —In this section, in sub -section ( 1) of section 7E and in clause ( ag) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31, the expression  6[an assembly constituency]  has the meaning assigned to it under the 
Representation of the  People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950).  
7E. Preparation and revi sion of electoral rolls .—(1) The electoral roll for each ward shall be 
prepared before each general election in such manner as may be prescribed by rules by reference to the 
qualifying date and shall come into force immediately upon its final publication i n accordance with  the 
rules made for the purpose : 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 5, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).   
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 8, for section 7 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid. for “Central Government may” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid, for “Director of Municipal Elections may employ such persons as he thinks fit ” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Subs. by s.  10, ibid. for “The Central Government” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993)  
6. Subs. by s. 11, ibid. for “a parliamentary constituency” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   26 Provided that if the  1[Election Commission ] is satisfied that, instead of preparing a fresh electoral roll 
of a ward before a general election, it would be sufficient to adopt the elec toral roll of  2[the assembly 
constituency ] for the time being in force as relates to the ward, it may, by order, for reasons to be 
specified therein, direct that the electoral roll of  2[the assembly constituency ] for the time being in force 
as relates to the ward shall, subje ct to any rules made for the purpose, be the electoral roll of the ward for 
the general election.  
(2) The electoral roll prepared or adopted, as the case may be, under subsection ( 1) shall— 
(a) unless otherwise directed by the  1[Election Commission ], for r easons to be recorded in 
writing, be revised in the manner prescribed by rules by reference to the qualifying date before each 
bye-election to fill a casual vacancy in a seat allotted to the ward; and  
(b) be revised in any year in the manner prescribed by rules by reference to the qualifying date if 
such revision has been directed by the  1[Election Commission ]: 
Provided that if the electoral roll is not revised as aforesaid, the validity or continued operation of the 
said electoral roll shall not thereby be  affected.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the  1[Election Commission ] may, at any 
time, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct a special revision of the electoral roll for any ward or 
part of a ward in such manner as it ma y think fit:  
Provided that the electoral roll for the ward as in force at the time of the issue of any such direction 
shall continue to be in force until the completion of the special revision so directed.  
Explanation :—In this section, the e xpression “qualifying date ” means such date as the  1[Election 
Commission ] may, by ord er, specify in this behalf.  
7F. Correction of entries in electoral roll .—If the electoral registration officer, on an application 
made to him or on his own motion, is satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit, that any entry in t he 
electoral roll for any ward — 
(a) is erroneous or defective in any particular; or  
(b) should be transposed to another place in the roll on the ground that the person concerned has 
changed his place of ord inary residence within such ward; or  
(c) should be deleted on the ground that the person concerned is dead or has ceased to be 
ordinarily resident within such ward or is otherwise not entitled to be registered in that the electoral 
registration officer sha ll, subject to such general or special directions, if any, as may be given by the  
3[Election Commission] in this behalf, amend, transpose or delete the entry:  
Provided that before taking any action on the ground specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or any  action 
under clause ( c) on the ground that the person concerned has ceased to be ordinarily resident within such 
ward or that he is otherwise not entitled to be registered in the electoral roll of such ward, the electoral 
registration officer shall give t he person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
the action proposed t o be taken in relation to him.  
7G. Inclusion of names in electoral roll .—(1) Any person whose name is not included in the 
electoral roll of a ward may apply to t he electoral registration officer for the inclusion of his name in that 
roll. 
(2) The electoral registration officer shall, if satisfied that the applicant is entitled to be registered in 
the electoral roll, direct his name to be included therein:  
Provided  that if the applicant is registered in the electoral roll of any other ward, the electoral 
registration officer shall inform the electoral registration officer of that other ward and that Officer shall, 
on receipt of the information, strike off the applic ant’s name from that roll.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 12, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid. for “a par liamentary constituency” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid. for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   27 (3) No amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry shall be made under section 7F and no 
direction for the inclusion of a name in the electoral roll of a ward shall be given under this section after 
the last date for making  nominations for an election in that ward and before t he completion of that 
election.  
7H. Appeal .—An appeal shall lie within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
to the  1[Election Commission] from any order of the electoral registration officer u nder section 7F or 
section 7G.  
7 I. Jurisdic tion of civil courts barred .—No civil court s hall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled to be 
registered in an electora l roll for a ward; or  
(b) to question the legality of any action taken by or under the authority of an electoral 
registration officer or of any decision given by the  2[Election Commission]. ] 
 8. Qualifications for councillorship .—A person shall not be qualified to be chosen as a council lor 
3[unless he has attained the age of  twenty -one years and his name] is registered as an elector i n the 
electoral roll for a ward : 
Provided that in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Cas tes, a person shall not be so qualified 
unless he is also a member of any of the said castes:  
4[Provided further that in the case of a seat reserved for woman, no person other than a woman shall 
be qualified to be chosen as a councillor.]  
9. Disqualificati ons for membership of Corporation .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being 
chosen as, and for being, a councillor,  5[***]— 
(a) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(c) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or 
is under any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;  
6[(d) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the pur poses of 
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;  
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi;]  
(f) if he holds any office of profit u nder the Corporation;  
(g) if he holds any office of profit under the Government  7[or Central Government];  
(h) if he is a licensed architect, draughtsman, engineer, plumber, surveyor or town planner or is a 
partner of a firm of which any such licensed person is also a partner;  
(i) if he is interested in any subsisting contract made with, or any work being done for, th e 
Corporation except as a share holder (other than a director) in an incorporated company or as a 
member of a cooperative society;  
(j) if h e is retained or employed in any professional capacity either personally or in the name of a 
firm of which he is a partner or with which he is engaged in a professional capacity, in connection 
with any cause or proceeding in which the Corporation or any of  the municipal authorities is 
interested or concerned;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 14, for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993 
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid. for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid. for “unless his name” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. The proviso ins. by s. 16 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words “or an alderman” omitted by s. 17 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 17 , ibid., for clauses ( d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Ins. by s. 17 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  28 (k) if he, having held any office under the Government, the Corporation or any other authority, 
has been dismissed for corruption or disloyalty to the State unless a period of four years has elapsed 
since his dismissal or the disqualification has been removed by the  1[Election Commission];  
(l) if he fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him, otherwise than as an agent, receiver, 
trustee or an executor, to the Corporation within three months afte r a notice in this behalf has been 
served upon him.  
 (2) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in sub -section ( 1)— 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(b) a person shall not be deemed to have incurred any disqualification under clause ( f) or                 
clause ( g) of that sub-section b y reason only of his receiving — 
(i) any pension; or  
(ii) any allowance or facility for serving as the Mayor or Deputy Mayor or as a 
councillor  3***; or 
4[(iii) any fee for attendance at meetings of any committee of the Corporation;]  
(c) a pers on shall not be deemed to have any interest in a contract or works such as is referred to 
in clause ( i) of that sub -section by reason only of his having a share o r interest in — 
(i) any lease, sale, exchange or purchase of immovable property or any agreement for the 
same; or  
(ii) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of money only; or  
(iii) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Corporation is 
inserted; or  
(iv) the sale to the Corporation  or to any municipal authority or any officer or other employee 
of the Corporation on behalf of the Corporation, of any article in which he regularly trades or the 
purchase from the Corporation or from any such authority, officer or other employee on behal f of 
the Corporation, of any article of a value in either case not exceed ing five thousand rupees in the  
aggregate in any year during the period of the contract or work; or  
(v) the letting out on hire to the Corporation or the hiring from the Corporation o f any article 
of a value not exceeding two thousand rupees in the aggregate in any year during the period of 
the contract or work; or  
5[(vi) any agreement or contract with the Corporation or any municipal authority for any 
goods or services which the Corpo ration may generally supply]  
(3) If a person sits or votes as a member of the Corporation when he knows that he is not qualified or 
that he is disqualified for such membership, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or 
votes to a pen alty of three hundred rupees to be recovered as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
10. Right to vote .—(1) Every person whose name is, for the time being, entered in the electoral roll 
for a ward shall be entitled to vote at the election of a councillor from that ward.  
6*   *   *   *   * 
11. General elections of council lors.—(1) A general election of councillors shall be held for the 
purpose of constituting the Corporation under section 3.  
7*   *   *   *   * 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 17, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by s. 17 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. The words “or an alderman” omitted by s. 17 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -clause ( vi) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Omitted by Act 42 of 1961, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961 ). 
7. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  29 (3) For the aforesaid purposes the  1[Election Commission] shall, by one or more notifications 
published in the Official Gazette; call upon all the wards to elect councillors in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made thereunder before such date or dates as may be 
speci fied in the notification or notifications : 
Provided that where in any ward a seat has been reserved for the Scheduled Castes, such notification 
or notifications shall specify that the person to fill that seat shall belong to one of the said castes:  
2[Provided further that where in any ward a seat has been reserved for woman, such notification or 
notifications shall specify that the person to fill that seat shall be a woman.]  
 12. Filling of casual vacancies in councillorship .—(1) When a casual vacancy  occurs in the office 
of a councillor the  3[Election Commission] shall, soon as may be after the occurrence of such vacancy and 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), by a notification in the Official Gazette, call upon the ward 
concerned to elect a  person for the purpose of filling the vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and the rules and orders made thereunder before such date as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that no election shall be held to fill a casual vacancy  occurring within  4[six months] prior to 
the holding of a general election under section 11.  
(2) If the vacancy be a vacancy in a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes the notification issued 
under sub -section ( 1) shall specify that the person to fill tha t seat shall belong to one of the Scheduled 
Castes.  
5[(3) If the vacancy be a vacancy in a seat reserved for women the notification issued under sub -
section ( 1) shall specify that the person to fill that seat shall be a woman.]  
13. [Election of aldermen. ]—Omitted by the Delhi Municipal Corporation Amendment                                
Act 1993 (67 of 1993), s. 20 (w.e.f.  1-10-1993).  
6[14. Publication of result of election .—The names of all persons elected as councillors shall, as far 
as may be, after each  election, be published by the Election Commission simultaneously in the Official 
Gazette.]  
Disputes regarding elections  
15. Election petitions .—(1) No election of a councillor 7*** shall be called in question except by an 
election petition presented to the court of the district judge of Delhi within fifteen days from the date of 
the publication of the result of the election under section 14.  
8[(2) An election petition calling in question any such election may be presented under any of the 
grounds specifi ed in section 17 by any candidate at such election, by any elector of the ward con cerned or 
by any councillor.]  
(3) A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition all the candidates at the election.  
(4) An election petition — 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies;  
(b) shall, with sufficient particulars, set forth the ground or grounds on which the election is 
called in question; and  
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manne r laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 18, for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 18 ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “four months” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for section 14 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. The words “or an alde rman” omitted by s. 22 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
8. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  30 16. Relief that may be claimed by the petitioner .—(1) A petitioner may claim — 
(a) a declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, and  
(b) in addition thereto, a further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly 
elected.  
(2) The expression “returned candidate ” means a candidate whose name has been published in the 
Official Gazette under section 14.  
17. Grounds for declaring elections to be void .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) if 
the court of th e district judge is of opinion — 
(a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified or was disqualified, to 
be chosen as a councillor 1*** under this Act, or  
(b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his agent or by any 
other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his agent, or  
(c) that any nomination paper has been improperly rejected, or  
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate , has been materially 
affected— 
(i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination, or  
(ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned cand idate by a person 
other than that candidate or his agent or a person acting with the consent of such candidate or 
agent, or  
(iii) by the improper acceptance or refusal of any vote or reception of any vote which is               
void, or  
(iv) by the non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or of any rules or orders made 
thereunder,  
the court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.  
(2) If in the opinion of the court, a returned candidate has been guilty by an agent of any  corrupt 
practi ce, but the court is satisfied — 
(a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate, and every such 
corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the consent of the candidate;  
(b) that the ca ndidate took all reasonable means for preventing the commission of corrupt 
practices at the election; and  
(c) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the 
candidate or any of his agents ; 
then the court may d ecide that the election of the returned candidate is not void.  
 18.  Procedure to be followed by the district judge .—The procedure provided in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in regard to suits shall be followed by the court of the district judge as far as 
it can be made applicable, in the trial and disposal of an election petition under this Act.  
 19.  Decision of the district judge .—(1) At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, the 
court of the dist rict judge shall make an order— 
(a) dismissing the election petition; or  
(b) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void; or  
(c) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void and the petitioner and 
any other candidates to  have been duly elected.  
                                                 
1. The words “or, as the case may be, as an alderman” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  31 (2) If any person who has filed an election petition has, in addition to calling in question the election 
of the returned candidate, claimed declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected 
and the court of the district judge is of opinion — 
(a) that in fact the petitioner or such other candidate received a majority of the valid votes, or  
(b) that but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate the petitioner or such other candidate 
would have obtained a majority of the valid votes,  
the court shall, after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void, declare the petitioner or 
such other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly elected.  
20. Procedure in case of equality of votes .—If during the trial of an election petition it appears that 
there is an equality of votes between any candidates at the election and that the addition of a vote would 
entitle any of those candidates to be declared elected, then, the court of the district judge  shall decide 
between them by lot and proceed as if the one on whom the lot falls had received an additional vote.  
21. Finality of decisions .—(1) An order of the court of the district judge on an election petition shall 
be final and conclusive.  
(2) An election of a councillor  1*** not called in question in accordance with the foregoing provisions 
shall be deemed to be a good and valid election.  
Corrupt practices and electoral offences  
22. Corrupt practices. —The following shall be deemed to be corrupt pr actices  for the purposes of 
this Act:— 
(1) Bribery as defined in clause ( 1) of section 123 of the Representation of the People                       
Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).  
(2) Undue influence as defined in clause ( 2) of the said section.  
(3) The systemati c appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person, to vote or refrain 
from voting on grounds of caste, race, community or religion or the use of or appeal to, religious 
symbols or, the use of or appeal to, national symbols such as the national fl ag or the national emblem, 
for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election.  
(4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person of any statement of fact 
which is false, and which he either believes to be false or does n ot believe to be true in relation to the 
personal character or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature, or withdrawal from 
contest of any candidate being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that 
candidate's e lection.  
(5) The hiring or procuring whether on payment or otherwise of any vehicle or vessel by a 
candidate or his agent or by any other person for the conveyance of any elector (other than the 
candidate himself, and the members of his family or his agent ) to or from any polling station provided 
in accordance with the rules made under this Act:  
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at their joint 
costs for the pu rpose of conveying him or them to or from any su ch polling station shall not be 
deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel 
not propelled by mechanical power:  
Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tra m car or railway 
carriage by an elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such polling 
station shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause.  
Explanation —In this clause the expression "vehicle" means any vehicle used or capable of being 
used for the purpose of road transport whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and 
whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise.  
                                                 
1.  The words “or an alderman” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  32 (6) The holding of any meeting in which intoxicating liquors are served.  
(7) The issuing of any circular, placard or poster having a reference to the election which does not 
bear the name and address of the printer and publisher thereof.  
(8) Any other practice which the Central Government may by rules specify to be a corrupt 
practice. 
 23. Maintenance of secrecy of voting .—(1) Every officer or clerk, agent or other person who 
performs any duty in connection with the recording or counting of votes at an election shall maintain and 
aid in maintaining the secrecy of the voting and sh all not (except for some purpose authorised by or under 
any law) communicate to any person any information calculated to violate such secrecy.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term  which may extend to three months or with fine, or with both.  
24. Officers, etc., at elections not to act for candidates or to influence voting .—(1) No person who 
is a returning officer, or an assistant returning officer or a presiding officer or polling o fficer at an 
election, or an officer or clerk appointed by the returning officer or the presiding officer to perform any 
duty in connection with an election or a member of a police force shall in the conduct or management of 
the election do any act (other than the giving of votes) for the furtherance of the prospects of the election 
of a candidate.  
(2) No such person as  aforesaid shall endeavour — 
(a) to persuade any person to give his vote at an election; or  
(b) to dissuade any person from giving his vote a t an election; or  
(c) to influence the voting of any person at an election in any manner.  
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, o r with fine, or with both.  
25. Prohibition of canvassing in or near polling station and of public meeting on election                
day.—(1) No person shall, on the date or dates on which the poll is taken at any polling station, commit 
any of the following acts within the polling station or in any public or private place within a distance of 
one hundred yards of the polling statio n, namely: — 
(a) canvassing for votes; or  
(b) soliciting the vote of any elector; or  
(c) persuading any elector not to vo te for any particular candidate; or  
(d) persuading any elector not to vote at the election; or  
(e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an official notice) relating to the election.  
(2) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public meeting within  any ward on the date or dates 
on which a poll is taken for an election in that ward.  
(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.  
(4) An offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable.  
26. Penalty for disorderly conduct in or near polling station .—(1) No person shall, on the date or 
dates on which a poll i s taken at any polling station — 
(a) use or operate within or at the entrance of the polling station or in any public or private place 
in the neighbourhood thereof any apparatus for amplifying or reproducing the human voice, such as a 
megaphone or a loud -speaker; or  
(b) shout or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, within or at the entrance of the polling station 
or in any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof;  
so as to cause annoyance to any person visiting the polling station for the poll, or so as to interfere with 
the work of the officer and other persons  on duty at the polling station.  33 (2) Any person who contravenes or wilfully aids or abets the contravention of the provisions of sub -
section ( 1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine, or with both.  
(3) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or 
has committed an offence punishable under this section, he may direct any police officer to arrest such 
person, and thereupon the police officer shall  arrest him.  
(4) Any police officer may take such step and use such force, as may be reasonably necessary for 
preventing any contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), and may seize any apparatus used for 
such contravention.  
(5) An offence punisha ble under this section shall be cognizable,  
27. Penalty for misconduct at the polling station .—(1) Any person who during the hours fixed for 
the poll at any polling station, misconducts himself or fails to obey the lawful directions of the presiding 
officer, may be removed from the polling station by the presiding officer or by any police officer on duty 
or by any person authorised in this behalf by such presiding officer.  
(2) The powers conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall not be exercised so as to pre vent any elector who is 
otherwise entitled to vote at a polling station from having an opportunity of voting at that station.  
(3) If any person who has been so removed from a polling station, re -enters the polling station 
without the permission of the pres iding officer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 3) shall be cognizable.  
 28. Breaches of official duty in connection with election .—(1) If any person to whom this section 
applies, is without reasonable cause guilty of any act or omission in breach of his official duty, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shal l lie against any such person for damages in respect of any 
such act or omission as aforesaid.  
(3) The persons to whom this section applies are returning officers, assistant returning officers, 
presiding officers, polling officers and any other person appo inted to perform any duty in connection with 
the election; and the expression “official duty ” shall for the purposes of this section be construed 
accordingly.  
29. Removal of ballot papers  from polling station to be an offence .—(1) Any person who at an 
election fraudulently takes or attempts to take a ballot paper  out of a polling station, or wilfully aids or 
abets the doing of any such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to fi ve hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or 
has committed an offence punishable under sub -section ( 1), such officer may, before such person leaves 
the polling sta tion, arrest or direct a police officer to arrest such person and may search such person or 
cause him to be searched by a police officer:  
Provided that when it is necessary to cause a women to be searched, the search shall be made by 
another woman with str ict regard to decency.  
(3) Any ballot paper found upon the person arrested on search1[or a ballot box or a voting machine or 
part thereof found being carried a way by a person outside the polling station] shall be made over for safe 
custody to a police officer by the presiding officer or when the search is made by a police officer, shall be 
kept by such officer in safe custody.  
(4) An offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  34 30. Other offences and penalties therefor .—(1) A person shall be guilty of an electoral  offence if at 
any election he — 
(a) fraudulently defaces or destroys any nomination paper; or  
(b) fraudulently defaces, destroys or removes any list, notice or other document affixed by or 
under the authority of the returning officer; or  
(c) fraudulently defaces or destroys any ballot paper or the official mark on any ballot paper; or  
(d) without due authority supplies any ballot paper  to any person or receives any ballot paper 
from any person or is in possession of any ballot paper; or  
(e) fraudulently puts into any ballot box anything other than the ballot paper which he is 
authorised by law to put in; or  
(f) without due authority des troys, takes, opens or otherwise interferes with any ballot box or 
ballot paper then in use for the purposes of the election; or  
(g) fraudulently or without due authority, as the case may be, attempts to do any of the foregoing 
acts or wilfully aids or abe ts the doing of any such acts.  
(2) Any person guilty of an offence under this section s hall— 
(a) if he is a returning officer or an assistant returning officer or a presiding officer or a polling 
officer or any other officer or clerk employed on official d uty in connection with the election, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both;  
(b) if he is any other person, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be on official duty if his duty is to 
take part in the conduct of any election or part of an election including the counting of votes or to be 
responsible after an electi on for the used ballot papers and other documents in connection with such 
election.  
(4) An offence punishable under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) shall be cognizable.  
(5) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 24, or under section 28, or under 
clause (a) of sub -section ( 2) of this section unless there is a complaint made by order of, or under 
authority from, the  1[Election Commission].  
Power to make rules  
31. Power to make rules regulating the election of councillors and aldermen. —(1) The Central 
Government may make rules to provide for or regulate all or any of the following matters  2[for the 
purpose of preparation, revision, and maintenance of electoral rolls of wards and holding elections] of 
councillors  3*** under this Act, namely: — 
4[(a) the particulars to be entered in the electoral rolls;  
(aa) the preliminary publication of electoral rolls;  
(ab) the manner in which and the time within which claims and objections as to entries in 
electoral rolls may be preferred;  
(ac) the manner in  which notices of claims or objections shall be published;  
(ad) the place, date and time at which claims or objections shall be heard and the manner in 
which claims or objections shall be heard and disposed of;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 25, for “Director of Municipal Elections” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 7, for “for the purpose of holding elections” ( w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
3. The words “and alderman” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 7, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  35 (ae) the final publication of electoral rolls ; 
(af) the revision and correction of electoral rolls and inclusion of names therein;  
(ag) the manner in which and the purpose for which the electoral roll of  1[an assembly 
constituency] may be used;  
(ah) the correction of electoral rolls on change of extent or boundaries of wards;]  
(b) the appointment of returning officer s, assistant returning officers, presiding officers and 
polling officers for the conduct of elections;  
(c) the nomination of candidates, form of nomination papers, objections to nomina tion and 
scrutiny of nominations;  
(d) the deposits to be made by candidates, time and manner of making such deposits and the 
circumstances under which such deposits may be returned to candidates or forfeited to the 
Corporation;  
(e) the withdrawal of candid atures;  
(f) the appointment of agents of candidates;  
(g) the procedure in contested and uncontested elections and the special procedure at elections in 
wards where any seat is reserved for the Scheduled Castes  2[and women];  
(h) the date, time and place for  poll and other matters relating to the conduct of elections 
including — 
(i) the appointment of polling stations for each ward,  
(ii) the hours during which the polling station shall be kept open for the casting of votes,  
(iii) the printing and issue of ballot papers,  
(iv) the checking of voters by reference to the electoral roll,  
(v) the marking with indelible ink of the left forefinger or any other finger or limb of the voter 
and prohibition of the delivery of any ballot paper to any person if at the ti me such person applies 
for such paper he has already such mark so as to prevent personation of voters,  
(vi) the manner in which votes are to be given and in particular in the case of illiterate voters 
or of voters under physical or other disability,  
(vii) the procedure to be followed in respect of challenged votes and tendered votes,  
(viii) the scrutiny of votes, counting of votes, the declaration of the results and the procedure 
in case of equality of votes or in the event of a councillor being elected to represent more than 
one ward,  
(ix) the custody and disposal of papers relating to elections,  
(x) the suspension of polls in case of any interruption by riot, violence or any other sufficient 
cause and the holding of a fresh poll,  
(xi) the holding of a fresh poll in the case of destruction of or tampering with ballot boxes 
before the count,  
(xii) the countermanding of the poll in the case of the death of a candidate before the poll;  
3[(hh) the requisitioning of premises, vehicles, vessels or animals, pay ment of compensation in 
connection with such requisitioning, eviction from requisitioned premises and release of premises 
from requisition;]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 26, for “a parliamentary constituency” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993). 
2. Ins. by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  36 1*   *   *   *  * 
(j) the fee to be paid on an election petition;  
(k) any other matter  2[relating to electoral roll s or elections] or election disputes in respect of 
which the Central Government deems it necessary to make rules under this section or in respect of 
which this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opinion of 
the C entral Government necessary.  
(2) In making any rule under this section the Central Government may provide that any contravention 
thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
Councillors and aldermen  
3[32. Oath or affirmation .—(1) Every councillor and every person nominated under sub -clause ( i) of 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3, before taking his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the 
Corporation an oath or affirmation according to the following fo rm, namely: — 
“I, A. B. having been                    nominated under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) of  
                                                                       nominated under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 3 as representative in                  
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, do  swear in the name of God that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           solemnly affirm 
Constitution of India as by law estab lished and I will faithfully discharge the duty upon  which I am about 
to enter.”  
(2) If a person sits or votes as a councillor or sits as a representative before he has complied with the 
requirements of sub -section ( 1) he shall be liable in respect of each  day on which he sits or votes as the 
case may be, to a penalty of three hundred rupees  to be recovered as arrears of tax under this Act.]  
4[32A. Declaration of assets .—(1) Every councillor shall, not later than thirty days after making and 
subscribing the  oath or affirmation under sub -section ( 1) of section 32 and before the last day of the same 
month in each succeeding year, file with the Mayor a declaration in such form as may be prescribed by 
rules by the Central Government, of all the assets owned by h im and members of his family and. such 
declaration shall form part of the records of the Corporation.  
Explanation —For the purposes of this sub -section, “family ” means the spouse and depend ant 
children of the councillor.  
(2) A person shall be disqu alified f or being a councillor — 
(a) if he fails to file a declaration referred to in sub -section ( 1); or 
(b) if he files a declaration under that sub -section which is either false or which he  knows or 
believes to be false.  
32B.  Vacation of seats in case of multiple  membership .—No councillor shall be a member both of 
the Corporation and Parliament or the Legislative Assembly and if a person is so chosen, then at the 
expiration of fourteen days from the date of the publication in the Gazette of India, or as the case m ay be, 
in the Official Gazette, whichever is later that he has been so chosen, that person ’s seat in Parliament or 
the Legislative Assembly shall become vacant unless he has previously resigned his seat in the 
Corporation.]  
33. Vacation of seats .—(1) If a councillor  5***— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in  6[section 9 or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 32A or] , 
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 7, for “relating to elections” (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 27, for section 32 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Ins. by s. 28 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words “or an alderman” omitted by s. 29 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
6. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “section 9 or” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  37 (b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Mayor and delivered to the 
Commissioner, his seat shall the reupon become vacant.  
(2) If during three successive months, a councillor  1*** is, without permission of the Corporation, 
absent from all the meetings thereof, the Corporation may declare his seat vacant.  
2[(3) If any question arises as to whether a councillor 1*** has become subject to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in section 9 or sub -section ( 2) of section 32A , the question shall be referred 
for the decision of the Administrator and his decision shal l be final.]  
3[(4) Before giving any decision on any such question the Administrator shall obtain the opinion of 
the Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]  
4[33A. Powers of Election Commission .—(1) Where in connection with the tendering of any 
opinion to the Administrator under sub -section ( 4) of section 33, the Election Commission considers it 
necessary or proper to make an inquiry, and the Commission is satisfied that on the basis of the affidavits 
filed and the documents prod uced in such inquiry by the parties concerned of their own accord, it cannot 
come to a decisive opinion on the matter which is being inquired into, the Commission shall have, for the 
purposes of such inquiry, the powers of a civil court, while trying a sui t under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other mat erial object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or a copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) The Commission shall also  have the power to require any person, subject to any privilege which 
may be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such 
points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or releva nt to, the subject -matter 
of the inquiry.  
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any such offence, as is described in 
section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), is 
commi tted in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commission may, after recording the facts 
constituting the offence and the statement of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), forward the case to a magistrate ha ving jurisdiction to try the same and the 
magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as 
if the case had been forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  
(4) Any proc eeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
 33B. Statements made by persons to the Election Commission .—No statement made by a person 
in the course of giving evidence before the Election Commission shall subject him to, or be used against 
him in, any civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:  
Provided that the statement — 
(a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by the Commission to answer; or  
(b) is relevant to the subject -matter of the inquiry.  
                                                 
1. The words “or an alderman” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 29 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).    
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 29, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by s. 29,  ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   38 33C.  Procedure to be followed by the Election Commission .—The Election Commission shall 
have the power to regulate its own proced ure (including the fixing of places and times of its sittings and 
deciding whether to sit in public or in private).  
33D.  Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Commission or any perso n acting under the direction of the Commission in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the foregoing provisions of 
sections 33A to 33C or of any order made thereunder or in respect of the tendering of any o pinion by the 
Commission to the Administrator or in respect of the publication, by or under the authority of the 
Commission of any such opinion, paper or proceedings.]  
34. Payment of allowances to  coun cillors  and aldermen .— 1[The councillors and  the persons 
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] shall be entitled to receive allowances for 
attendance at meetings of the Corporation and of any of its committees at such rate as may be determined 
by rules made in this behalf.  
Mayor  and Deputy Mayor  
35. Annual election of Mayor and Deputy Mayor. —(1) The Corporation shall at its first meeting in 
each year elect one of its members to be  2[the Chairperson to be known as] the Mayor and another 
member to be the Deputy Mayor of the Corpor ation : 
3[Provided  that during the duration of the Corporation the office of the Mayor shall be reserved in 
favour of a member who is a woman for the first year of the Corporation and in favour of a member 
belonging to a Scheduled Caste for the third year o f the Corporation.]  
(2) On the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor, the 
Corporation shall within one month of the occurrence of such vacancy elect one of its members as Mayor 
or Deputy Mayor, as the case may be.  
3[(3) If the vacancy be a casual vacancy in the office of the Mayor and is reserved for woman or for 
Scheduled Castes, the vacancy shall be filled by electing one of the councillors from amongst women or a 
member of the Scheduled Castes as the case may be.]  
36. Term of office of the Mayor and Deputy Mayor and facilities and privileges of the    
Mayor .—(1) The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor shall hold office from the time of his election until the 
election of his successor in office, unless in the meantime he resigns his office as Mayor or Deputy Mayor  
4*** or unless in the case of the Deputy Mayor he is elected as Mayor.  
(2) The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor may be given such facilities in respect of residential 
accommodation, conveyance and the like as may be determined in each case by rules made in this behalf.  
(3) The Mayor shall have full access to all the records of the Corporation and may obtain reports — 
5*** from the Commissioner on any matter connected with the municipal government of Delhi;  
6*   *   *  *   * 
 37. Discharge of functions of the Mayor by the Deputy Mayor .—(1) When the office of the 
Mayor is vacant, the Deputy Mayor shall act as Mayor until a new Mayor is elected.  
(2) When the Mayor is absent from his duty on account of illness or any other cause, the  powers, 
duties and functions of the Mayor shall be exercised and performed by the Deputy Mayor.  
(3) The Mayor may by order in writing delegate any of his powers, duties and functions to the Deputy 
Mayor.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 31, for “the councillors and the alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Added by s. 32 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by s. 32 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. The words “or his term of office as a member of the Corporation term inates in any manner” omitted by s. 33 , ibid.                
(w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The  brackets and letter “(a)” omitted by s. 33 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Omitted by s. 33 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  39 38. Resignation of Mayor and Deputy Mayor .—(1) The Mayor may, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Deputy Mayor and delivered to the  1[Municipal  Secretary ], resign his office.  
(2) The Deputy Mayor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Mayor and delivered to the  
1[Municipal S ecretary ], resign his office.  
(3) A resignation under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall take effect from the date on which it is 
delivered.  
Committees of the Corporation  
39. Rural Areas Committee and Education Committee .—(1) In addition to the Standing 
Committee,  2[and the Wards Committee] referred to in section 44, there shall be a Rural Areas Committee 
and an Education Committee of the Corporation,  
(2) The Rural Areas Committee shall consist of all the councillors elected from the wards situated 
within  the rural areas.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Rural Areas Commit tee— 
(a) to make reco mmendations to the Corporation — 
(i) in relation to the functions of the Corporation which may be discharged within the rural 
areas and questions of policy and schemes relating to the development of such areas;  
(ii) in relation to taxes which the Corporation proposes to levy in the rural areas; and  
(iii) generally in relation to the expenditure that may be incurred by the Corporation for the 
municipal government in those  areas;  
(b) to review the progress of work of the Corporation in the rural areas;  
(c) to bring to the notice of the appropriate municipal authorities deficiencies in the rural areas 
and make proposals to those authorities for the removal of such deficienci es; 
(d) to discharge such other functions in relation to the rural areas as may be assigned to it by 
resolution made by the Corporation or by regulations made under this Act.  
(4) The Corporation or any of the municipal authorities specified in section 44 s hall not take any 
action, in relation to any of the matters specified in sub -clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii) of clause ( a) of                    
sub-section ( 3) except in consultation with the Rural Areas Committee.  
(5) The Education Committee shall consist of  seven members of whom such number not exceeding 
three as may be determined by the Corporation, shall be nominated by the Corporation, from among 
experts in education who are not members of the Corporation and the rest shall be elected by the members 
of th e corporation from among themselves at the first meeting of the Corporation after each general 
election or as soon as possible at any other meeting subsequent thereto.  
(6) The Education Committee shall exercise and perform such powers, duties and functions  in 
relation to education in Delhi as may be determined by regulations made in this behalf.  
(7) The Rural Areas Committee as well as the Education Committee shall at its first meeting in each 
year elect one of its members  3[who is a councillor to be the Ch airman and another member to be the 
Deputy Chairman].  
 40. Special and ad hoc committies and ward committees, etc. —(1) The Corporation may 
constitute as many special and ad hoc committees as it thinks fit for the exercise of any power or 
discharge of any function which the Corporation may by resolution delegate to them or for inquiring into, 
reporting or advising upon any matter which the Corporation may refer to them.  
(2) Any such committee shall consist of members of the Corporation only:  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 6, for “Secretary” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “to be the Chairman and another member to be the Deputy Chairman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  40 Provided that an ad hoc committee may with the sanction of the Corporation co -opt not more than 
three persons who are not members of the Corporation but who in the opinion of the Corporation possess 
special qualifications for serving on such committee.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(6) Each committee constituted under this section shall elect one of its members  2[who is a councillor] 
as the Chairman and another member as the Vice -Chairman.  
(7) Any matter relating to each of the committees constituted under section 39 or this section, not 
expressly provided in this Act may be provided by r egulations made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE CORPORATION  
41. General powers of the Corporation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, 
regulations and  bye-laws made thereunder the municipal government of Delhi shall vest in the 
Corporation.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), it shall be the duty of the 
Corporation to consider all periodical statements of the re ceipts and disbursements and all progress 
reports and pass such resolutions thereon as it thinks fit.  
42. Obligatory functions of the Corporation .—3[Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other 
law for the time being in force, it shall be incumbent]  on the Corporation to make adequate provision by 
any means or measures which it may lawfully use or take, for each of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage works and of public 
latrines, urin als and similar conveniences;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(c) the scavenging, removal and disposal of filth, rubbish and other obnoxious or polluted 
matters;  
5*   *   *   *  * 
(e) the reclamation of unhealthy localities, the removal of noxious vegetation and generally the 
abatement of all nuisances;  
(f) the regulation of places for the disposal of the dead and the provision and maintenance of 
places for the said purpose;  
(g) the registration of births and deaths;  
(h) public vaccination and inoculation;  
(i) mea sures for preventing and checking the spread of dangerous diseases;  
(j) the establishment and maintenance of  6*** dispensaries and maternity and child welfare 
centres and the carrying out of other measures necessary for public medical relief;  
7[(jj)) the m aintenance including the expansion and upgradation of facilities of the hospitals 
existing on the date of the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 
1993  (67 of 1993) ;] 
(k) the construction and maintenance of municipal markets and  slaughter houses and the 
regulation of al l markets and slaughter houses; . 
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 35 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 36,  ibid., for “It shall be incumbent” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Omitted by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Omitted by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. The word “hospitals” omitted by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Ins. by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  41 (l) the regulation and abatement of offensive or dangerous trades or practices;  
(m) the securing or removal of dangerous buildings and places;  
(n) the construction, maintenance, alt eration and improvements of public streets, bridges, 
culverts, causeways and the like;  
(o) the lighting, watering and cleansing of public streets and other public places;  
(p) the removal of obstructions and projections in or upon streets, bridges and other  public places;  
(q) the naming and numbering of streets and premises;  
(r) the establishment, maintenance of, and aid to, schools for primary education subject to such 
grants as may be determined by the Central Government from time to time;  
(s) the maintenance of municipal offices;  
(t) the laying out or the maintenance of public parks, gardens or recreation grounds;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(v) the maintenance of monuments and memorials vested in any local authority in Delhi 
immediately before the commencem ent of this Act or which may be vested in the Corporation after 
such commencement;  
(w) the maintenance and development of the value of all properties vested in or entrusted to the 
management of the Corporation; and  
2[(wa) the preparation of plans for econo mic development and social justice.]  
(x) the fulfilment of any other obligation imposed by or under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force.  
 43. Discretionary functions of the Corporation .—3[Subject to any general or special order of the  
Government, from time to time, the Corporation may] provide either wholly or in  part for all or any of the 
following ma tters, namely: — 
(a) the furtherance of education including cultural  and physical education, by measures other than 
the establishment and  maintenance of and aid to, schools for primary education;  
(b) the establishment and maintenance of, and aid to, libraries, museums, art  galleries, botanical 
or zoological collections;  
(c) the establishment and maintenance of, and aid to, stadia, gymnasia, a kharas and  places for 
sports and games;  
(d) the planting and care of trees on roadsides and elsewhere;  
(e) the surveys of buildings and lands;  
(f) the registration of marriages;  
(g) the taking of a census of population;  
(h) the civic reception to persons  of distinction;  
(i) the providing of music or other entertainments in public places or places of  public resort and 
the establishment of theatres and cinemas;  
(j) the organisation and management of fairs and exhibitions;  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 36 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 36 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “The Corporation may in its discretion” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  42 (k) the acquisition of movable or immovable property for any of the purposes before  mentioned, 
including payment of the cost of investigations, surveys or  examinations in relation thereto for the 
construction or adaptation of  buildings necessary for such purposes;  
(l) the c onstruction and maintenance of — 
(i) rest-houses,  
(ii) poor houses,  
(iii) infirmaries,  
(iv) children's homes,  
(v) houses for the deaf and dumb and for disabled and handicapped children,  
(vi) shelters for destitute and disabled persons,  
(vii) asylums for persons of unsound mind;  
(m) the construction and maintenance of cattle pounds;  
(n) the building or purchase and maintenance of dwelling houses for municipal  officers and other 
municipal employees;  
(o) any measures for the welfare of the  municipal officers and other municipa l employees or any 
class of them including  the sanctioning of loans to such officers and employees or any class of them  
for construction of houses and purchase of vehicles;  
(p) the organisation or management of chemical or bacteriological laboratories for  the 
examination or analysis of water, food and drugs for the detection of  diseases or research connected 
with public health or medical relief;  
(q) the provision for relief to destitute and disabled persons;  
(r) the establishment and maintenance of veterinary hospitals;  
(s) the organisation, construction, maintenance and management of swimming pool, public  wash 
houses, bathing places and other institutions designed for the improvement  of public health;  
(t) the organisation and management of farms and  dairies within or without Delhi  for the supply, 
distribution and processing of milk and milk products for the  benefit of the residents of Delhi;  
(u) the organisation and management of cottage industries, handicraft centres and  sales emporia;  
(v) the construction and maintenance of warehouses and godowns;  
(w) the construction and maintenance of garages, sheds and stands for vehicles and  cattle biers;  
(x) the provision for unfiltered water supply;  
(y) the improvement of Delhi in accordance with improvement schemes approved by the  
Corporation;  
(z) the provision of housing accommodation for the inhabitants of any area or for  any class of 
inhabitants; and  
(za) any measure not hereinbefore specifically mentioned, likely to promote public  safety, heal th, 
convenience or general welfare.  
CHAPTER IV  
MUNICIPAL  AUTHORITIES  UNDER THE CORPORATION  
Municipal authorities  
1[44. Enumeration of municipal authorities .—For the efficient performance of its functions, there 
shall be the following municipal authorities under the Corporation, namely: — 
(a) the Standing Committee;  
(b) the Wards Committee; and  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 38, for section 44 (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  43 (c) the Commissioner.]  
The Standing Committee  
45. Constitution of the Standing Committee .—1[(1) The Stand ing Committee shall consist of — 
(i) six members elected by the  councillors from among themselves at the first meeting of the 
Corporation;  
(ii) one member each elected by the members of each Wards Committee from among themselves 
at the first meeting of the Wards Committee;  
after each general election or as soon as possible at any other meeting subsequent thereto.]  
(2) On and  2[from such date as may be determined by the Corporation by resolution] the Standing 
Committee shall be deemed to have been constituted.  
3[(3) One -half of the members referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) and one -half of the members 
referred to in clause ( ii) of that sub -section shall retire on the expiration of one year from the date of the 
constitution of the Standing Committee after the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 1993  (27 of 1993) , and for that purpose they shall be selected by lot from amongst 
their respective categories before the said expiration in such manner as the Chairman of the Standing 
Committee may determine;]  
(4) During each succeeding yea r the members who have been longest in office shall retire therefrom:  
Provided that in the case of a member who has been re -elected the term of his office shall for the 
purpose of this sub -section be computed from the date of his re -election.  
4[(5) The Cor poration or the concerned Wards Committee as the case may be, shall in a meeting held 
immediately before the occurrence of the vacancies caused by the retirement of the members under             
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), elect the requisite member  or members from amongst the councillors or 
from amongst members of the Wards Committee, as the case may be, to fill up those vacancies.]  
(6) Any councillor  5*** who ceases to be a member of the Standing Committee shall be eligible for 
re-election.  
46. Casual vacancies .—(1) When a casual vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Standing 
Committee,  6[Corporation  or, as the case may be, Wards Committee shall] fill up the vacancy, as soon as 
may be after, and in any case within one month of , the occ urrence of the vacancy, by the election of 
another councillor or  7[persons referred to in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3].  
(2) A member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall be elected to serve for the remainder of his 
predecessor ’s term of office  
47. Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee .—(1) The Standing Committee 
shall at its first meeting in each year elect one of its members  8[who is  a councillor] to be the Chairman 
and another member to be the Depu ty Chairman.  
(2) The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee shall hold office from the date 
of his election until the election of his successor in office unless in the meantime he resigns his office as 
Chairman or Deputy Chairman or his term of office as member of the Standing Committee is in any 
manner determined or unless in the case of the Deputy Chairman he is elected as Chairman.  
(3) On the occurrence of any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman, 
the Sta nding Committee shall within one month of the occurrence of such vacancy elect one of its 
members  8[who is a councillor ] as Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, and the Chairman 
or the Deputy Chairman so elected shall hold office for th e remainder of his predec essor’ s term.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 39, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for “from the date of such election” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words “or alderman” omitted by s. 39 , ibid. (w.e.f . 1-10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 40,  ibid., for “Corporation shall” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Subs. by s. 40,  ibid., for “alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
8. Ins. by s. 41 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993). 44 48. Resignation of Chairman and members of the Standing Committee .—(1) Any member of the 
Standing Committee may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman; and the 
Chairman may resign his offi ce by writing under his hand addressed to the Mayor.  
(2) A resignation under sub -section ( 1) shall take effect from the date specified for the purpose in the 
writing referred to in that sub -section, or if no such date is specified, from the date of its rec eipt by the 
Chairman or the Mayor, as the case may be.  
49. Functions of the Standing Committee .—The Standing Committee shall exercise such powers 
and perform such functions as are specifically conferred or imposed upon it by or under this Act.  
1[The Wards Committee  
50. Constitution of the Wards Committee. —(1) For each Zone shall be a Wards Com mittee which 
shall consist of, — 
(a) all the councillors elected from the wards comprised in that Zone; and  
(b) the person, if any, nominated by the Administrator under  sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 3) of section 3 if his name is registered as an elector within the territorial limits of the 
Zone concerned.  
(2) The Wards Committee shall be deemed to have been constituted from the date on which t he 
Corporation is constituted after each general election.  
51. Application of sections 47 and 48 .—The provisions of sections 47 and 48 shall apply in relation 
to a Wards Committee as they apply in relation to the Standing Committee.  
52. Powers and functions of the Wards Committee .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
every Wards Committee shall exercise the powers and perform the functions as specified in the Fifteenth 
Schedule on behalf of the Corporation in relation to that Zone.  
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Fifteenth Schedule.  
(3) When any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of a Wards Committee 
or the Corpo ration, it shall be referred to the Government, and the decision of that Government thereon 
shall be final.]  
The Commissioner  
54. Appointment, etc., of the Commissioner. —(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint a suitable person as the Commissioner of the Corporation.  
(2) The Commissioner so appointed shall hold office for a term of five years in the first instance:  
Provided that his appointed may be renewed from time to time for a term not exceeding one year at a 
time:  
Provided further that where the Commissioner holds a lien on any service under the Government, the 
Central Government may  at any time after reasonable notice to the Corporation replace his services at the 
disposal of that Government.  
(3) The Central Government — 
(a) shall remove the Commissioner from office if at a special meeting of the Corporation called 
for the purpose a resolution for such removal has been passed by a majority of not less than three -
fifths of the total number of members;  
(b) may re move the Commissioner from office at any time if it appears, to that Government that 
he is incapable of performing the duties of his office or has been guilty of neglect or misconduct in 
the discharge of such duties which renders his removal expedient.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 42, for the heading and sections 50 to 53 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  45 (4) The Commissioner shall not undertake any work unconnected with his office without the sanction 
of the Central Government and of the Corporation.  
55. Salary and allowances of the Commissioner .—The Commissioner shall be paid out of the 
Municipal Fund such monthly salary and such monthly allowances, if any, as may from time to time be 
fixed by the Central Government and may be given such facilities (if any) in relation to residential 
accommodation, conveyance and the like as may from time to time be fixed by  that Government:  
Provided that the salary of the Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.  
56. Leave of absence of Commissioner .—(1) Leave may be granted to the Commissioner by the 
Standing Committee.  
(2) Whenever such le ave is granted to the Commissioner the Central Government shall appoint 
another person to officiate as Commissioner in his place.  
57. Appointment of officiating Commissioner in case of death, resignation or removal of 
Commissioner .—If any vacancy occurs in  the office of the Commissioner on account of death, 
resignation or removal, the Central Government may appoint another person to officiate as Commissioner 
in his place for a term not exceeding two months, pending the appointment of a Commissioner under 
section 54.  
58. Service regulations of Commissioner .—(1) If the Commissioner is an officer in the service of 
the Government, the  Corporation shall make such contribution towards his leave allowances, pension  and 
provident fund as may be required by the conditions of his service under  the Government, to be paid by 
him or for him, as the case may be.  
(2) If the Commissioner is not an officer in the service of the Government, his leave  and leave 
allowances, his superannuation or retirement, his gratuity or pension  and the proportions of his 
pensionary or provident fund contribution payable  respectively from his salary and from the Municipal  
Fund shall be governed by rules : 
Provided that — 
(a) the amount of any such leave and leave allowances, gratuity or pension shall in  no case, 
without the special sanction of the Central Government, exceed what  would be admissible in the case 
of Government servants of similar standing and  status; and  
(b) the conditions under which such allowances, gratuity or pension are  granted or  any leave, 
superannuation or retirement is sanctioned shall not without similar  sanction be more favourable than 
those for the time being prescribed for such  Government servants.  
59. Functions of the Commissioner .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the entire executive 
power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act  1*** 2*** and of any other Act for the 
time being in force which confers any power or imposes any duty on the Corporation, shall vest in the 
Commissioner who sh all also— 
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties specifically conferred or imposed upon him 
by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and control over the acts and pro ceedings of, 
all municipal officers and other municipal employees other the Municipal Secretary and the 
Municipal Chief Auditor and the municipal officers and other municipal employees immediately 
subordinate to them and subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, dispose of all 
questions relating to the service of the said officers and other employees and their pay, privileges, 
allowances and other conditions of service;  
                                                 
1. The words “other than those pertaining to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking” omitted by Act 67 of 1993,                                
s. 43 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993). 
2.  The words “on the Delhi Transport Undertaking” om itted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7 (b) and the Second                                 
Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  46 (c) on the occurrence or threatened occurrence of any sudden accident o r any unforseen event or 
natural calamity involving or likely to involve extensive damage to any property of the Corporation, 
or danger to human life, take such immediate action as he considers necessary and make a report 
forthwith to the Standing Committe e and the Corporation of the action he has taken and the reasons 
for the same as also of the amount of cost, if any, incurred or likely to be incurred in consequence of 
such action, which is not covered by a budget grant;  
1[(d) subject to any regulation th at may be made in this behalf, be the disciplinary authority in 
relation to all municipal officers and other municipal employees .] 
2*   *   *   *   * 
Miscellaneous provisions relating to the various municipal authorities  
65. Appointment of sub -committees by the various committees .—(1) The  Standing 
Committee,  3[or the Wards Committee] may appoint from among its own members any sub -committee  
consisting of such number as that committee may think fit for exercising any  power or performing any 
function of that committee under this Act or for  inquiring into or reporting or advising upon any matter 
which that committee  may refer to such sub -committee.  
(2) Every such sub -committee shall conform to such instructions as may be given to  it by the 
committee by which it has been appointed.  
66. Commissioner and General Manager s not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the 
Corporation .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as the Commissioner  4*** who has, 
directly or indirectly, by himself or by a partner, or any other person, any share or interest in any contract 
made with, or any work being done for, the Corporation other than as such Commissioner  5***. 
(2) If the Commissioner,  4*** acquires directly or indirectly, by himself or by his partner, or any 
other person, any share or interest in any such contract or work as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), he 
shall, unless the Corporation in any particular case otherwise decides, be liable to be r emoved from his 
office by the order of the authority competent to remove him under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that before an order of removal is made, the Commissioner  6*** shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the acti on proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
67. Vacation of seats by members of committees .—7[(1) A member of the Standing Committee or a 
Wards  Committee, if he ceases to be a councillor or ceases to represent any of the  categories mentioned in 
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall cease to be a member of that Committee 
and his seat shall  thereupon become vacant .] 
(2) If a member of the Standing Committee,  8***, absents himself during three successive months  
from the meetings of the committee except on account of illness or any other  cause approved by the 
committee, or absents himself during six successive  months from the meetings of the committee on 
account of any cause whatsoever,  whether approved by the committee or not, he sha ll cease to be a 
member of the  committee and his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
68. Committees to continue in office till new committees are constituted .—The Standing 
Committee,  9[or the Wards Committee] shall continue to function until a new committee is  constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act notwithstanding that the  member s or some of the members of 
such committee have ceased to be council lors or aldermen.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 43, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The heading “The General Manager (Electricity) and sections 60  to 64” omitted by s. 44 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 45,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. The words and brackets “or the General Manager (Electricity) ” omitted by s. 46 , ibid. (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words “or General Manager, as the case may be” omitted by s. 46 , ibid. (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  
6. The words “or such General Manager” omitted by s. 46 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1-10-1993).  
8. The words “the Delhi Electric Supply Committee or the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee” omitted 
by s. 47 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
9. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  47 69. Power of Corporation to call for extracts of proceedings from th e Committees .—The 
Corporation may at any time call for any extract of any proceedings of the Standing Committee,  1[the 
Wards Committee] , the Delhi Rural Areas Committee, the Education Committee or of any other 
committee or sub -committee constituted or appo inted under this Act and for any return, statement, 
account or report concerning or connected with any matter with which any such committee or sub -
committee is empowered by or under this Act to deal; and every such requisition shall be complied with 
by any  such Committee or sub -committee without any unreasonable delay.  
70. Power of Corporation to require the Commissioner , etc., to produce documents and furnish 
returns, reports, etc. —(1) The  Corporation may at any  time require the Commissioner — 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document which is in his  possession or 
under his control as Commissioner or which is recorded or filed  in his office or in the office of any 
municipal officer or other municipal  employee subordinate to him;  
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics concerning  or connected 
with any matter pertaining to the administration of this Act or  the municipal government of 
Delhi  2*** 3***; 
(c) to furnish a report by himself or to obtai n from the head of any department  subordinate to him 
and furnish with his own remarks thereon, a report, upon any  subject concerning or connected with 
the administration of this Act or the  municipal government of Delhi  2*** 4***. 
(2) Every such requisition  shall be complied with by the Commissioner without any  unreasonable 
delay; and it shall be incumbent on every municipal officer and  other municipal employee to obey any 
order made by the Commissioner in  pursuance of any such requisition:  
Provided  that the  Commissioner shall not be bound to comply with any such requisition if  with the 
previous approval of the Mayor he makes a statement that such  compliance would be prejudicial to public 
interest or to the interests of the  Corporation.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
71. Exercise of powers to be subject to sanction .—Save as  otherwise provided in this Act, the 
exercise of any power or the performance of  any duty conferred or imposed upon the Corporation or any 
municipal authority  by or under this Act, which will involve expenditure, shall be subject to the  following 
conditions, namely: — 
(a) that such expenditure, in so far as it is to be incurred in the year in which  such power is 
exercised or duty performed, shall be provided for under a  current budget -grant; and  
(b) that if the exercise of such power or the performance of such duty involves or  is likely to 
involve expenditure for any period or at any time after the close  of the said year, such expenditure 
shall not be incurred without the sanct ion— 
(i) of the Standing  Committee  6***, if it is incurred in the year next following such year, or  
(ii) of the Corporation,  if it is incurred at any time after the next following year.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
Transaction of business by the Corporation  
72. Meetings. —(1) The Corporation shall ordinarily hold at least one meeting in every month for the 
transaction of business.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 49, for certain words (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words “except in regard to the Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking” omitted by s. 50,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. The words “, or the Delhi Transport Undertaking” omitted by Act  71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second                                
Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
4. The words “or the Delhi Transport Undertaking” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7 (b) and the Second                                
Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
5. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993 , s. 50 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Certain words omitted by s. 51,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  48 (2) The Mayor or in his absence the Deputy Mayor may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon a 
requisition in writing by not less than one -fourth of the  total number of councillors  1[and other persons 
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3], convene a special meeting of the Corporation.  
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent date, and an adjourned meeting 
may be further adjourned in like manner.  
73. First meeting of the Corporation after general election .—The first meeting of the Corporation 
after a general election shall be held as early as possible after the publication of the results of the election  
2*** und er section 14 and shall be convened by the Administrator.  
 74. Notice of meetings and business .—A list of the business to be transacted at every meeting 
except at an adjourned meeting shall be sent to the address of each councillor  3[and the persons  referred to 
in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] at least seventy -two hours before the time fixed for such  
meeting; and no business shall be brought before, or transacted at, any meeting other than the business of 
which a notice has been so give n: 
Provided that any councillor  4[or the persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] 
may send or deliver to of such meeting so as to reach him at least forty -eight hours before the date fixed 
for the meeting and the Municipal Secreta ry shall with all possible despatch take steps to circulate such 
resolution to every councillor  3[and the persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] in 
such manner as he may think fit.  
75. Quorum .—(1) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting of the 
Corporation shall be one -fifth of the total number of members  5[and the persons referred to in sub -clauses 
(ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3].  
(2) If at any time during a meeting of the Corporation there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the 
Mayor or the person presiding over such meeting either to adjourn the meeting or to suspend the meeting 
until there is a quorum.  
(3) Where a meeting has been adjourned under sub -section ( 2), the business which would have been 
brought before the original meeting if there had been a quorum present thereat, shall be brought before, 
and may be transacted at an adjourned meeting, whether there is a quorum present or not.  
76. Presiding officer .—(1) The Mayor or in his absence, the Deputy Mayor, shall preside at every 
meeting of the Corporation.  
6[(2) In the absence of both the Mayor and Deputy Mayor from the meeting, the members and the 
persons referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of cla use ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall elect 
one from among the councillors to preside.]  
(3) The Mayor or the person presiding over a meeting shall have and exercise a second or a casting 
vote in all cases of equality of votes.  
 77. Presiding officer at meeting for the election of Mayor .—Notwithstanding an ything contained 
in section 76 — 
(a) at a meeting for the election of a Mayor the Administrator shall nominate a councillor  7*** 
who is not a candidate for such election to preside over the meeting;  
(b) if during the election of Mayor it appears that there is an equality of votes between any 
candidates at such election and that the addition of a vote would entitle any of those candidates to be 
elected as Mayor, then, the person presi ding over the meeting shall decide between them by lot to be 
drawn in the presence of the candidates and in such manner as he may determine, and the candidate 
on whom the lot falls shall be deemed to have received an additional vote.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 52, for “and alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words “of alderman” omitted by s. 53 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 54,  ibid., for “and alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. Subs. by s. 54,  ibid., for “or alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Ins. by s. 55 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
7. The words “or an alderman” omitted by s. 57 , ibid. (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  49 78. Method of deciding  questions .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters required 
to be decided by the Corporation shall be decided by the majority of the votes of the  1[members and 
persons referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 3] present 
and voting.  
(2) The voting shall be by show of hands, but the Corporation may, subject to such regulations as may 
be made by it, resolve that any question or class of questions shall be decided by ballot.  
(3) At any me eting, unless voting be demanded by at least four  1[members and persons referred to in 
sub-clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3], a declaration by the presiding 
officer at such meeting that a resolution has been carrie d or lost, and an entry to that effect in the minutes 
of the proceedings shall, for the purposes of this Act, be inclusive evidence of the fact without proof of 
the number or proportion of the votes recorded in favour of or against such resolution.  
(4) If voting as aforesaid is demanded, the votes of all the  1[members and persons referred to in                
sub-clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] present who desire to vote shall 
be taken under the direction of the presiding officer at the meeting and the result of the voting shall be 
deemed to be the resolution of the Corporation at such meeting.  
79. Maintenance of order at , and admission of public to, meeting s; withdrawal and suspension 
of councillors and  alderm en—(1) The Mayor or the person presiding over a meeting shall preserve 
order threat and shall have all powers necessary for the purpose of preserving such order.  
(2) The Mayor or the person presiding over a meeting may direct any councillor  2[or persons refer red 
to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] whose conduct is in his opinion grossly disorderly to 
withdraw immediately from the meeting, and any councillor  2[or persons referred to in clause ( b) of                
sub-section ( 3) of section 3] so directed to withdraw shall do so forthwith and shall absent himself during 
the remainder of the meeting.  
(3) If any councillor  2[or persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] is ordered to 
withdraw a second time within fifteen days,  the Mayor or the person presiding may suspend such 
councillor  2[or persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] from attending the 
meetings of the Corporation for any period not exceeding fifteen days and the councillor  2[or persons 
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] so suspended shall absent himself accordingly:  
Provided that the Mayor may at any time decide that such suspension be terminated:  
Provided further that such suspension shall not debar the suspended  councillor  2[or persons referred to 
in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] from serving on any committee of the Corporation of which 
he is a member.  
(4) Subject to sub -section ( 5) every meeting shall be open to the public, unless a majority of the  
3[members and persons referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3] present at the meeting decide that any inquiry or deliberation pending before the Corporation 
shall be held in private.  
(5) The Corporatio n may make regulations for the purpose of admission of the member of the public 
to its meetings and for the removal by force, if necessary, of any member of the public admitted to a 
meeting for interrupting or disturbing the proceedings of the meeting.  
(6) In the case of grave disorder arising in a meeting the Mayor or the person presiding may, if he 
thinks it necessary to do so, adjourn the meeting to a date specified by him.  
80. Councillors or  aldermen not to vote on matter in which they are interested .—No councillor 
or 4[person s referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] shall  
vote at a meeting of the Corporation or of any committee thereof on any question relating to his own 
conduct or vote or take par t in any discussion on any matter (other than a matter affecting generally the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 58, for “members” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 59,  ibid., for “or alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 59,  ibid., for “members” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 60, ibid., for “alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   50 residents of Delhi or of any particular ward), which affects his pecuniary interest or any property in 
respect of which he is directly or indirectly interested, or any property of or for which he is a manager or 
agent.  
 81. Right to attend meetings of the Corporation and its committees, etc., and right of 
councillors and aldermen to ask questions in relation to the municipal government of Delhi .—1[(1) 
The Commissioner or any municipal officer authorised by him in this behalf may attend, speak in, or 
otherwise take part in the proceedings of, any meeting of the Corporation or any of its Committees, but 
none of the persons specified herein shall by virtue of this sub -section be entitled to vote in any such 
meeting.]  
(2) A councillor or  2[person referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) 
of section 3] may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), ask the Commissioner questions on any 
matter relating to the municipal government of Delhi or the administration of this Act or the functions of 
any of the municipal authorities.  
(3) The right to ask a question shall be governed by the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) not less than seven clear d ays' notice in writing specifying the question shall be given to the 
Municipal Secretary;  
(b) no question shall — 
(i) bring in any name or statement not strictly necessary to make the question intelligible,  
(ii) contain arguments, ironical expressions, imputations, epithets or defamatory statements,  
(iii) ask for an expression of opinion or the solution of a hypothetical proposition,  
(iv) ask as to the character or conduct of any person except in his official or public capacity,  
(v) relate to a matter wh ich is not primarily the concern of the Corporation or of any of the 
municipal authorities,  
(vi) make or imply a charge of a personal character,  
(vii) raise questions of policy too large to be dealt with within the limits of an answer to a 
question,  
(viii) repeat in substance questions already answered or to which an answer has been refused.  
(ix) ask for information on trivial matters,  
(x) ordinarily ask for information on matters of past history,  
(xi) ask for information set forth in accessible documents o r in ordinary works of reference,  
(xii) raise matters under the control of bodies or persons not primarily responsible to the 
Corporation,  
(xiii) ask for any information on matter which is under adjudication by a court of law.  
(4) The Mayor shall disallow any question which is, in his opinion, in contravention of the provisions 
of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) If any doubt arises whether any question is or is not in contravention of the provisions of                   
sub-section ( 3), the Mayor shall decide the point and his decision shall be final.  
(6) The Commissioner shall not be bound to answer a question if it asks for information which has 
been communicated to him in confidence or if in the opinion of the Mayor it cannot be answered without 
prejudice to pub lic interest or the interest of the Corporation.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 61, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
2. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for “alderman” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   51 (7) Unless otherwise directed by the Mayor or the presiding officer of the meeting, every question 
shall be answered by the Commissioner at a meeting of the Corporation.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
82. Power to make regulations .—The Corporation may make regulations for the transaction of 
business at its meeting:  
Provided that the time, place and procedure for the first meeting after the constitution of the 
Corporation under section 3 shall be determined by the Administrator.  
Transaction of business by Standing and other committees  
83. Presiding officers at meetings of the Standing and other committees .—(1) The Chairman or in 
his absence the Deputy Chairman shall preside at every meeting of the Standing Committee , the 2[Wards 
Committee] or any other committee of the Corporation.  
(2) In the absence of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman from any meeting the members of any 
such committee shall choose one  3[from amongst the councillors] to preside over the meeting.  
 84. Conduct of business at meetings of Standing and other committees .—The Corporation may 
make regulations for the procedure and the conduct of business at meetings, of the Standing Committee 
and all other committees except adhoc committees which shall re gulate their own procedure.  
Minutes and reports of proceedings  
85. Keeping of minutes and proceedings .—Minutes, in which shall be recorded the names of the  
4[members and other persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 present] at, a nd the 
proceedings of each meeting  5*** of the Corporation and of the Standing Committee and every other 
committee of the Corporation, shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept for that purpose, and 
shall be laid before the next ensuing meeting of the Corporation or of such committee, as the case may be, 
and signed at such meeting by the presiding officer thereof.  
86. Circulation of minutes and inspection of minutes and reports of proceedings .—(1) Minutes 
of the proceedings of each meeting of the  Corporation shall be circulated to all the  6[persons referred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] and shall at all reasonable times be available at the municipal 
office for inspection by any other person on payment of a fee of eight annas.  
(2) Full reports, if any, of such proceedings shall similarly be available for inspection by any  
6[persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3] without charge and by any other person 
on payment of a fee of eight annas.  
87. Forwarding minutes and reports of proceedings to the Administrator .—(1) The Municipal 
Secretary shall forward to the Administrator a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of each meeting of 
the Corporation, within ten days from the date on which the minu tes of the proceedings of such meeting 
were signed under section 85.  
(2) The Administrator may also in any case ask for a copy of any paper or all the papers which were 
laid before the Corporation or any committee thereof and the Municipal Secretary shall forward to the 
Administrator a copy of such paper or papers.  
(3) The Municipal Secretary shall also forward to the Administrator as soon as may be after the date 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), a full report of the proceedings of each meeting of the Corpor ation, if any 
such report be prepared.  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 62, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
3. Subs. by s. 62, ibid., for “of their numbers” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. Subs. by s. 63, ibid., for “members present” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993) .   
5. The words “of the councillors for the election of any alderman and of each” omitted by s. 63 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
6. Subs. by s. 64, ibid., for “members of the Corporation” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   52 Validation  
88. Validation of proceedings, etc. —(1) No act done or proceeding taken under this Act shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of — 
(a) the seat of any councillor  1*** remaining unfilled from any cause whatsoever;  
(b) the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Corporation, or in any 
committee thereof;  
(c) any  2[councillor or any person referred to in sub -clauses ( ii), (iii) and ( iv) of cl ause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 3) of section 3] or taken part in any proceedings in contravention of section 80;  
(d) any defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.  
(2) Every meeting  3*** of the Corporation or of any committee thereo f, the minutes of the proceeding 
of which have been duly drawn up and signed shall be deemed to have been duly convened and to be free 
from all defects and irregularities.  
CHAPTER VI  
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES  
89. Appointment of certain officers .—(1) The Corporation shall appoint suitable persons to be 
respectively  4***, the Municipal Engineer, the Municipal Health Officer, the Education Officer, the 
Municipal Chief Accountant, the Municipal Secretary and the Munic ipal Chief Auditor and may appoint 
one or more Deputy Commissioners and such other officer or officers of a status equivalent to or higher 
than the status of any of the officers specified earlier in this sub -section as the Corporation may deem fit 
on such monthly salaries and such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the Corporation.  
(2) The appointment of the Municipal Chief Auditor shall be made with the previous approval of 
the 5*** Government and every other appointment referred to in sub -section ( 1) except that of the 
Municipal Chief Accountant and the Municipal Secretary shall be subject to confirmation by that 
Government:  
Provided that the Municipal Chief Auditor shall not be eligible for any other office under the 
Corporation after he has ceased to  hold his office.  
90. Schedule of permanent posts and creation of temporary posts .—(1) The  6[Commissioner] 
shall from time to time prepare and lay before  7[the Standing Committee] two schedules of posts other 
than those specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 89 setting forth the designations and grades of municipal 
officers and other municipal employees who should be maintained permanently in the service of the 
Corporation indicating therein the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be pa id to such 
officers and other employees.  
8[(2) Of the two schedules referred to in sub -section ( 1), the first schedule shall deal with category A 
posts and second schedule with category B and category C posts.]  
(3) 9[The Standing Committee] shall lay the f irst schedule  with its comments thereon before the 
Corporation for its consideration and approval and shall sanction the second either without modifications 
or with such modifications as it thinks fit and thereafter may amend it either on its own motion af ter 
ascertaining the views of  the 10[Commissioner or at his instance].  
                                                 
1. The words “or alderman” omitted by Act 67 o f 1993, s. 65 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
2. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for “councillor having voted” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
3. The words “of the councillors for the election of any alderman or” omitted by s. 65 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. The words  and brackets  “the Chief Engineer (Water Supply)” omitted by s. 66 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
5. The word “Central” omitted by s. 66 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
6. Subs. by s. 67,  ibid., for “appropriate authority” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
7. Subs. by s. 67, ibid., for “the committee concerned” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
8. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 8, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).   
9. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 67, for “The Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
10. Subs. by s. 67,  ibid., for “appropriate authority  or at the instance of such authority” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   53 (4) The Corporation shall after considering the comments of  1[the Standing Committee] sanction the 
first schedule either without modifications or with such modifications as it thinks fit  and thereafter may 
amend it either on its own motion after ascertaining the views of the  2[Commissioner] and  1[the Standing 
Committee] or at the instance of  3[the Commissioner] or committee.  
4[(5) The  2[Commissioner] may create for a period not exceeding six months any category C post:  
Provided that no such post shall be continued beyond the said period without the previous approval of  
1[the Standing Committee ]. 
(6) 5[The Standing Committee] may, on the recommendation of the  2[Commissioner] create for a 
period not exceeding six months an y category A or category B post : 
Provided that no such post shall be continued beyond the said period without the previous approval of 
the Corporation.]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7[(8) In this section and in section 92 — 
8[(i) “category A post ” means any post, which, having regard to its scale of pay or emoluments, 
would, if such post had been in the Central Government, be classified as a Group A post under the 
Central Government in accordance with the orders issued by that Gover nment from time to time;  
(ii) “category B post ” means any post which, having regard to its scale of pay or emoluments, 
would, if such post had been in the Central Government, be classified as a Group B post under the 
Central Government in accordance with t he orders issued by that Government from time to time;]  
(iii) “category C post ” means any post, other than a category A or category B post.]  
91. Restriction on employment of permanent officers and other employees .—No permanent 
officer or other employee sha ll be entertained in any department of the municipal administration unless he 
has been appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 89 or his office and emoluments are included in one 
of the schedules for the time being in force prepared and sanctioned under  section 90.  
92. Power to make appointments .—9[(1) Subject to the provisions of section 89, the power of the 
appointing municipal officers and other municipal employees whether temporary or permanent shall vest 
in the Commissioner:  
Provided that the power of appointing officers and other employees immediately subordinate to the 
Municipal Secretary or the Municipal Chief Auditor to category B posts of category C posts shall vest in 
the Standing Committee:  
Provided further that the Standing Committee may dele gate to the Municipal Secretary or the 
Municipal Chief Auditor the power of appointing officers and other employees immediately subordinate 
to the said Secretary or Auditor, to category C posts.]  
(2) The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes shall be taken into consideration, consistently 
with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments of municipal officers 
and other municipal employees.  
10[92A. Recruitment to category B and category C posts .—The direct recruitment  to category B 
category C posts may be made by the Government through such agencies as may be prescribed by it.]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 67 , for “the committee concerned” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
2. Subs. by s. 67,  ibid., for “appropriate authority” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
3. Subs. by s. 67, ibid.,  for “such authority” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 8, for sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6)  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
5. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 67, for “The Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
6. Omitted by s. 67 , ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).   
7. Ins. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 8 (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).   
8. Subs. by Act 8 of 1987, s. 2, for clauses ( i) and ( ii) (w.e.f. 5-2-1987).   
9. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 68, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
10. Ins by s. 69 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   54 93. Officers and other employees not to undertake any extraneous work .—No municipal officer 
or other municipal employee shall undertake any  work unconnected with his duties under this Act except 
with the permission of the Corporation.  
94. Officers and other employees not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the 
Corporation .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a m unicipal officer or employee 
if he has, directly or indirectly, by himself or by a partner or any other person any share or interest in any 
contract made with, or any work being done for, the Corporation other than as such officer or employee.  
(2) If any such officer or other employee acquires, directly or indirectly, by himself or by a partner or 
any other person, any share or interest in any such contract or work as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), he 
shall unless the authority appointing him in any pa rticular case otherwise decides, be liable to be removed 
from his office by an order of such authority:  
Provided that before an order of removal is made, such officer or other employee shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the ac tion proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
95. Punishment for municipal officers and other employees .—(1) Every municipal officer or other 
municipal employee shall be liable to have his increments or promotion withheld or to be censured, 
reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed for any breach of any departmental 
regulations or of discipline or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or other misconduct by such 
authority as may be prescribed by regulations:  
Provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank, compulsorily 
retired, removed or dismissed by any authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed:  
Provided further that the Corporation may b y regulations provide that municipal empl oyees belonging 
to such classes or categories as may be specified in the regulations shall be liable also to be fined by such 
authority as may be specified therein.  
(2) No such officer or other employee shall be punished under sub -section ( 1) unless he has  been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply — 
(a) where an officer or other employee is removed or dismissed on the ground of conduct which 
had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or  
(b) where the authority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other employee is 
satisfied that for some reason to be recorded by that authority, it is not reasonably practicable to give 
that person an opportunity of showing cause.  
(3) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any officer or other employee 
an opportunity of showing cause under sub -section ( 2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered 
to remove or di smiss such officer or other employee shall be final.  
(4) An officer or other employee upon whom a punishment has been inflicted under this section may 
appeal to such officer or authority as may be prescribed by regulations.  
1[Provided that in the case of an officer or other employee appointed by the Commissioner an appeal 
shall lie to the Administrator.]  
96. Consultation with the Union Public Service Commission .—No appointment  2*** 3*** 4[to any 
category A post within the meaning of clause ( i) of sub -section (8) of section 90 shall be made except 
after co nsultation with the Commission] : 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 70 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
2. The word s and brackets  “to the post of the General Manager (Electricity)” omitted by s. 71 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
3.  The word s and brackets  “or the General Manager (Transport)” omitted by Act 71  of 1971, s. 7 (b) and the Second  Schedule 
(w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).   
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 10, for certain words  and brackets  (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).   55 Provided that no such consultation with the Commission shall be necessary in regard to  the selection 
for appointment — 
(a) to any acting or temporary post for a period not exceeding one year; or  
(b) to such ministerial posts as may from time to time be specified by the Corporation in 
consultation with the Commission when such posts are to be filled by promotion; or  
(c) to a post when at the time of such appointment the perso n to be appointed thereto is in the 
service of the Central Government or a State Government in a class I post; or  
(d) to a permanent or temporary post, if the officer or other employee to be appointed is not likely 
to hold that post for more than one year;  or if such officer or other employee is likely to hold the post 
for more than one year but not more than three years and the Commission advises that the 
appointment may be made without consulting the Commission; 1[or] 
1[(e) to such other posts, as may, from time to time, be specified  by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Commission.]  
97. Power of Commission to make regulations and reference to the Central Government in case 
of difference between the Commission and the Corporation .—(1) The Co mmission may make 
regulations for the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in advertising posts, inviting applications , 
scrutinizing the same and selecting candidates for interview;  
(b) the procedure to be followed  by the Commission for selecting candidates for appointment and 
by the Corporation for consultation with the Commission;  
(c) any other matter which is incidental to, or necessary for, the purpose of consultation with the 
Commission.  
(2) In the case of any difference of opinion between the Commission and the Corporation on any 
matter, the Corporation shall refer the matter to the Central Government and the decision of that 
Government thereon shall be final.  
98. Power of Corporation to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may make regulations to 
provide for any one or more of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances, provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of 
absence and other conditions of service of officers and  other employees appointed under this Chapter;  
(b) the powers, duties and functions of the Municipal Secretary;  
(c) the qualifications of candidates for appointment to posts specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 
89 and to posts dealt with in the first sc hedule of post referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 90 and 
the manner of selection for appointments to posts dealt with in the second schedule of posts referred 
to in that sub -section;  
(d) the procedure to be followed in imposing any penalty under sub -section ( 1) of section 95, 
suspension pending departmental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty and the authority by 
whom such suspension may be ordered; the officer or authority to whom an appeal shall lie under 
sub-section ( 4) of that section ; 
(e) any matter which is incidental to, or necessary for, the purpose of regulating the appointment 
and conditions of service of persons appointed to services and posts under the Corporation and any 
other matter for which in the opinion of the Corporation  provisions should be made by regulations.  
(2) No regulation under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be made except after consultation with the 
Commission.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1974, s. 10 (w.e.f. 10 -1-1975).  56 CHAPTER VII  
REVENUE  AND EXPENDITURE  
The Municipal Fund  
99. Constitution of the Municipal Fund .—The Municipal Fund  
(1) Save as o therwise provided in this Act, — 
(a) all funds which immediately before the establishment of the Corporation vested in any body 
or local authority specified in the Second Schedule;  
(b) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation under the provisions of this Act or of 
any other law for the time being in force, or under any contract;  
(c) all proceeds of the disposal of property by, or on behalf of, the Corporation;  
(d) all rents accruing from any property of the Corporat ion; 
(e) all moneys raised by any tax, rate or cess levied for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) all fees collected and all fines levied under this Act or under any rule, regulation or bye -law 
made thereunder;  
(g) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation from the Government or any 
individual or association of individuals by way of grant or gift or deposit;  
1*  *   *   *   * 
(i) all interests and profits arising from any investment of, or from any transaction in connection 
with, any money belong ing to the Corporation, including loans advanced under this Act; and  
(j) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Corporation from any other source whatsoever,  
shall form one Fund to be entitled the Municipal Fund of Delhi (hereinafter in this Act referr ed to as “the 
Municipal Fund ”). 
2[(2) The Municipal Fund shall be held by the Corporation in trust for the purposes of this Act subject 
to the provisions herein contained and a General Account relating to all moneys received by or on behalf 
of the Corporat ion shall be maintained.]  
3[100. Municipal Fund to be kept in the State Bank of India .—All moneys payable to the credit of 
the Municipal Fund in the General Account shall be received by the Commissioner and shall be forthwith 
paid into the State Bank of In dia to the credit of the said Account which shall be entitled “The General 
Account of the Municipal Fund of Delhi.]  
101. Operation of the Accounts .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act no payment shall be 
made by the State Bank of India out of the Municipal Fund exc ept on a cheque signed by both — 
(a) the Chief Accountant or an officer subordinate to him authorised by the standing Committee 
in this behalf; and  
4[(b) the Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner or an officer subordinate to the Commission er 
authorised by the Standing Committee in this behalf.]  
(2) Payment of any sum due by the Corporation in excess of one hundred rupees shall be made by 
means of a cheque signed in accordance with sub -section ( 1) and not in any other way.  
(3) Payments hot covered by sub -section ( 2) may be made in cash.  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
3. Subs. by s. 73,  ibid.,  for section 100 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
4. Subs. by s. 74, ibid.,  for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   57  102. Payments not to be made unless covered by a budget -grant .—No payment of any sum out of 
the Municipal Fund shall be made unless the expenditure of the same is covered by a current budget -grant 
and a suff icient balance of such budget grant is still available notwithstanding any reduction or transfer 
thereof which may have been made under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that this section shall not apply to payments made in the foll owing classes of case s 
namely:— 
(a) refund of taxes and other moneys which are authorised under this Act;  
(b) repayment of moneys belonging to contractors or other persons and held in deposit and of 
moneys collected or credited to the Municipal Fund by mistake;  
(c) sums payable in any of the following circumstances — 
(i) under orders of the Central Government on failure of the Corporation to take any action as 
required by that Government; or  
(ii) under any other enactment for the time being in force; or  
(iii) under the decree or order of a civil or criminal court passed against the Corporation; or  
(iv) under a compromise of any claim, suit or other legal proceedings; or 
(v) on account of cost incurred in taking immediate action by the Corporation or any of the 
munici pal authorities to avert a sudden threat of danger to the property of the Corporation or to 
human life;  
(d) temporary payments for works urgently required by the Central Government in the public 
interest;  
(e) sums payable as compensation under this Act or under any rules, regulations or bye -laws 
made thereunder;  
(f) expenses incurred by the Corporation on special measures taken on the outbreak of dangerous 
diseases.  
 103. Duty of persons signing cheques .—Before any person signs a cheque in accordance with 
section 101, he shall satisfy himself that the sum for which  the cheque is drawn is either — 
(a) required for a purpose or work specifically sanctioned by the proper authority and covered by 
a current budget -grant, or  
(b) required for any payment referred to, or specified in section 102.  
104. Procedure when money not covered by a budget -grant is expended .—Whenever  any sum is 
expended under  1[clause ( c), (e) or (f)] of the proviso to section 102 the Commissioner,  2[shall forthwith 
communicate the circumstances to  the Standing Committee]  3*** which may take, or  recommend to the 
Corporation to take, such action under the provisions of this  Act as shall, in the circumstances appear 
possible and expedient for covering  the amount of the additional expen diture.  
105. Application of Municipal Fund .—(1) The moneys from time to time credited to the Municipal 
Fund shall be applied in payment of all sums, charges and costs necessary for carrying out the provisions 
of this Act, and of the rules, regulations and bye-laws made thereunder, or of which payment is duly 
directed, sanctioned or required by or under any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Such moneys shall likewise be applied in payment of all sums payable out of the Municipal Fund 
under any other enactme nt for the time being in force.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule, for “clauses ( c), (e) or ( f)” (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 75, for certain words  and brackets  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).    
3.  The words “or the Delhi Transport Committee” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule                       
(w.e.f. 3 -11-1971). 58 106. Temporary payments from the Municipal Fund for works urgently required for the public 
service .—(1) On the written requisition of a Secretary to the Central Government,  1[the Commissioner] , 
may at any time undertake the execution of any work certified by such Secretary to  be urgently required 
in public interest, and for this purpose may temporarily  make payments from the Municipal Fund so far as 
the same can be met without  unduly interfering with the regular work of the m unicipal government.  
(2) The cost of work so executed and of the  establishment engaged in executing the same shall be 
paid by the Central  Government and credited to the Municipal Fund.  
(3) On  the receipt of any requisition under sub -section (1) the Commissioner  2*** 3*** shall  
forthwith forward a copy thereof to the Corporation together with a report of  the steps taken by him in 
pursuance of the same.  
4[107. Investment of surplus moneys .—(1) Surplus money standing at the credit of General Account 
of the Municipal Fund which cannot immediately be applied for the purposes specified in section 105 
shall be deposited in the State Bank of India or in such scheduled bank or banks as the Corporation may 
select or be invested in public securities.  
(2) The los s, if any, arising from such deposit of investment shall be debited to the General A ccounts  
of the Municipal Fund.  
107A. Constitution of Finance Commission .—(1) The Administrator shall, as soon as may be, 
within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy -third Amendment) Act, 1992 and 
thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial 
position of the Corporation and to make recommendatio ns to the Administrator as to, — 
 (a) the p rinciples which should govern, — 
(i) the distribution between the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Corporation of the 
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
which may be divided between them.  
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to or 
appropriated by the Corporation;  
(iii) the grants -in-aid to the Corporation from the consolidated fund of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi;  
(b) the measure s needed to improve the financial position of the Corporation;  
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Administrator in the interest of 
sound finance of the Corporation.  
(2) The Legislature of the National Capital Territory of Delhi,  may by law provide for the 
composition of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be required for appointment of members 
thereof, and the manner in which they shall be selected.  
(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such  powers in the performance 
of their functions as the Legislature of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, may, by law, confer on 
them.  
(4) The Administrator shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this section 
together with an expl anatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 76, for certain words  and brackets  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).    
2. The words and brackets “or as the case may be, the General Manager (Electricity)” omitted by s. 76 ,                                         
ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. The words “or the General Manager” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 77, for section 107 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  59 Special funds  
108. Constitution of special funds .—(1) The Corporation shall constitute such special fund or funds 
as may be prescribed by regulations and such other funds necessary for the purposes of this Act as may be 
so prescribed.  
(2) The constitution and disposal of such funds shall be effected in the manner laid down by 
regulations.  
Budget estimates  
 109. Adoption of budget estimates .—1[(1) The Corporation shall, on or before the 31st day of 
March of every year, adopt for the ensuing year the budget estimate which shall be an estimate of the 
income and expenditure of the Corporation to be received and incurred on ac count of the municipal 
government of Delhi.]  
(2) On or before the 15th day of February of each year the Corporation shall determine the rates at 
which various municipal taxes, rates and cesses shall be levied in the next following year and save as 
otherwis e provided in this Act the rates so fixed shall not be subsequently altered for the year for which 
they have been fixed.  
(3) Budget estimates shall be prepared in such form as may be approved by the Standing Committee 
and presented and adopted in such mann er and shall provide for all such matters as are prescribed by 
regulations made in this behalf.  
110. Power of Corporation to alter budget estimates .—2[(1) On the recommendation of the 
Standing Committee in respect of the budget estimate, the Corporation may from time to time, during the 
year,— 
(i) increase the amount of budget grant under any head;  
(ii) make an additional budget grant for the purpose of me eting any special or unforeseen 
requirement arising during the said year; or  
(iii) reduce the amount of the budget grant under any head:  
Provided that due regard shall be had to all the requirements of this act and in making any increase or 
any additional budget grant the estimated cash balance at the close of the year shall not be reduced below 
the sum of one lakh rupees or such higher sum as the Corporation may determine in respect of the budget 
estimate.]  
(2) Every increase in a budget -grant and every ad ditional budget -grant made in any year under sub -
section ( 1) shall be deemed to be included in the budget estimates finally adopted for that year.  
(3) The Standing Committee may fro m time to time during the year — 
(a) reduce the amount of a budget -grant; or  
(b) Sanction the transfer of any amount within a budget -grant:  
Provided that every reduction if it exceeds five hundred rupees shall be reported forthwith by 
Standing Committee to the Corporation and the Standing Committee and the Commissioner shall give 
effect to any order that may be passed by the Corporation in relation thereto.  
(4) The Commissioner may from time to time during the year, sanction the transfer of any amount not 
exceeding five thousand rupees within a minor head if such transfer does not involve a recurring liability:  
Provided that every such transfer, if it exceeds five hundred rupees, shall be reported forthwith by the 
Commissioner to the Standing Committee and the Commissioner shall give effect to any order that may 
be passed by that Co mmittee in relation thereto,  
3*   *   *   *   * 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 78, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 79, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Omitted by s. 79 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  60 111. Power of Corporation to re -adjust income and expenditure during the year .—(1) If at any 
time during the year it appears to the Corporation that, notwithstanding  any reduction of budget -grant that 
has bee n made under section 110 the income  of the Municipal Fund during the same year will not suffice 
to meet the  expenditure sanctioned in the budget estimates of that year and to leave at the  close of the 
year the cash balance specified in or determined under the proviso  to sub -section ( 1) of section 110, then, 
it shall be incumbent on the  Corporation to sanction forthwith any measures which it may consider 
necessary  for adjusting the year's income to the expenditure.  
(2) For  the purposes of sub -section ( 1), th e Corporation may either diminish the  sanctioned 
expe nditure of the year so far as it may be possible so to do with  regard to all the requirements of this Act, 
or have recourse to supplementary  taxation under section 151 or to an increase of the rates of c esses, fees,  
fares and other charges leviable under this Act, or to adopt all or any of  those methods.  
112. Provisions as to unexpended budget -grant .—If the  whole or arty part of any budget -grant 
included in the budget estimates for a  year remains unexpended at the close of that year, and the amount 
thereof has  not been taken into account in the opening balance entered in the budget  estimates of any                      
of the next two following years, the Standing Committee  1*** may  sanction the ex penditure of such 
budget -grant or the unexpended portion thereof  during the next two following years for the completion of 
the purpose or object  for which the budget -grant was originally made and not for any other purpose or  
object.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TAXATION  
Levy of taxes  
113. Taxes to be imposed by the Corporation under this Act .—(1) The  Corporation shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, le vy the following taxes,  namely:— 
(a) property taxes;  
(b) a tax on vehicles and animals;  
(c) a theatre -tax; 
(d) a tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers;  
(e) a duty on the transfer of property; and  
(f) a tax on buildings payable along with the application for sanction of the  building plan.  
(2) In addition to the taxes specified in  sub-section ( 1), the Corporation may, for the purposes of this 
Act, levy any of the following taxes, namely: — 
(a) an education cess;  
(b) a local  rate on land revenues;  
(c) a tax on professions, trades, callings and employments;  
(d) a tax on the consumption,  2[sale or supply] of  electricity;  
(e) a betterment tax on the increase in urban land  values caused by the execution of any 
development or improvement work;  
(f) a tax on boats; and  
(g) tolls.  
(3) The taxes specified in sub -section ( 1) sub-section ( 2) shall be levied, assessed and collected in 
accordance with the  provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder.  
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 80 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993 ).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 7, for “or sale” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  61 Property taxes  
114. Components and rates of property tax .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property 
taxes shall be levied on lands and buildings in Delhi and shall con sist of the following, namely: — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(d) a general tax — 
(i) of not less than ten and not more than 2[thirty]  per cent. of the rateable value of lands and buildings 
within the urban areas, and  
(ii) on lands and buildings within the rural areas at such lower rates and with effect from such date as 
may be determined by the Corporation:  
Provided that the Corporation may, when fixing the rate at which the general tax shall be levied 
during any year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or portions of lands and 
buildings  in which  any particular class of trade or business is carried on shall be higher  than the rate 
determined in respect of other lands and buildings or portions of other lands and buildings by an amount 
not exceeding one -half of the rate so fixed:  
3[Provided further that the general tax may be levied on a graduated scale, if the Corporation so 
determines. ] 
Explanation .—Where any portion of a land or building is liable to a higher rate of the general tax 
such portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.  
(2) The Corporation may exempt from  the general tax lands and buildings of which the rateable value 
does not exceed one hundred rupees.  
115. Premises in respect of which property taxes are to be levied. —4*     *      *   *       * 
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the general tax shall be levied in respect of all lands and 
buildings in Delhi except — 
(a) lands and buildings or portions of lands and buildings exclusively occupied and used for 
public worship or by  a society or body for a charitable purpose:  
Provided that such society  or body is supported wholly or in part by voluntary contributions, 
applies its profits, if any, or other income in promo ting its objects and does not p ay any dividend or 
bonus to its members.  
Explanation .—“Charitable purpose” includes relief of the poor, education and medical relief but 
does not include a purpose which relates exclusively to religious teaching;  
(b) lands and buildings vested in the Corporation 5*** , in respect of which the said tax, if levied, 
would under the provisions of this Act be leviable primarily on the Corporation;  
(c) agricultural lands and buildings ( other than dwelling houses).  
(5) Lands and buildings or portions thereof shall not be deemed to be exclusively occupied and used 
for public worship or for a charitable purpose wit hin the meaning of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4), if any 
trade or business is carried on in such lands and buildings or portions thereof or if in respect of such lands 
and buildings or portions thereof, any rent is derived.  
(6) Where any portion of any lan d or building is exempt from the general tax by reason of its being 
exclusively occupied and used for public worship or for a charitable purpose such portion shall be 
deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.  
116. Determinatio n of r ateab le value of lands and buildings assessable to property                  
taxes .—(1) The rateable value of any land or building assessable to property taxes shall be the annual rent 
at which such land or building might reasonably be expected to let  from year to year less — 
(a) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the said annual rent which shall be in lieu of all allowances for 
costs of repairs and insurance, and other expenses, if any, necessary to maintain the land or building 
in a state to command that  rent, and  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 81 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1968, s. 2, for “twenty” (w.e.f. 23 -3-1968).  
3. Ins. by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -3-1968).  
4. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 82 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Certain words omitted by s. 82 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  62 (b) the water tax or the scavenging tax or both, if the rent is inclusive of either or both of the said 
taxes:  
Provided that if the rent is inclusive of charges for water supplied by measurement, then, for the 
purpose of this section the rent sh all be treated as inclusive of water tax on rateable value and the 
deduction of the water tax shall be made as provided therein:  
Provided further that in respect of any land or building the standard rent of which has been fixed 
under the Delhi and Ajmer Re nt Control Act, 1952 (38 of 1952), the rateable value thereof shall not 
exceed the annual amount of the standard rent so fixed.  
1[Explanation .—The expressions “water tax” and “scavenging tax” shall mean such taxes of that 
nature as may be levied by an appr opriate authority.]  
(2) The rateable value of any land which is not built upon but is capable of being built upon and of 
any land on which a building is in process of erection shall be fixed at five per cent. of the estimated 
capital value of such land.  
(3) All plant and machinery contained or situate in or upon any land or building and belonging to any 
of the classes specified from time to time by public notice by the Commissioner with the approval of the 
Standing Committee, shall be deemed to form part of  such land or building for the purpose of determining 
the rateable value thereof under sub -section ( 1) but save as aforesaid no account shall be taken of the 
value of any plant or machinery contained or situated in or upon any such land or building.  
117. [Charge by measurement in lieu of water tax in certain cases .]—Omitted by the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993 ( Act 67 of 1993 ), s. 84 ( w.e.f.  1-10-1993).  
118. [Special rates of scavenging tax in certain cases .]—Omitted  by s. 84, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-10-1993).  
119. Taxation of Union properties .—2[(1)] Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Chapter, lands and buildings being properties of the Union shall be exempt from the 
property taxes specified in section 114:  
Provided that nothing  3[in this sub -section] shall prevent the Corporation from levying any of the said 
taxes on such lands and buildings to which immediately before the 26th January, 1950, they were liable or 
treated as liable, so long as that tax continu es to be levied by the Corporation on other lands and 
buildings.  
4[(2) Where the possession of any land or building, being property of the Union, has been                  
delivered  in pursuance of section 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Reha bilitation)                 
Act, 1954 (44 of 1954) to a displaced person or any association of displaced persons, whether 
incorporated or not, or to any other person (hereafter in this sub -section and the proviso to sub -section ( 1) 
of section 120 referred to as the transferee), the property taxes specified in section 114 shall be leviable 
and shall be deemed to have been leviable in respect of such land or building with effect from the 7th day 
of April, 1958 or the date on which possession thereof has been delivered to the transferee, whichever is 
later, and such property taxes shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) 
of section 126 or any other provision of this Act, be recoverable with effect from that day or date, as the  
case may be.]  
120. Incidence of property taxes. —(1) The property taxes shall be primarily leviable as follows :— 
(a) if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;  
(b) if the land or building is sub -let, upon the superior lessor;  
(c) if the land or building is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to let the same vests.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 83 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Section 119 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 42 of 1961, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 2-9-1961).  
3. Sub s. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “in this section” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
4. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  63 1[Provided that the property taxes in respect of land or building, being property of the Union, 
possession of which has been delivered in pursuance of section 20 of the Displaced P ersons 
(Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 (44 of 1954), shall be primarily leviable upon the 
transferee. ] 
(2) If any land has been let for a term exceeding one  year to a tenant and such tenant has built upon 
the land, the property taxes assessed in respect of that land and the building erected thereon shall be 
primarily leviable upon the said tenant, whether the land and building are in the occupation of such tenant 
or a sub -tenant of such tenant.  
Explanation .—The term “tenant ” includes any person deriving title to the land or the building erected 
upon such land from the tenant whether by operation of law or by transfer inter vivos . 
(3) The liability of the several owners of any building which is, or purports to be, severally ow ned in 
parts or flats or rooms, for payment of property taxes or any instalment thereof payable during the period 
of such ownership shall be joint and several.  
121. Apportionment of liability for property taxes when the premises assessed are let or sub -
let.—(1) If any land or building assessed to property taxes is let, and its, rateable value exceeds the 
amount of rent payable in respect thereof to the person upon whom under the provisions of section 120 
the said taxes are leviable, that person shall be ent itled to receive from his tenant the difference between 
the amount of the property taxes levied upon him and the amount which would be leviable upon him if 
the said taxes were calculated on the amount of rent payable to him.  
(2) If the land or building is sub-let and its rateable value exceeds the amount of rent payable in 
respect thereof to the tenant by his sub -tenant, or the amount of rent payable in respect thereof to a  sub -
tenant by the person holding under the sub -tenant, the tenant shall be entitled  to receive from his sub -
tenant or the sub -tenant shall be entitled to receive from the person holding under him, as the case may 
be, the difference between any sum recovered under this section from such tenant or sub -tenant and the 
amount of property taxe s which would be leviable in respect of the said land or building if the rateable 
value thereof were equal to the difference between the amount of rent which such tenant or sub -tenant 
receives and the amount of rent which he pays.  
(3) Any person entitled t o receive any sum under this section shall have, for the recovery thereof, the 
same rights and remedies as if such sum were rent payable to him by the person from whom he is entitiled 
to receive the same.  
122. Recovery of property taxes from occupiers .—(1) On the failure to recover  any sum due on 
account of property taxes in respect of any land or building from the person primarily liable therefor 
under section 120, the Commissioner shall recover from every occupier of such land or building by 
attachment, i n accordance with section 162 of the rent payable by such occupier, a portion of the total 
sum due which bears, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to that sum as the rent annually payable 
by such occupier bears to the total amount of rent annually pa yable in respect of the whole of the land or 
building.  
(2) An occupier from whom any sum is recovered under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to be 
reimbursed by the person primarily liable for the payment, and may in addition to having recourse to 
other r emedies that may be open to him, deduct the amount so recovered from the amount of any rent 
from time to time becoming due from him to such person.  
 123. Property taxes a first charge on premises on which they are assessed .—Property taxes due 
under this Ac t in respect of any land or building shall, subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if 
any, due to the Governm ent thereon, be a first charge — 
(a) in the case of any land or building held immediately from the Government, upon the interest 
in such land or building of the person liable for such taxes and upon the goods and other movable 
properties, if any, found within or upon such land or building and belonging to such person; and  
(b) in the case of any other land or building, upon such land or buil ding and upon the goods and 
other movable properties, if any, found within or upon such land or building and belonging to the 
person liable for such taxes.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 9 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  64 1[Explanation —The term “property taxes ” in this section shall be deemed to include the costs on 
recovery of property taxes and the penalty, if any, payable as specified in the bye -laws.]  
124. Assessment list.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Corporation shall cause a n 
assessment list of all lands and buildings in Delhi to be prepared in such form and manner and containing 
such particulars with respect to each land and building as may be prescribed by bye -laws.  
(2) When the assessment list has been prepared the Commissioner shall g ive public notice thereof and 
of the place where the list or  a copy thereof may be inspected, and every person claiming to be the owner, 
lessee or occupier of any land or building included in the list and any authorised agent of such person, 
shall be at liberty to inspect the list and to take extracts therefrom free of charge.  
(3) The Commissioner shall, at the same time, give public notice of a date, not less than one month 
thereafter, when he will proceed to consider the rateable values of lands and bui ldings  2***, entered in the 
assessment list, and in all cases in which any land or building is for the first time assessed, 3[or the 
rateable value of any land or building is increased] , he shall also give written notice thereof to the owner 
or to any less ee or occupier of the land or building.  
(4) Any objection to a rateable value or 4[any other matter]  as entered in the assessment list shall be 
made in writing to the Commissioner before the date fixed in the notice and shall state in what respect the 
rateable value, 5[or other matter]  is disputed, and all objections so made shall be recorded in a register to 
be kept for the purpose.  
(5) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons making them shall be 
allowed an opportunity of be ing heard either in person or by authorised agent, by the Commissioner or by 
any officer of the Corporation authorised in this behalf by the Commissioner.  
(6) When all objections have been disposed of, and the revision of the 6[rateable value ] has been 
completed, the assessment list shall be authenticated by the signature of the Commissioner or, as the case 
may be, the officer authorised by him in this behalf, who shall certify that except in the cases, if any, in 
which amendments have been mad e as shown therein no valid objection has been made to the 7[rateable 
values ] or any other matters entered in the said list.  
(7) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Corporation and shall 
be open, free of charge duri ng office hours to all owners, lessees and occupiers of lands and buildings 
comprised therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a public notice that it is so open shall 
forthwith be published.  
125. Evidential value of assessment list. —Subject t o such alterations as may thereafter be made in 
the assessment list under section 126 and to the result of any appeal made under the provisions of this 
Act, the entries in the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in section 124 shall be 
accepted as conclusive evidence — 
(a) for the purpose of assessing any tax levied under this Act, of the rateable value of all lands 
and buildings in which such entries respectively relate; 8*** 
9*   *   *  *   * 
126. Amendment of assessment list. —(1) The Commissioner may, at any time, amend the 
assessment list — 
(a) by inserting therein the name of any person whose name ought to be inserted; or  
(b) by inserting therein any land or building previously omitted; or  
(c) by striking out the name of any person n ot liable for the payment of property taxes; or  
(d) by increasing or reducing for adequate reasons the amount of any rateable value and of the 
assessment thereupon; or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 85, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words “and the assessments of property taxes in respect of lands and buildings” omitted by Act 42 of 1961, s. 10 
(w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
3. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid.,  for “or the assessment is increased” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
4. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid.,  for “a ssessment or any other matter” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “assessment or other matter” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
6. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid.,  for “rateable value and assessment” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).   
7. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid.,  for “rateable values or assessments” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).    
8. The word “and” omitted by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
9. Omitted by s. 11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  65 (e) by making or cancelling any entry exempting any land or building from liability to any 
property tax; or  
(f) by altering the assessment on the land or building which has been erroneously valued or 
assessed through fraud, mistake or accident; or  
(g) by inserting or altering an entry in respect of any building erected, re -erected, altered o r added 
to, after the preparation of the assessment list:  
Provided that no person shall by reason of any such amendment become liable to pay a ny tax or 
increase of tax in respect of any period prior to the commencement of the year 1[in which the notice und er 
sub-section ( 2) is given] . 
(2) Before making any amendment under sub -section ( 1) the Commissioner shall give to any person 
affected by the amendment, notice of not less than one month that he proposes to make the amendment 
and consider any objections wh ich may be made by such person.  
2[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2), before 
making any amendment to the assessment list for the years 3[commencing on the 1st  day of April, 1988, 
the 1st day of April, 1989 and the 1st day of April, 1990 under sub -section ( 1), the Commissioner shall 
give to any person affected by the amendment, notice of not less than one month at any time before the 
1st day of April, 19 92], tha t he proposes to make the amendment and consider any objections which may 
be made by such person.  
(4) No amendment under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in the assessment list in relation to — 
(a) any year prior to the year commencing on the 1st day of April,  1988, after the 31st day of 
March, 1991;  
(b) the year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1988, or any other year thereafter, after the 
expiry of three years from the end of the year in which the notice is given under sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to a case where the Commissioner has 
to amend the assessment list in consequence of or to give effect to any direction or order of any court.  
Explanation .—In computing the p eriod referred to in cl ause ( a) or clause ( b), any period or periods 
during which the proceedings for the assessment were held up on account of any stay or injunction by the 
order of any court, or the period of any delay attributable to the person to whom the notice has been given 
under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, shall be excluded.]  
127. Preparation of new assessment list. —It shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner to 
prepare for the whole or any part of Delhi a new assessment list every year or to adopt the rateable values 
4*** contained in the list for any year, with such alterations as may in particular cases be deemed 
necessary, as the rateable values 4*** for the year foll owing, giving the same public notice as well as 
individual notices, to persons affected by such alterations, of the rateable values 4*** as if a new 
assessment list had been prepared.  
128. Notice of transfers .—(1) Whenever the title of any person primarily  liable for the payment of 
property taxes on any land or building is transferred, the person whose title is transferred and the person 
to whom the same is transferred shall within three months after the execution of the instrument of transfer 
or after its registration, if it is registered, or after the transfer is effected, if no instrument is executed, give 
notice of such transfer in writing to the Commissioner.  
(2) In the event of the death of any person primarily liable as aforesaid, the person on whom t he title 
of the deceased devolves, shall give notice of such devolution to the Commissioner within six months 
from the date of the death of the deceased.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 12, for “in which the amendment is made” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1991, s. 2, for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 30 -3-1991).  
4. The words “and assessments” omitted by Act 42 of 1961, s. 13 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  66 (3) The notice to be given under this section shall be in such form as may be determined by bye -laws 
made under this Act, and the transferee or the other person on whom the title devolves shall, if so 
required, be bound to produce before the Commissioner any documents evidencing the transfer or 
devolution.  
(4) Every person who makes a transfer as aforesaid  without giving such notice to the Commissioner 
shall, in addition to any penalty to which he may be subjected under the provisions of this Act, continue 
liable for the payment of all property taxes from time to time payable in respect of the land or build ing 
transferred until he gives such notice or until the transfer has been recorded in the Commissioner ’s book, 
but nothing in this section sha ll be held to affect the liabil ity of the transferee for the payment of the said 
tax. 
(5) The Commissioner shall r ecord every transfer or devolution o f title notified to him under this 
section in his books and in the assessment list. 
(6) On a written request by the Commissioner, the registrar or sub -registrar of Delhi appointed under 
the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), shall furnish such particulars regarding the registration of 
instrument of transfer of immovable properties in Delhi, as the Commissioner may from time to time 
require.  
(7) Such information shall be furnished as soon as may be after the regis tration of an instrument of 
transfer is effected, or, if the Commissioner so requests, by periodical returns at such intervals as the 
Commissioner may fix.  
129. Notice of erection of building etc. —When any new building is erected or when any building is 
rebuilt or enlarged or when any building which has been vacant is re -occupied, the person primarily liable 
for the property taxes assessed on the building shall give notice thereof in writing to the Commissioner 
within fifteen days from the date of its com pletion or occupation whichever first occurs, or as the case 
may be, from the date of its enlargement or re -occupation; and property taxes shall be assessable on the 
building from the said date.  
130. Notice of demolition or removal of building .—(1) When any building or any portion of a 
building, which is liable to the payment of property taxes is demolished or removed, otherwise than by 
order of the Commissioner, the person primarily liable for the payment of the said taxes shall give notice 
thereof in wr iting to the Commissioner.  
(2) Until such notice is given, the person aforesaid shall continue liable to the payment of such 
property taxes as he would have been liable to pay in respect of such building if the same or any portion 
thereof had not been demo lished or removed.  
131. Power of Commissioner to call for information and returns and to enter and inspect 
premises. —(1) To enable him to determine the rateable value of any land or building and the person 
primarily liable for the payment of any property t axes leviable in respect thereof, the Commissioner may 
require the owner or occupier of such land or building, or of any portion thereof to furnish him within 
such reasonable period as the Commissioner fixes in this behalf, with information or with a writt en return 
signed by such owner or occupier — 
(a) as to the name and place of residence of the owner or occupier, or of both the owner and 
occupier of such land or buildings;  
(b) as to the measurements or dimensions of such land or building or of any portion  thereof and 
the rent, if any, obtained for such land or building or any portion thereof; and  
(c) as to the actual cost or other specified details connected with the determination of the value of 
such land or building.  
(2) Every owner or occupier on whom a ny such requisition is made shall be bound to comply with the 
same and to give true information or to make a true return to the best of his knowledge or belief.  
(3) Whoever omits to comply with any such requisition or fails to give true information or to m ake a 
true return to the best of his knowledge or belief, shall, in addition to any penalty to which he may be 67 liable, be precluded from objecting to any assessment made by the Commissioner in respect of such land 
or building of which he is the owner or oc cupier.  
132. Premises owned by, or let to, two or more persons in severalty to be ordinarily assessed as 
one property. —Notwithstanding that any land or building is owned by, or let to, two or more persons in 
severalty, the Commissioner shall for the purpose of assessing such land or building to property taxes 
treat the whole of it as one property:  
Provided that the Commissioner may, in respect of any land or building which was originally treated 
as one property but which subsequently passes on by tran sfer, succession or in any other manner to two or 
more persons who divide the same into several parts and occupy them in severalty, treat, subject to any 
bye-law made in this behalf, each such several part, or two or more of such several parts together, as  a 
separate property and assess such part or parts to property taxes accordingly.  
133. Assessment in case of amalgamation of premises. —If any land or building, bearing two or 
more municipal numbers, or portions thereof, be amalgamated into one or more new premises, the 
Commissioner shall on such amalgamation assign to them one or more numbers and assess them to 
proper ty taxes accordingly:  
Provided that the total assessment on amalgamation shall not be greater than the sum of the previous 
assessments of the several premises except when there is any re -valuation of any of the said premises.  
134. Power of Commissioner to assess separately out -houses and portions of buildings. —The 
Commissioner may in his discretion assess any outhouse appurtenant to a building, or any portion of a 
land or building separately from such building or as the case may be, from the rest of such land or 
building.  
135. Power of Commissioner to employ valuers .—(1) The Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, 
employ one or more competent persons  to give advice or assistance in connection with the valuation of 
any land or building, and any person so employed shall have power, at all reasonable times and after 
giving due notice, and on production, if so required, of authorisation in writing in that  behalf from the 
Commissioner, to enter on, survey and value any land or building which the Commissioner may direct 
him to survey and value.  
(2) No person shall wilfully delay or obstruct and such person in the exercise of any of his powers 
under this sect ion. 
Tax on vehicles and animals  
136. Tax on certain vehicles and animals and rates thereof .—Save as otherwise provided in this 
Act, a tax at the rates not exceeding those specified in the Third Schedule shall be levied on vehicles and 
animals of the descriptions specified in that Schedule which are kept within Delhi.  
137. The tax on whom leviable .—The tax on vehicles or animals shall be leviable upon the owner 
of, or the person having possession or control of, such vehicles or animals in respect of wh ich the tax is 
leviable:  
Provided that in the case of an animal generally used or employed in drawing any vehicle, the tax in 
respect of such animal shall be leviable upon the owner of, or the person having possession or control of, 
such vehicle, whether o r not such animal is owned by such owner or person:  
Provided further that the tax under this section sha ll not be levied in respect of — 
(a) vehicles and animals belonging to the Central Government or to the Corporation used or 
intended to be used solely fo r public purposes;  
(b) vehicles intended exclusively for the conveyance free of charge, of the injured, the sick or the 
dead;  
(c) children ’s perambulators or tricycles;  68 1[(d) a cow or a she -buffalo kept for milking for domestic use if the cow or the she-buffalo is the 
only cow or she -buffalo kept by the owner or the person having possession or control thereof for such 
milking and is registered in accordance with bye -laws made in this behalf, so, however, th at— 
(i) where more cows or, as the case may b e, more she -buffaloes than one are kept by several 
such owners or person constituting a family, the tax under this section shall be levied in respect of 
all such cows or all such she -buffaloes;  
(ii) where a cow and also a she -buffalo are kept by the owner or the person having the 
possession or control thereof or by several such owners or persons constituting a family, the tax 
under this section shall be levied in respect of the cow and the she -buffalo.]  
138. Tax when payable .—The tax on vehicles or animals shall be payable in advance in such  
number of instalments and in such manner as may be determined b y bye -laws made in this behalf.  
139. Power of Commissioner to compound with livery stable keeper, etc., for tax .—The 
Commissioner may, with the approval of the Standing Committee, compound for any period not 
exceeding one year at a time, with any livery stable keeper or other person keeping vehicles for hire or 
animals for sale or hire, for a lump sum to be paid in respect of the vehicles or animals so kept i n lieu of 
the taxes leviable under section 136 which such livery stable keeper or other person would otherwise be 
liable to pay.  
Theatre -tax 
140. Theatre -tax.—Save as otherwise provided in the Act, there shall be levied a tax (referred to in 
this Act as theatre -tax) in respect of every cinema, theatre, circus, carnival and other place of 
entertainment to which persons are ordinarily admitted on payment for performances or shows held or 
conducted thereat, at such rates not exceeding those specified in the Fourth Schedule as the Corporation 
may determine:  
Provided that the theatre -tax shall not be levied in respect of any performance or show i f the 
Commissioner is satisfied — 
(a) that the entire receipts from such performance or show will be devoted to philanthropic, 
religious or charitable purposes; or  
(b) that the performance or show is of a wholly educational character; or  
(c) that the performance or show is provided for partly educational or partly scientific purposes 
by a society not conducted or es tablished for profit.  
141. Liability to pay theatre -tax.—Every proprietor, manager, or person incharge of a theatre, 
cinema, circus, carnival or other place of entertainment shall be liable to pay the theatre -tax and shall pay 
the same in advance before th e commencement of the performances or shows : 
Provided that the Commissioner may, with the approval of the Standing Committee, compound for 
any series of performances or shows or for any period not exceeding one month, with such proprietor, 
manager, or pers on for a lump sum to be paid for such series of performances or shows or for the 
performances or shows held or conducted during such period.  
Tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers  
142. Tax on advertisements .—(1) Every person, who erects, exhibits, fixes or retains upon or over 
any land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle any advertisement or, 
who displays any advertisement to public view in any manner whatsoever, visible from a public street or 
public place (including any advertisement exhibited by means of cinematographs), shall pay for every 
advertisement which is so erected, exhibited, fixed or retained or so displayed to public view, a tax 
calculated at such rates not exceedi ng those specified in the Fifth Schedule as the Corporation may 
determine:  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  69 Provided that no tax shall be levied under this section on any advertisement which — 
(a) relates to a public meeting, or to an election to Parliament or the Corporation or to candida ture 
in respect of such election; or  
(b) is exhibited within the window of any building if the advertisement relates to the trade, 
profession or business carried on in that building; or  
(c) relates to the trade, profession or business carried on within the  land or building upon or over 
which such advertisement is exhibited or to any sale or letting of such land or building or any effects 
therein or to any sale, entertainment or meeting to be held on or upon in the same; or  
(d) relates to the name of the lan d or building upon or over which the advertisement is exhibited, 
or to the name of the owner or occupier of such land or building; or  
(e) relates to the business of a railway administration and is exhibited within any railway station 
or upon any wall or ot her property of a railway administration; or  
(f) relates to any activity of the Central Government or the Corporation.  
(2) The tax on any advertisement leviable under this section shall be payable in advance in such 
number of instalments and in such manner  as may be determined by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
Explanation  1.—The word “structure ” in this section includes any movable board on wheels used as 
an advertisement or an advertisement medium.  
Explanation  2.—The word “advertisement ” in relation to a tax on advertisement under this Act means 
any word, letter, model, sign, placard, notice, device or representation, whether illuminated or not, in the 
nature of and employed wholly or in part for the purposes of advertisement, announcemen t or direction.  
 143. Prohibition of advertisements without written permission of the Commissioner .—(1) No 
advertisement shall be erected, exhibited, fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, 
hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle or shall be displayed in any manner 
whatsoever in any place within Delhi without the written permission of the Commissioner granted in 
accordance with bye -laws made under this Act.  
(2) The Commissioner shal l not grant such permission if — 
(a) the advertisement contravenes any bye -law made under this Act; or  
(b) the tax, if any, due in respect of the advertisement has not been paid.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), in the case of an advertisement liable to the 
advertisement tax,  the Commissioner shall grant permission for the period to which the payment of the 
tax relates and no fee shall be charged in respect of such permission.  
144. Permission of the Commissioner to become void in certain cases .—The permission granted 
under sec tion 143 shall become void i n the following cases, namely: — 
(a) if the advertisement contravenes any bye -law made under this Act;  
(b) if any material change is made in the advertisement or any part thereof without the previous 
permission of the Commissione r; 
(c) if the advertisement or any part thereof falls otherwise than through accident;  
(d) if any addition or alteration is made to, or in the building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or 
structure upon or over which the advertisement is erected, exhibited, fi xed or retained if such addition 
or alteration involves the disturbance of the advertisement or any part thereof; and  
(e) if the building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure over which the advertisement is 
erected, exhibited, fixed or retained is demolished or destroyed.  
145. Presumption in case of contravention .—Where any advertisement has been erected, exhibited, 
fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in 
any vehicle or displayed to p ublic view from a public street or public place in contravention of the 70 provisions of this Act or any bye -laws made thereunder, it shall be presumed, unless and until contrary is 
proved, that the contravention has been committed by the person or the person s on whose behalf the 
advertisement purports to be or the agents of such person or persons.  
146. Power of Commissioner in case of contravention .—If any advertisement is erected, exhibited, 
fixed or retained in contravention of the provisions of section 143 , the Commissioner may require the 
owner or occupier of the land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or vehicle upon, or over 
or in which the same is erected, exhibited, fixed or retained, to take down or remove such advertisement 
or may en ter any land, building, property or vehicle and have the advertisement dismantled taken down or 
removed or spoiled, defaced or screened.  
Duty on transfer of property  
147. Duty on transfer of property  and method of assessment there of.—(1) Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the Corporation shall levy a duty on transfers of immovable property situated within 
the limits of Delhi in accordance with the provisions hereafter in this section contained.  
(2) The said duty shall be levied — 
(a) in the form of a surcharge on the duty imposed by the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) as 
in force for the time being in the Union territory of Delhi, on every instrument of the description 
specified below, and  
(b) at such rate as may be determined by the Corporation not  exceeding five per cent, on the 
amount specified b elow against such instruments: — 
 
Description of instrument  Amount on which duty should be levied  
(i) Sale of immovable property.  The amount or value of the consideration for the 
sale, as set forth in the instrument.  
(ii) Exchange of immovable property.  The value of the property of the greater value, as 
set forth in the instrument.  
(iii) Gift of immovable property.  The value of the property, as set forth in the 
instrument.  
(iv) Mortgage with possession of 
immovable property.  The amount secured by the mortgage as set forth 
in the instrument.  
(v) Lease in perpetuity of immovable 
property.  The amount equal to one -sixth of the whole 
amount or value of the rent which would be 
paid or delivered in respect of the first fifty 
years of the lease as set forth in the instrument.  
 148. Provisions applicable on the introduction of transfer duty .—On the introduction of the  duty 
on transfers of property — 
(a) section 27 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899), as in force in Delhi shall be read as if it 
specifically required the particulars to be set forth separately in respect of property situated within 
and without Delhi;  
(b) section 64 of the said Act shall be read as if it referred to the Corporation as well as th e 
Government.  
Tax on buildings payable along with the application for sanction of building plans  
149. Tax on building applications .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Corporation 
shall levy a tax on buildings at such rates not exceeding those specified in the Sixth Schedule, as the 
Corporation shall determine.  71 (2) The tax shall be leviable on every person who makes an application to the Commissioner for the 
sanction of building plan and shall be payable along with the same.  
Other taxes  
150. Imposition of other taxes .—(1) The Corporation may, at a meeting, pass a resolution for the 
levy of any of the taxes specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 113, defining the maximum rate of the tax 
to be levied, the class or classes of persons or the des cription or descriptions of articles and properties to 
be taxed, the system of assessment to be adopted and the exemptions, if any, to be granted.  
(2) Any resolution passed under sub -section ( 1) shall be submitted to the  1*** Government for its 
sanction, a nd if sanctioned by that Government, shall come into force on and from such date as may be 
specified in the order of sanction.  
(3) After a resolution has come into force under sub -section ( 2), the Corporation may, subject to the 
maximum rate, pass a second  resolution determining the actual rates at which the tax shall be leviable; 
and the tax shall come into force on the first day of the quarter of the year next following the date on 
which second resolution is passed.  
(4) After a tax has been levied in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section, the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 109, shall apply in relation to such tax as they apply in relation to 
any tax imposed under sub -section ( 1) of section 113.  
Supplementary taxation  
151. Supplementary taxation .—Whenever  the Corporation decides to have recourse to 
supplementary taxation under  sub-section ( 2) of section 111 in any year, it shall do so by increasing from  
such date as the Corporation may determine, the rates at which any tax leviable  under this Act is being 
levied, but every such increase shall be made subject  to the maximum rate and any other limitation 
specified in respect of such tax.  
Payment and recovery of taxes  
152. Time and manner of payment of taxes .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any tax 
levied under this Act shall be payable on such dates, in such number of instalments and in such manner as 
may be determined by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
153. Presentation of bill .—(1) When any tax has b ecome due, the Commissioner shall cause to be 
presented to the person liable for the payment thereof, a bill for the amount due:  
Provided that no such bill sha ll be necessary in the case of — 
(a) a tax on vehicles and animals;  
(b) a theatre -tax; and  
(c) a tax on advertisements.  
(2) Every such bill shall specify the particulars of the tax and the period for which the charge is made.  
154. Notice of demand and notice -fee.—(1) If the amount of the tax for which a bill has been 
presented under section 153, is not  paid within fifteen days from the presentation thereof, or if the tax on 
vehicles and animals or the theatre -tax or the tax on advertisements is not paid after it has become due, 
the Commissioner may cause to be served upon the person liable for the payme nt of the same a notice of 
demand in the form set forth in the Seventh Schedule.  
(2) For every notice of demand which the Commissioner causes to be served on any person under this 
section, a fee of such amount not exceeding five rupees as may be determined  by bye -laws made in this 
behalf, shall be payable by the said person and shall be included in this cost of recovery.  
                                                 
1. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 86 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  72 155. Penalty in case of default of payment of taxes .—(1) If the person liable for the payment of any 
tax does not, within thirty days of t he service of the  notice of demand under section  154, pay the sum due 
and if no appeal is preferred against such tax, he shall be deemed to be in default.  
(2) When the person liable for the payment of any tax is deemed to be in default under                              
sub-section ( 1), such sum not exceeding twenty per cent, of the amount of the tax as may be determined 
by the Commissioner may be recovered from him by way of penalty, in addition to the amount of the tax 
and the notice fee, pa yable under sub -section ( 2) of section 154.  
(3) The amount due as penalty under sub -section ( 2) shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this 
Act. 
156. Recovery of tax .—(1) If the person liable for the payment of the tax does not, within thirty days 
from the service of the notice of demand, pay the amount due, such sum together with all costs and the 
penalty provided for in section 155, may be recovered under a warrant, issued in the form set forth in the 
Eighth Schedule, by distress and sale of the m ovable property or the attachment and sale of the 
immovable property, of the defaulter:  
Provided that the Commissioner shall not recovery any sum the liability for which has been remitted 
on appeal under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every warrant issued  under this section shall be signed by the Commissioner.  
157. Distress .—(1) It shall be lawful for any officer or other employee of the Corporation to whom a 
warrant issued under section 156 is addressed to distrain, wherever it may be found in any place i n Delhi, 
any movable property or any standing timber, growing crops or grass belonging to the person therein 
named as defaulter, subject to the following conditions, exceptions and exemptions, namel y:— 
(a) the following pro perty shall not be distrained: — 
(i) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter, his wife and children and their 
cooking and eating utensils;  
(ii) tools of artisans;  
(iii) books of account; or  
(iv) when the defaulter is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry, seed, grain and such 
cattle as may be necessary to enable the defaulter to earn his livelihood;  
(b) the distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained shall be as nearly as 
possible equal in value to the amount recoverable under the war rant, and if any property has been 
distrained which, in the opinion of the Commissioner, should not have been distrained, it shall 
forthwith be released.  
(2) The person charged with the execution of a warrant of distress shall forthwith make an inventory 
of the property which he seizes under such warrant, and shall, at the same time, give a written notice in 
the form set forth in the Ninth Schedule, to the person in possession thereof at the time of seizure that the 
said property will be sold as therein men tioned.  
158. Disposal of distrained property and attachment and sale of immovable property .—(1) 
When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay or when the expense of keeping it in 
custody is, when added to the amount to be recovered, likel y to exceed its value, the Commissioner shall 
give notice to the person in whose possession the property was at the time of seizure that it will be sold at 
once, and shall sell it accordingly by public auction unless the amount mentioned in the warrant is 
forthwith paid.  
(2) If the warrant is not in the meantime suspended by the Commissioner, or discharged, the property 
seized shall, after the expiry of the period named in the notice served under sub -section ( 2) of section 157, 
be sold by public auction by order of the Commissioner.  
(3) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sale of immovable property, the attachment shall 
be made by an order prohibiting the defaulter from transferring or charging the property in any way, and 73 all persons from taking  any benefit from such transfer or charge, and declaring that such property would 
be sold unless the amount of tax due with all costs of recovery is paid into the municipal office within 
fifteen days from the date of the attachment.  
(4) Such order shall be  proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or 
other customary mode and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and 
upon a conspicuous part of the municipal office and also, when the property  is land paying revenue to the 
Government, in the office of the collector.  
(5) Any transfer of or charge on the property attached or any interest therein made without written 
permission of the Commissioner shall be void as against all claims of the Corpora tion enforceable under 
the attachment.  
(6) The surplus of the sale -proceeds, if any shall, immediately after the sale of the property, be 
credited to the Municipal Fund, and notice of such credit shall be given at the same time to the person 
whose property  has been sold or his legal representative and if the same is claimed by written application 
to the Commissioner within one year from the date of the notice, a refund thereof shall be made to such 
person or representative.  
(7) Any surplus not claimed withi n one year as aforesaid shall be the property of the Corporation.  
(8) For every distraint and attachment made in accordance with the foregoing provisions, a fee of 
such amount not exceeding two -and-a-half per  cent. of the amount of the tax due as shall in each case be 
fixed by the Commissioner, shall be charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of recovery.  
159. Recovery from a person about to leave Delhi .—(1) If the Commissioner has reason to believe  
that any person from whom any sum is due or is about to become due on account of any tax is about to 
move from Delhi, he may direct the immediate payment by such person of the sum so due or about to 
become due and cause a notice of demand for the same to be served on such person.  
(2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the sum so due or about to 
become due, the amount shall be leviable by distress or attachment and sale in the manner hereinbefore 
provided, and the warrant of distress or attachment and sale may be issued and executed without any 
delay.  
160. Power to institute suit for recovery .—Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and 
sale as hereinbefore provided, or after a defaulter has been so proceeded against unsuccessfully or with 
partial success, any sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, from such defaulter on 
account of a tax may be recovered from him by a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
161. Power of seizure of vehi cles and animals in case of non -payment of tax thereon .—(1) If the 
tax on any vehicle or animal is not paid, then, instead of proceeding against the defaulter by distress and 
sale of his other movable property as hereinbefore provided, the Commissioner may, at any time after the 
tax has become due, seize and detain the vehicle or animal or both and, if the owner or other person 
entitled thereto does not within seven days in respect of a vehicle and two days in respect of an animal 
from the date of such s eizure and detention, claim the same and pay the tax due together with the charges 
incurred in connection with the seizure and detention, the Commissioner may cause the same to be sold 
and apply the proceeds of sale or such part thereof as is required in d ischarge of the sum due and the 
charges incurred as aforesaid.  
(2) The surplus, if any, remaining after the application of the sale -proceeds under sub -section ( 1) shall 
be disposed of in the manner laid down in sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7) of section 158.  
162. Occupiers may be required to pay rent towards satisfaction of property taxes .—(1) For the 
purposes of recovering the amount of any property tax from any occupier under section 122, the 
Commissioner shall cause to be served on such occupier a notice requir ing him to pay to the Corporation 
any rent due or falling due from him in respect of the land or building to the extent necessary to satisfy 
the portion of the sum due for which he is liable under the said section.  74 (2) Such notice shall operate as an attac hment of the said rent unless the portion of the sum due shall 
have been paid and satisfied and the occupier shall be entitled to credit in account with the person to 
whom such rent is due for any sum paid by him to the Corporation in pursuance of such not ice: 
Provided that if the person to whom such rent is due is not the person primarily liable for payment of 
the property tax, he shall be entitled to recover from the person primarily liable for the payment of such 
tax any amount for which credit is claime d as aforesaid.  
(3) If any occupier fails to pay to the Corporation any rent due or falling due which he has been 
required to pay in pursuance of a notice served upon him as aforesaid, the amount of such rent may be 
recovered from him by the Corporation as  an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Remission and Refund  
163. Demolition, etc., of buildings .—If any building is wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or 
otherwise deprived of value, the Commissioner may, on the application in writing of the owner or 
occupier, remit or refund such portion of any tax assessed on the  rateable  annual value thereof as he 
thinks fit.  
1[164 Remission  or refund of tax .—(1) If any building toget her with land appurtenant there to has 
remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Commissioner shall 
remit or refund, as the case may be, two -thirds of such portion of 2*** the general tax assessed on the 
rateable value thereof, as may be proportiona te to the number of days during which the said building 
together with the land appurtenant thereto has remained vacant and unproductive of rent.  
(2) If any land, not being land appurtenant to a building, has remained vacant and unproductive of 
rent for six ty or more consecutive days, the Commissioner shall remit or refund, as the case may be, one -
half of such portion of 2*** the general tax assessed on the rateable value thereof, as may be, 
proportionate to the number of days during which the said land has remained vacant  and unproductive of 
rent. 
3*   *   *   *   *] 
165. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings. —(1) For the purpose of 
obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the owner of a building composed of separate tenements 
may request the Commissioner, at the time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the assessment 
list, in addition to the rateable value of the whole building, a note regarding any detail of the rateable 
value of each separate tenement.  
(2) When any tenement, the rateable value of which has been thus separately recorded, has remained 
vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, such portion of any tax assessed on 
the rateable value of the whole building shall be remit ted or refunded as would have been remitted or 
refunded if the tenement had been separately assessed.  
166. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed. —No 
remission or refund under section 164 or section 165 shall be mad e unless notice in writing of the fact that 
the land, building or tenement has become vacant and unproductive of rent has been given to the 
Commissioner, and no remission or refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more 
than fifteen day s before delivery of such notice.  
167. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant. —(1) For the purposes of sections 164 and 165, 
no land, building or tenement shall be deemed vacant if maintained as a pleasure resort or town or country 
house or be deemed unproductive of rent if, let to a tenant who has a continuing right of occupation 
thereof, whether he is in actual occupation or not.  
(2) The burden of proving the facts entitling any person to claim relief under section 163, or section 
164, or sect ion 165, shall be upon him.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 15, for section 164 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
2. The word s “the scavenging tax, the fire tax and” omi tted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 87 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Omitted by s. 87 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  75 168. Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant land or building. —The owner of any land, 
building or tenement in respect of which a remission or refund of tax has been given under section 164, or 
section 165, shall give notice of the re -occupation of such land, building or tenement within fifteen days 
of such re -occupation.  
Appeals  
169. Appeal against assessment, etc. —(1) An appeal against the levy or assessment of any tax under 
this Act shall lie to the court of the District Judge of Delhi.  
(2) If, before or on the hearing of an appeal under this section, any question of law or usage having 
the force of law or construction of a document arises, the court of the District Judge on its own motion 
may, or on the applicati on of any party to the appeal, shall, draw up a statement of the facts of the case, 
and the question so arising, and refer the statement with its opinion on the question for the decision of the 
High Court.  
(3) On a reference being made under sub -section ( 2), the subsequent proceedings in the case shall be, 
as nearly as may be in conformity with the rules relating to references to the High Court contained in 
Order XLVI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(4) In every appea l, the costs shall be in the discretion of the court.  
(5) Costs awarded under this section to the Corporation shall be recoverable by the Corporation as an 
arrear of tax due from the appellant.  
(6) If the Corporation fails to pay any costs awarded to an ap pellant within ten days after the date of 
the order for payment thereof, the court may order the Commissioner to pay the amount to the appellant.  
170. Conditions of right to appeal .—No Appeal shall be heard or deter mined under section 169 
unless— 
(a) the appeal is, in the case of a property tax, brought within thirty days next after the date of 
authentication of the assessment list under section 124 (exclusive of the time requisite for obtaining a 
Copy of the relevant entries therein) or, as the case may b e, within thirty days of the date on which an 
amendment is finally made under section 126, and, in the case of any other tax, within thirty days 
next after the date of the receipt of the notice of assessment or of alteration of assessment or, if no 
notice has been given, within thirty days after the date of the presentation of the first bill or, as the 
case may be, the first notice of demand in respect thereof:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiration of the period prescribed therefor by  
this section if the appellant satisfies the  court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period;  
(b) the amount, if any, in dispute in the appeal has been deposited by the appellant in the office of 
the Corporation.  
 171. Finality of appellate orders .—The order of the court confirming, setting aside or modifying an 
order in respect of any rateable  value or assessment or liability to assessment or taxation shall be final:  
Provided that it shall be lawful for the  court , upon a pplication or on its own motion, to review any 
order passed by it in appeal within three months from the date of the order.  
Miscellaneous provisions relating to taxation  
172. Power to inspect for purposes of determining rateable  value or tax .—(1) The Commissioner 
may, without giving any previous notice, enter upon and make an inspection of — 
(a) any land or building for the purpose of determining the rateable  value of such land or 
building;  
(b) any stable, garage, or coach house or any place where in he may have reason to believe that 
there is any vehicle or animal liable to a tax under this Act;  
(c) any place or premises which he has reason to believe are being used or are about to be used 
for any performance or show in respect of which the theatre  tax is payable or would be payable;  76 (d) any land, building or vehicle in or upon which any advertisement liable to tax under this Act 
is exhibited or displayed.  
(2) The Commissioner may, by written summons, require the attendance before him of any person 
whom he has reason to believe to be liable to the payment of a tax in respect of a vehicle or animal, or of 
any servant of any such person and may examine such person or servant as to the number and description 
of vehicles and animals owned by or in the po ssession or under the control of such person; and every 
person or servant of such person so summoned shall be bound to attend before the Commissioner and to 
give information to the best of his knowledge and belief as to the said matters.  
173. Composition .—(1) The Commissioner may, with the previous sanction of the Standing 
Committee, allow any person to compound for any tax.  
(2) Every sum due by reason of the composition of a tax under sub -section ( 1) shall be recovered as 
an arrear of tax under this Act.  
174. Irrecoverable debts .—(1) The Commissioner may write off any sum due on account of any tax 
or of the costs of recovering any tax if such sum is, in his opinion irrecoverable:  
Provided that, where the sum written off in favour of any one person exceeds o ne hundred rupees, the 
previous sanction of the Standing Committee shall be first obtained.  
(2) The Commissioner shall report to the Standing Committee every case in which any sum has been 
written off under sub -section ( 1). 
175. Obligation to disclose liab ility.—(1) The Commissioner may, by written notice, call upon any 
inhabitant of Delhi to furnish such information as may be necessary f or the purpose of ascertaining — 
(a) whether such inhabitant is liable to pay any tax imposed by the Corporation under this Act;  
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; or  
(c) the rateable  value of the land or building which he occupies and the name and address of the 
owner or lessee thereof.  
(2) If any person when called upon under sub -section ( 1) to furnish information  neglects to furnish it 
within the period specified in this behalf by the Commissioner or furnishes information which is not true 
to the best of his knowledge or belief, he shall be liable, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed 
under this Act, to  be assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Commissioner may deem proper, 
and the assessment so made shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be final.  
176. Immaterial error not to affect liability .—No assessment and no charge or demand on account 
of any tax shall be impeached or affected by reason only of any mistake in the name, residence, place of 
business or occupation of any person liable to pay the tax or in the description of any property or thing, or 
of any mistake in the amount of t he assessment, charge or demand, or by reason only of clerical error or 
other defect of form, if the directions contained in this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder have in 
substance and effect been complied with; and it shall be enough in the case of an y such tax on property or 
any assessment of value for the purpose of any such tax, if the property taxed or assessed is so described 
as to be generally known; and it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupier thereof.  
177. General power of exempt ion.—The Corporation may, by resolution passed in this behalf, 
exempt either wholly or in part from the payment of any tax levied under this Act, any class of persons or 
any class of property or goods.  
Terminal taxes on goods  
178. Terminal tax on goods car ried by railway , or road .—(1) On and from the date of the 
establishment of the Corporation under Section 3, there shall be levied on all goods carried by railway or 
road into the Union Territory of Delhi from any place outside thereof, a terminal tax at the rates specified 
in the Tenth Schedule.  77 (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, vary from time to time, the 
rates specified in that Schedule, in relation to any goods or classes of  goods so, however, that where the 
rates  are increased, the increased rate shall not be more than treble the rates so specified.  
(3) The Central Government may by like notification declare that with effect from such date as may 
be specified in the notification, the terminal tax levied in relatio n to any goods or class of goods shall, for 
reasons specified in the notification, cease to be levied.  
179. Recovery of terminal taxes. —(1) The terminal tax levied under this Act shall be payable on 
demand and shall be collected by the Central Government i n such manner and through such agency as 
may be specified by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Such portion of the total proceeds of the terminal tax as the Central Government may determine 
shall be deducted to meet the cost of collection of the ta x. 
180. Payment by the Central Government to the Corporation and other local authorities. —The 
proceeds of the terminal tax collected under this Act (which shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of 
India)  reduced by the cost of collect ion as determined under sub -section ( 2) of Section 179 shall, if 
Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, be paid by the Central Government to 
the Corporation and to other local authorities within the Union Territory of Delhi in such proportion as  
may from time to time be determined by the Central Government.  
181. Power of exemption. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt either wholly or in part from the payment of terminal tax imposed by this Act any class of goods.  
182. Powers and liabilities of persons authorised to collect terminal taxes. —Every person 
authorised under the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder to collect the terminal tax shall 
have, in respect of the collection of such tax and of the confiscation of goods in connection therewith, 
same powers as are conferred by any law for the time being in force on the Collector of Land Customs, 
Delhi and the officers subordinate to him in respect of the levy and collection of land customs duti es and 
the confiscation of goods in connection therewith and shall also be subject to the same liabilities in 
respect of anything done by him in or for the purpose of collecting the terminal tax as the said Collector 
of Land Customs and the officers subord inate to him are subject to under any law for the time being in 
force r elating to land customs duties.  
183. Power to make rules. —The Central Government may make rules in relation to the levy, 
assessment and collection of terminal tax under this Act and may  by such rules provide for the following 
among other matters, namely: — 
(a) the examination of goods liable to payment of terminal tax;  
(b) the inspection, weighing or otherwise examining the contents of any conveyance or package 
for the purpose of ascertai ning whether it contains any goods in respect of which terminal tax is 
payable;  
(c) the seizure and confiscation of goods liable to terminal tax in case of refusal to pay such tax ;  
(d) the measures to prevent evasion of terminal tax ;  
(e) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed for the levy, assessment or collection of 
the terminal tax.  
1*** Taxes on entertainment and betting  
2[184. Proceeds of entertainment tax. —The proceeds of the entertainment and betting taxes 
collected in Delhi under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Entertainment and Betting Tax Act, 1937 
(U.P. Act 8 of 1937), as extended to Delhi (which shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi) reduced by the cost of collect ion as determined by the Government 
shall, if the Legislat ive Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi by appropriation made by law 
in this behalf so provides, be paid to the Corporation for the performance of its functions under this Act.]  
                                                 
1. The words “ Taxes on motor vehicles and ” omitted by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  
2. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 88, for section 184 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  78 CHAP TER IX  
BORROWING  
185. Power of Corporation to borrow .—(1) The Corporation may, in pursuance of any resolution 
passed by it, borrow by way of debenture or otherwise on the security of all or any of the taxes, rates, 
cesses, fees and charges authorised by or under this Act, any sums of money which may be required — 
(a) for acquiring any land which it has power to acquire;  
(b) for erecting any building which it has power to erect;  
(c) for the execution of any permanent work, the provision of any plant, or the doing of any other 
thing which it has power to execute, p rovide or do, if the cost of carrying out the purpose in question 
ought to be spread over a term of years;  
1[(d) to pay off any debt due to the Central Government or the Government;]  
(e) to repay a loan previously raised under this Act or any other Act pre viously in force; or  
(f) for any other purpose for which the Corporation is, by virtue of this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force, authorised to borrow:  
Provided that — 
(i) no loan shall be raised without the previous sanction of the Central Government or without 
previous publication of the application for sanction under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914, (9 
of 1914) and the rules made thereunder;  
(ii) the amount of loan, the rate of interest and the terms including the date of floatation,  the time 
and method of the repayment and the like shall be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) When any sum of money has been borrowed under sub -section ( 1), no portion of any sum of 
money borrowed for any of the purposes referred to in  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be applied to the 
payment of salaries and allowances to any municipal officers or other municipal employees other than 
those exclusively employed in connection with the carrying out of that purpose.  
186. Time for repayment of money borrowed under section 185 .—The time for the repayment of 
any money borrowed under section 185 shall in no case exceed sixty years and the time for repayment of 
any money borrowed for the purpose of discharging any previous loa n shall not, except with the express 
sanction of the Central Government, extend beyond the unexpired portion of the period for which such 
previous loan was sanctioned.  
187. Form and effect of debenture s.—All debentures issued under this Chapter shall be in  such 
form as Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, determine and shall be 
transferable in such manner as shall be therein expressed; and the right to sue in respect of the moneys 
secured by any of such debentures shall ves t in the holders thereof for the time being without any 
preference by reason of some such debentures being prior in date to others.  
188. Payment to survivors of joint payees .—When any debenture or security issued under this Act 
is payable to two or more pe rsons jointly, and either or any of them dies, then notwithstanding anything in 
section 45 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), the debenture or security shall be payable to the 
survivor or survivors of such person :  
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any claim by the legal representative of a deceased 
person against such survivor or survivors.  
189. Receipt by joint holders for interest or dividend .—When two or more persons are joint 
holders of any debenture or security issued under  this Act, any one of such persons may give an effectual 
receipt for any interest or dividend payable in respect of such debenture or security, unless notice to the 
contrary has been given to the Corporation by the other of such persons.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 89, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  79 190. Maintenance a nd investment of sinking funds .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain sinking 
funds for the repayment of money borrowed on debentures issued and shall pay every year into such 
sinking funds such sum as will be sufficient for the repayment within the period fi xed for the loan of all 
moneys borrowed on the debentures issued.  
(2) All money paid into the sinking funds shall, as soon as possible, be invested by the Commissioner 
in public securities and every such investment shall be reported by the Commissioner to the Corporation 
within fifteen days.  
(3) All dividends and other sums received in respect of any such investment shall, as soon as possible 
after receipt, be paid into the sinking funds and invested in the manner laid down in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) When any part of a sinking fund is invested in Delhi municipal debentures, or is applied in paying 
off any part of a loan before the period fixed for repayment, the interest which would otherwise have been 
payable on such debentures or on such part of the loan shal l be paid into the sinking fund and invested in 
the manner laid down in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Any investment made under this section may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), be 
varied or transposed.  
191. Application of sinking funds .—A sinking fun d or any part thereof shall be applied in or 
towards the discharge of the loan or a part of the loan for which such fund was created, and until such 
loan or part is wholly discharged shall not be applied for any other purpose:  
Provided that when any loan or part thereof has been consolidated under section 193, the 
Commissioner shall transfer to the sinking fund of the consolidated loan such part of the sinking funds of 
the original loans as may be proportionate to the amount of the original loans incorpora ted in the 
consolidated loan.  
192. Annual statement by Commissioner .—(1) The Commis sioner shall, at the end of every year, 
submit to C orporation a statement showing — 
(a) the amount which has been invested during the year under section 190;  
(b) the date of the last investment made previous to the submission of the statement;  
(c) the aggregate amount of the securities then in his hands; and  
(d) the aggregate amount which has up to the date of the statement been applied under section 
191, in or towards dischar ging loans.  
(2) Every such statement shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
193. Power of Corporation to consolid ate loans .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Chapter, the Corporation may consolidate all or any of its loans and for that purpose may 
invite tenders for a new loan (to be called “the Delhi Municipal consolidated loan, 19 —— ”) and invite 
holders of the municipal debentures to exchange their debentures for scrips of such loan.  
(2) The terms of any such consolidated loan and the form of its scrip and the rates at which exchange 
into such consolidated loan shall be permitted shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central 
Government.  
(3) The period for the exchanging of any such consolidated loan shall not, without the sanction of the 
Central Government, extend beyond the farthest date within which any of the loans to be consolidated 
would otherwise be repayable.  
(4) The Corporation shall provide for the repayment of any such consolidated loan by a sinking fund 
in the manner laid down in section 190, having regard to the amount transferred to such sinking fund 
under section 191.  
194. Priorit y of payments for interest and repayment of loans over other payments .—All 
payments due from the Corporation for interest on and repayment of loans shall be made in priority to all 
other payments due from the Corporation.  80 195. Attachment of Municipal Fund for recovery of money borrowed from Government .—(1) If 
any money borrowed or deemed to have been borrowed by the Corporation from the  1[Central 
Government  or the Government ] or any interest or costs due in respect thereof be n ot repaid according to 
the conditions of the loan, the  1[Central Government  or the Government ] may attach the Municipal Fund 
or any part thereof.  
(2) After such attachment no person except an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government shall  in any way deal with the attached fund; but such officer may do all acts in respect 
thereof which any municipal authority, officer or other employee might have done if such attachment had 
not taken place, and may apply the proceeds in satisfaction of the arrears and of all interests and costs due 
in respect thereof and of all expenses caused by the attachment and subsequent proceedings:  
Provided that no such attachment shall defeat or prejudice any debt for which the fund was previously 
charged in accordan ce with law; and all such prior charges shall be paid out of the proceeds of the fund 
before any part of the proceeds is applied to the satisfaction of the debt due to the  1[Central Government].  
196. Power to make regulations .—The Corporation may make regulations to carry out the purpose 
of this Chapter including, in particular, the issue of duplicates in case  of loss of debentures by theft, 
destruction or otherwise, and renewal of debentures on payment of fees prescribed in this behalf by such 
regulati ons. 
CHAPTER X  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
Property  
 197. Acquisition of property .—The Corporation shall, for the purpose of this Act, have power to 
acquire and hold movable and immovable property, or any interest therein.  
198. Acquisition of immovable property by agreement .—Whenever the Corporation decides to 
acquire any immovable property for the purpose of this Act, the Commissioner shall acquire such 
property on behalf of the Corporation by agreement on such terms and at suc h price as may be approved 
by the Standing Committee.  
199. Procedure when immovable property c annot be acquired by agreement .—Whenever the 
Commissioner is unable to acquire any immovable property under section 198 by agreement, the Central 
Government may at the request of the Commissioner procure the acquisition thereof under the provisions 
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), and on payment by the Corporation of the compensation 
awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Governmen t in connection with the 
proceedings, the land shall vest in the Corporation.  
200. Disposal of property .—With respect to the disposal of property belonging to the Corporation, 
the following provisi ons shall have effect, namely: — 
(a) the Commissioner may, i n his discretion, dispose of, by sale or otherwise, any movable 
property belonging to the Corporation not exceeding in value in each instance one thousand rupees, or 
such higher amount as the Corporation may prescribe, or let out or hire any movable proper ty or grant 
a lease of any immovable property belonging to the Corporation, including any right of gathering and 
taking fruits and the like, for a period not exceeding one year at a time;  
(b) the Commissioner may, with the sanct ion of the Standing Committee, — 
(i) dispose of, by sale or otherwise, any movable property belonging to the Corporation the 
value of which does not exceed five thousand rupees;  
(ii) grant a lease (other than a lease in per petuity) of any immovable property belonging to the 
Corporation; or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 90, for “Government” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  81 (iii) sell or grant a lease in perpetuity of any immovable property belonging to the 
Corporation the value of which does not exceed fifty thousand rupees or the annual rent of which 
does not exceed three thousand rupees;  
(c) in cases not covered by clause ( a) or clause ( b), the Commissioner may, with the sanction of 
the Corporation, lease, sell, let out on hire or otherwise transfer any property, movable or immovable, 
belonging to the Corporation;  
(d) the consideration for which any immova ble property may be sold, leased or otherwise 
transferred shall not be less than the value at which such immovable property could be sold, leased or 
otherwise transferred in normal and fair competition;  
(e) the sanction of the Standing Committee or of the Corporation under the aforesaid clauses may 
be given either generally for any class of cases or specially for any particular case;  
(f) subject to any conditions or limitations that may be specified in any other provisions of this 
Act, the foregoing provisi ons of this section shall apply to every disposal of property belonging to the 
Corporation made under, or for any purpose of, this Act;  
(g) every case of disposal of property under clause ( a) and clause ( b) shall be reported by the 
Commissioner without del ay to the Standing Committee and the Corporation respectively.  
Contracts  
201. Contracts by the Corporation .—Subject to the provisions of sections 202 and 203, the 
Corporation shall be competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the purposes of this 
Act. 
202. Procedure for making contracts .—With respect to the making of contracts, the following 
provisions shall have effect, namely: -- 
(a) every such contract shall be made on behalf of the Corporation by the Commissioner;  
(b) no such contract, for any purpose which in accordance with any provision of this Act the 
Commissioner may not carry out without the approval or sanction of the Corporation or some other 
municipal authority shall be made by him until and unless such approval or san ction has been duly 
obtained;  
1[(c) no contract which will involve an expenditure exceeding ten lakh rupees or such higher 
amount as the Central Government may from time to time, fix, shall be made by the Commissioner 
unless the same is previously approved  by the Standing Committee; and  
(d) every contract made by the Commissioner involving an expenditure exceeding one lakh 
rupees but not exceeding ten lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be fixed under clause ( c) shall 
be reported by him, within one mon th after the same has been made to the Standing Committee.]  
2*   *   *   *  * 
203. Mode of executing contracts .—(1) The mode of executing contracts under this Act shall be 
prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
(2) No contract which is not made in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws 
made thereunder shall be binding on the Corporation.  
CHAPTER XI  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
Scrutiny and audit of accounts  
3[204. Accounts to be kept .—There shall be kept in such manner and in such form as  may be 
prescribed by regulations the General Account of all receipts and expenditures of the Corporation.]  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 91, for clauses ( c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by s. 91 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993). 
3. Subs. by s. 92, ibid., for section 204 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  82  205. Scrutiny of accounts by Municipal Chief Auditor and by the Standing Committee .—(1) 
The Municipal Chief Auditor shall conduct a monthly examination and audit of the municipal accounts 
and shall report thereon to the Standing Committee who shall publish monthly an abstract of the receipt 
and expenditure of the month last preceding, signed by not less than two members of that Committee and 
by the Municipal Chief Auditor.  
(2) The Standing Committee may also from time to time and for such period as it thinks fit conduct 
independently any examination and audit of the municipal accounts.  
(3) For the purpose of examination and audit of the municip al accounts the Standing Committee and 
the Municipal Chief Auditor shall have access to all the municipal accounts and to all records and 
correspondence relating thereto and the Commissioner shall forthwith furnish to the Standing Committee 
or the Municipa l Chief Auditor any explanation concerning any receipts or expenditure which they may 
call for.  
206. Report by the Municipal Chief Auditor .—(1) The Municipal Chief Audit or shall— 
(a) report to the Standing Committee any material impropriety or irregularity  which he may at 
any time observe in the expenditure or in the recovery of moneys due to the Corporation or in the 
municipal accounts;  
(b) furnish to the Standing Committee such information as that Committee may from time to time 
require concerning the pro gress of the audit.  
(2) The Standing Committee shall cause to be laid before the Corporation every report made by the 
Municipal Chief Auditor to the Standing Committee and every statement of the views of the Municipal 
Chief Auditor on any matter affecting the exercise and performance of the powers and duties assigned to 
him under this Act which the Municipal Chief Auditor may require the Standing Committee to place 
before the Corporation together with a report stating what orders have been passed by the Sta nding 
Committee upon such report or statement, and the Corporation may take such action in regard to any of 
the matters aforesaid as the Corporation may deem necessary.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of each year the Municipal Chief Auditor s hall 
deliver to the Standing Committee a report of the entire municipal accounts for the previous year.  
(4) The Commissioner shall cause the said report to be printed and shall forward as soon as may be a 
printed copy thereof to each councillor and alderman.  
(5) The Commissioner shall also forward without delay to the  1*** Government so many copies of 
the said report as may be required by that Government with a brief statement of the action, if any taken or 
proposed to be taken thereon.  
207. Special audit at the direction of the Central Government .—(1) The  2*** Government may at 
any time appoint an auditor for the purpose of making a special audit  3[of the General Account] of the 
Municipal Fund and of reporting thereon to the  2*** Government and the costs of such audit as 
determined by the  2*** Government shall be chargeable to the Municipal Fund.  
(2) An auditor so appointed may exercise any power which the Municipal  Chief Auditor may 
exercise.  
Powers and duties of the Municipal Chief Auditor  
208. Procedure to be followed by the Municipal Chief Auditor .—(1) The Municipal Chief Auditor 
shall audit the accounts of the Corporation with  the assistance of officers and other employees 
subordinate to him.  
(2) In the discharge of his functions under this section th e Municipal Chief  Auditor shall — 
                                                 
1. The word “Central” omitted by s. 93 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The word “Central” omitted by 94 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 94, ibid., for “of any of the Accounts” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  83 (a) audit the accounts of expenditure from the revenue of the Corporation,  expenditure on account 
of loan works and expenditure incurred out of special  funds shall ascertain whether moneys shown 
therein as having been disbursed  were legally available for, and applicable to, the service or purpose 
to which  they have been applied or charged, and whether the expenditure conforms to the  authority 
which governs it;  
(b) audit the accounts of debts, deposits sinking funds , advances, suspense and  remittance 
transactions of the Corporation and report upon those accounts and  upon the results of verification of 
the balances relating thereto.  
(3) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall examine and audit the statement of accounts  relating to the 
commercial services conducted in any department of the  Corporation, including the trading, 
manufacturing and profit and loss accounts,  and the balance -sheets where such accounts are maintained 
under the orders of  the Corporation,  1[or the Standing Committee], and shall  certify and report upon these 
accounts.  
(4) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall, in consultation with  2*** the Standing Committee and  subject 
to any directions given by the Corporation, determine the form and  manner in which hi s reports on the 
accounts of the Corporation shall be  prepared and shall have authority to call upon any officer of the 
Corporation  to provide any information necessary for the preparation of these reports.  
209. Power of Municipal Chief Auditor to make queries, etc. and call for returns, etc. —(1) The 
Municipal Chief Auditor may make such queries and observations in relation to any of the accounts of the 
Corporation which he is required to audit and call for such vouchers, statements, returns and explanations 
in relation to such accounts as he may think fit.  
(2) Every such query or observation as aforesaid shall be promptly taken into consideration by the 
officer or authority to whom it may be addressed and returne d without delay with the necessary vouchers, 
documents or explanations to the Municipal Chief Auditor.  
(3) The powers of the Municipal Chief Auditor with regard to the disapproval of, and the procedure 
with regard to the settlement of objections to, expend iture from the revenues of the Corporation shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Standing Committee in consultation with the Municipal Chief Auditor 
and with the approval of the Corporation.  
(4) If the Municipal Chief Auditor considers it desirable tha t the whole or any part of the audit 
applied to any accounts which he is required to audit shall be conducted in the offices in which those 
accounts originate he may require that those accounts, together with all books and documents having 
relation there t o, shall at all convenient times be made available in the said offices for inspection.  
(5) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall have the power to require that any books or other documents 
relating to the accounts he is required to audit shall be sent for insp ection by him:  
Provided that if the documents are confidential he shall be responsible for preventing disclosure of 
their contents.  
(6) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall have authority to frame standing orders and to give directions 
on all matters relating  to audit, and particularly in respect of the method and the extent of audit to be 
applied and the raising and pursuing of objections.  
(7) Expenditure sanctioned by the Municipal Chief Auditor shall be audited by an officer to be 
nominated by the Corporati on. 
CHAPTER XII. —[Water Supply, Drainage and Sewage Disposal.]Omitted by the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (Amendment ) Act, 1993  (67 of 1993) , s. 96 ( w.e.f . 1-10-1993).  
CHAPTER XIII. —[Electricity Supply.]Omitted by s . 96, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-10-1993).  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 95, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).   
2. Certain words omitted by s. 95 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  84 CHAPTER XIV.—Tran sport Services.]Omitted by the Delhi Road Transport Laws (Amendment)                 
Act 1971  (71 of 1971 ), s. 7(b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f 3-11-1971) . 
CHAPTER XV  
STREETS  
Construction, maintenance and improvement of streets  
298. Vesting of public streets in the Corporation .—(1) All streets within Delhi which are or at any 
time become public streets, and the pavements, stones and other materials thereof shall vest in the 
Corporation:  
Provided that no public street which immediatel y before the commencement of this Act vested in the 
Union shall, unless the Central Government with the consent of the Corporation so directs, vest in the 
Corporation by virtue of this subsection.  
(2) All public streets vesting in the Corporation shall be under the control of the Commissioner and 
shall be maintained; controlled and regulated by him in accordance with the bye -laws made in this behalf.  
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Central Government may, 
by notific ation, direct that all or any of the functions of the Corporation or the Commissioner, in respect 
of public streets under this Act shall be performed by such authority as may be specified therein.]  
299. Functions of Commissioner in respect of public street s.—(1)The Commissioner shall, from 
time to time, cause all public streets vested in the Corporation to be levelled, metalled or paved, 
channe lled, altered or repaired, and may widen, ex tend or otherwise improve any such street or cause the 
soil thereof to be raised, lowered or altered or may place and keep in repair fences and posts for the safety 
of foot -passengers:  
Provided that no widening, extension or other improvement of a public street, the aggregate cost of 
which will exceed five thousand rupees, sh all be undertaken by the Commissioner except with the 
previous sanction of the Corporation.  
(2) With the previous sanction of the Corporation the Commissioner may permanently close the 
whole or any part of a public street:  
Provided that before according su ch sanction the Corporation shall by notice publish in the manner 
specified by bye -laws give reasonable opportunity to the residents likely to be affected by such closure to 
make suggestions or objections with respect to such closure and shall consider all  such suggestions or 
objections which may be made within one month from the date of the publication of the said notice.  
300. Disposal of land forming site of public streets permanently closed .—Whenever any public 
street or a part thereof is permanently clo sed under sub -section ( 2) of section 299 the site of such street or 
of the portion thereof may be disposed of as land vesting in the Corporation.  
301. Power to make new public streets .—The Commissioner may at any time with the previou s 
sanction of the Corporation: — 
(a) lay out and make new public streets;  
(b) construct bridges and sub -ways;  
(c) turn or divert any existing public street; and  
(d) lay down and determine the position and direction of a street or streets in any part of Delhi 
notwithstanding that no proposal for the erection of any building in the vicinity has been received.  
302. Minimum width of new public streets .—The Commissioner shall, from time to time, with the 
sanction of the Standing Committee, specify the minimum width of different classes of new public streets 
according to the nature of the traffic likely to be carried thereon, and the streets with which they join at 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 97 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  85 one or both ends, the localities in which they are situated, the heights up to which buildings abutting 
thereon may b e erected and other similar considerations.  
 303. Power to prohibit use of public streets for certain kind of traffic .—(1) The Commissioner 
may— 
(a) prohibit vehicular traffic in any public street or any portion thereof so as to prevent danger, 
obstruction  or inconvenience to the public or to ensure quietness in any locality;  
(b) prohibit in respect of all public streets, or any particular public street, the transit of any vehicle 
of such form, construction, weight or size or laden with such heavy or unwile dy objects as may be 
likely to cause injury to the roadways or any construction thereon, except under such conditions as to 
time, mode of traction or locomotion, use of appliances for the protection of roadways, number of 
lights and assistants and other ge neral precautions and upon the payment of such charges as may be 
specified by the Commissioner generally or specially in each case;  
(c) prohibit access to premises from any particular public street carrying high speed vehicular 
traffic :  
Provided that the Commissioner shall not take action without the sanction of the Corporation in cases 
under clause ( a) and without the sanction of the Standing Committee in cases under clause ( c). 
(2) Notices of such prohibition as are imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be  posted in conspicuous 
places at or near both ends of public streets or portions thereof to which they relate, unless such 
prohibition applies generally to all public streets.  
304. Power to acquire lands and buildings for public streets and for public parking places .—
Subject to the provisions contained in Chapter X, the Commissioner may — 
(a) acquire any land required for the purpose of opening, widening, extending or otherwise 
impro ving any public street or of making any new public street, and any building standing upon such 
land;  
(b) acquire in relation to any such land or building, all such land with buildings, if any, thereon as 
the Corporation may think expedient to acquire outsi de of the regular line, or of the intended regular 
line, of such street;  
(c) acquire any land for the purpose of laying out or making a public parking place.  
305. Defining the regular line of streets .—(1) The Commissioner may define a line on one or both 
sides of any public street in accordance with the bye -laws made in this behalf and may, with the previous 
sanction of the Corporation, redefine at any time any such regular line :  
Provided that, before according sanction the Corporation shall by public not ice afford reasonable 
opportunity to the residents of premises abutting on such public street to make suggestions or objections 
with respect to the proposed redefined line of the street and shall consider all such suggestions or 
objections which may be mad e within one month from the date of the publication of the said notice:  
Provided further that the regular line of any public street operative under any law in force in any part 
of Delhi immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be a line defined by the 
Commissioner under this subsection.  
(2) The line for the time being defined or redefined shall be called the regular line of street.  
(3) No person shall construct or reconstruct any building or a portion thereof or any boundary wall o r 
other structure whatsoever within the regular line of a street except with the written permission of the 
Commissioner:  
Provided that if within sixty days after the receipt of application from any person for permission to 
construct or reconstruct a bounda ry wall or a portion thereof, the Commissioner fails to take steps  to 
acquire the land within the regular line of the street in accordance with section 308, then, that  person may, 
subject to any other provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder , proceed with the work of 
construction or reconstruction of such boundary wall or portion thereof.  86 (4) When the Commissioner grants permission for the construction or reconstruction of any building 
or any boundary wall or other structure within the regula r line of a street, he may require the owner of the 
building to execute an agreement binding himself and his successors -in-interest not to claim 
compensation in the event of the Commissioner at any time thereafter calling upon him or any of his 
successors by written notice to remove any work carried out in pursuance of such permission and to pay 
the expenses of such removal if, in default, such removal is carried out by the Commissioner and may for 
that purpose require such owner to deposit in the Municipal  Fund such sum as may be determined by him.  
(5) The Commissioner shall maintain — 
(a) a register containing such particulars as may be specified by him in this behalf with plans 
attached thereto showing all public streets in respect of which the regular lin e of the street has been 
defined or redefined and containing any other particulars which the Commissioner may deem 
necessary;  
(b) a register of all agreements executed under sub -section ( 4) and of all deposits made 
thereunder.  
(6) All such registers shall be open to inspection by any person on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed by the Commissioner with the sanction of the Standing Committee.  
(7) Any agreement entered into in pursuance of sub -section ( 4) shall be in writing, shall be registered 
under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), and shall be deemed to be an agreement in respect 
of the land to which it relates and any condition contained in such agreement shall be deemed to be an 
obligation annexed to the ownership of the said land an d enforceable against the successors -in-interest of 
the owner of such land.  
 306. Setting back building to regular line of street .—(1) If any part of a building abutting on a 
public street is within the regular line of that street, the Commissioner may, whenever it is propos ed— 
(a) to repair, rebuild or construct such building or to take down such building to an extent 
exceeding one -half thereof above the ground level, such half to be measured in cubic feet; or  
(b) to repair, remove, construct or reconstr uct or make any additions to, or structural alterations 
of, any portion of such building which is within the regular line of the street,  
by any order which he issues concerning the additions to, rebuilding, construction, repair or alterations of, 
such buil ding, require such building to be set back to the regular line of the street.  
(2) When any building or any part thereof within the regular line of a public street falls down or is 
burnt down or is, whether by the order of the Commissioner or otherwise, tak en down, the Commissioner 
may forthwith take possession on behalf of the Corporation of the portion of the land within the regular 
line of the street therefore occupied by the said building and, if necessary, clear the same.  
(3) Land acquired under this se ction shall be deemed to be a part of the public street and shall vest in 
the Corporation.  
 307. Compulsory setting back of building to regular line of street .—(1) Where any building or 
any part thereof is within the regular line of a public street and in the opinion of the Commissioner it is 
necessary to set back the building or part thereof to the regular line of the street he may, by notice served 
on the owner in accordance with the provisions of this Act, require him to show cause within such period 
as may be specified in the notice as to why such building or part thereof which is within the regular line 
of the street should not be pulled down and the land within the regular line acquired by the Commissioner 
on behalf of the Corporation.  
(2) If such owne r fails to show cause as required by sub -section ( 1) the Commissioner may, with the 
approval of the Standing Committee, require the owner by another notice to be served on him in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, to pull down the building or part  thereof which is within the 
regular line of the street within such period as is specified in the notice.  
(3) If within such period the owner of the building fails to pull down the building or part thereof as 
required by the Commissioner, the Commissioner may pull down the same and all the expenses incurred 
in so doing shall be paid by the owner and recoverable from him as an arrear of tax under this Act.  87 (4) The Commissioner shall at once take possession on behalf of the Corporation of the portion of the 
land within the regular line of the street occupied by the said building or part thereof and such land shall 
thereupon be deemed to be a part of the public street and shall vest in the Corporation.  
 308. Acquisition of open land and land occupied by platfor ms, etc., within the regular line of 
street .—If any land, whether open or enclosed, not vesting in the Corporation and not occupied by any 
building is within the regular line of a public street or if a platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge 
or fenc e or some other structure external to a building abutting on a public street or a portion of such 
platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge, fence or other structure is within the regular line of such 
street the Commissioner may, after giving to the o wner of the land or building not less than seven clear 
days' notice of his intention so to do, take possession on behalf of the Corporation of the said land with its 
enclosing wall, hedge or fence, if any, or of the said platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge, 
fence or other structure or of any portion thereof which is within the regular line of the public street and, 
if necessary, clear the same and the land so acquired shall thereupon be deemed to be a part of the public 
street and shall vest in t he Corporation:  
Provided that where the land or building is vested in the Union or a State the Commissioner shall not 
take possession thereof without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
309. Acquisition of the remaining part of a building and land after their portions within a 
regular line of street have been acquired .—(1) Where a land or building is partly within the regular line 
of a public street and the Commissioner is satisfied that the land remaining after the excision of the 
portion within the said line will not be suitable or fit for any beneficial use, he may, at the request of the 
owner, acquire such land in addition to the land within the said line and such surplus land shall be deemed 
to be a part of the public street and shall v est in the Corporation.  
(2) Such surplus land may thereafter be utilised for the purpose of setting forward a building under 
section 310.  
310. Setting forward of buildings to the regular line of street .—The Commissioner may, upon 
such terms as he thinks fi t, allow any building to be set forward for the purpose of improving the regular 
line of a public street and may, with the sanction of the Standing Committee, by notice required any 
building to be so set forward in the case of reconstruction thereof or of a new construction.  
Explanation :—For the purpose of this section a wall separating any premises from a public street 
shall be deemed to be a building; and it shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with permission or 
requisition to set forward a building to the regular line of a street if a wall of such material and 
dimensions as are approved by the Commissioner is erected along the said line.  
311. Compensation to be paid in certain cases of setting back or setting forward of buildings, 
etc.—(1) Compensation shall  be paid by the Commissioner to the owner of any building or land acquired 
for a public street under the provisions of sections 306, 307 and 308 for any loss which such owner may 
sustain in consequence of his building or land being so a cquired and for any expense incurred by such 
owner in consequence of any order made by the Commissioner:  
Provided that: — 
(a) any increase or decrease in the value of the remainder of the property of which the building or 
land so acquired formed part, likel y to accrue from the setting back to the regular line of the street 
shall be taken into consideration and allowed for in determining the amount of such compensation;  
(b) if any such increase in the value exceeds the amount of loss sustained or expenses incurred by 
the owner, the Commissioner may recover from him half the amount of such excess as a betterment 
charge.  
(2) If in consequence of any order to set forward a building made by the Commissioner, the owner of 
such building sustains any loss or damag e, compensation shall be paid to him by the Commissioner for 
such loss or damage after taking into account any increase in value likely to accrue from the setting 
forward.  88 (3) If the additional land which will be included in the premises of any person requ ired or permitted 
under sub -section ( 2) to set forward a building belongs to the Corporation, the order or permission of the 
Commissioner to set forward the building shall be a sufficient conveyance to the said owner of the said 
land; and the price to be p aid to the Corporation by the owner for such additional land and the other terms 
and conditions of the conveyance shall be set forth in the order or permission.  
(4) If, when the Commissioner requires any building to be set forward, the owner of the buildin g is 
dissatisfied with the price fixed to be paid to the Corporation or with any of the terms or conditions of 
conveyance, the Commissioner shall, upon the application of the owner at any time within fifteen days 
after the said terms and conditions are com municated to him, refer the case for the determination of the 
court or the district judge of Delhi whose decision thereon shall be final.  
Private Streets  
 312. Owner’s obligation when dealing with land as building sites .—If the owner of any land 
utilises, sells, leases out or otherwise disposes of such land for the construction of buildings thereon he 
shall lay down and make a street or streets giving access to the plots into which the land may be divided 
and connecting with an existing public or private st reet. 
313. Lay-out Plans .—(1) Before utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any land under section 
312, the owner thereof shall send to the Commissioner a written application with a lay -out plan of the 
land showing the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the plots into which the land is proposed to be divided for the erection of buildings thereon 
and the purpose or purposes for which such buildings are to be used;  
(b) the reservation or allotment of any site for any street, open space, park, recreation ground, 
school, market or any other public purpose;  
(c) the intended level, direction and width of street or streets;  
(d) the regular line of street or streets;  
(e) the arrangements to be made for leveling , paving, metalling, flagging, channe lling, severing , 
draining, conserving and lighting street or streets.  
(2) The provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder as to width of the public streets and 
the height of buildings abutting thereon, shall apply in the case of streets referred t o in sub -section ( 1) and 
all the particulars referred to in that sub -section shall be subject to the sanction of the Standing 
Committee.  
(3) Within sixty days after the receipt of any application under sub -section ( 1) the Standing 
Committee shall either ac cord sanction to the lay -out plan on such conditions as it may think fit or 
disallow it or ask for further information with respect to it.  
(4) Such sanction shall be refused: — 
(a) if the particulars shown in the lay -out plan would conflict with any arrangements which have 
been made or which are in the opinion of the Standing Committee likely to be made for carrying out 
any general scheme of development of Delhi whether contained in the master plan or a zonal 
development plan prepared for Delhi or not ; or 
(b) if the said lay -out plan does not conform to the provisions of this Act and bye -laws made 
thereunder; or  
(c) if any street proposed in the plan is not designed so as to connect at one end with a street 
which is already open.  
(5) No person shall utilise, sell or otherwise deal with any land or lay -out or make any new street 
without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of the Standing Committee and if further 
information is asked for, no step shall be taken to utilise, sell or otherwise deal with the land or to lay -out 
or make the street until orders have been passed upon receipt of such information:  89 Provided that the passing of such orders shall not be in any case delayed for more than sixty days 
after the Standing Committee has received  the information which it considers necessary to enable it to 
deal with the said application.  
(6) The lay -out plan referred to earlier in this section shall, if so required by the Standing Committee, 
be prepared by a licensed town planner.  
314. Alteration or demolition of street made in breach of section 313 .—(1) If any person lays -out 
or makes any street referred to in section 313, without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of 
the Standing Committee, the Commissioner may, whether or not the of fender be prosecu ted under this 
Act, by notice: — 
(a) require the offender to show cause by a written statement signed by him and sent to the 
Commissioner on or before such date as may be specified in the notice, why such street should not be 
altered to the  satisfaction of the Commissioner or if such alteration be impracticable, why such street 
should not be demolished; or  
(b) require the offender to appear before the Commissioner either personally or by a duly 
authorised agent on such day and at such time a nd place as may be specified in the notice and show 
cause as aforesaid.  
(2) If any person on whom such notice is served fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner why such street should not be so altered or demolished, the Commissioner may  pass an 
order directing the alteration or demolition of such street.  
 315. Power of Commissioner to order work to be carried out or to carry it out himself in 
default .—(1) If any private street or part thereof is not levelled, paved, metalled, flagged, channel led, 
severed , drained, conserved or lighted to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, he may by notice require 
the owners of such street or part and the owners of the lands and buildings fronting or abutting on such 
street or part to carry out any wo rk which in his opinion may be necessary, and within such time as may 
be specified in such notice.  
(2) If such work is not carried out within the time specified in the notice, the Commissioner may, if 
he thinks fit, execute it and the expenses incurred sha ll be paid by the owners referred to in                           
sub-section ( 1) in such proportion as may be determined by the Commissioner and shall be recoverable 
from them as an arrear of tax under this Act . 
316. Right of owners to require streets to be declared public .—If any street has been level led, 
paved, metalled, flagged, channe lled, severed , drained, conserved and lighted under the provisions of 
section 315, the Commissioner may, and on the requisition of a majority of the owners referred to in                
sub-section ( 1) of that section shall, declare such a street to be a public street and thereupon the street 
shall vest in the Corporation.  
Encroachments on streets  
317. Prohibition of projections upon streets, etc. —(1) Except as provided in section 318, no person 
shall erect, set up , add to, or place against or in front of any premises any structure or fixture which will — 
(a) overhang, jut or project into, or in any way encroach upon, and obstruct in any way the safe or 
convenient passage of the public along, any street, or  
(b) jut or project into or encroach upon any drain or open channel in any street so as in any way to 
interfere with the use or proper working of such drain or channel or to impede the inspection or 
cleansing thereof.  
(2) The Commissioner may by notice require the owner or occupier of any premises to remove, or to 
take such other action as he may direct in relation to, any structure or fixture which has been erected, set 
up, added to , or placed against, or in front of, the sa id premises in contravention of this section.  
(3) If the occupier of the said premises removes or alters any structure or fixture in accordance with 
such notice, he shall be entitled, unless the structure or fixture was erected, set up or placed by himself , to 90 credit into account with the owner of the premises for all reasonable expenses incurred by him in 
complying with the notice.  
318. Projections over streets may be permitted in certain cases .—(1) The Commissioner may give 
a written permission, on such terms and on payment of such fee as he in each case thinks fit, to the owner 
or occupier of the building abutting on any street — 
(a) to erect an arcade over such street or any portion thereof; or  
(b) to put up a verandah, balcony, arch, connecting passage,  sun-shade, weather frame, canopy, 
awning or other such structure or thing projecting from any storey over or across any street or portion 
thereof:  
Provided that no permission shall be given by the Commissioner for the erection of an arcade in any 
public s treet in which construction of an arcade has not been generally sanctioned by the Corporation.  
(2) The Commissioner may at any time by notice require the owner or occupier of any building to 
remove a verandah, balcony, sun -shade, weather frame or the like put up in accordance with the 
provisions of any law and such owner or occupier shall be bound to take action accordingly but shall be 
entitled to compensation for the loss caused to him by such removal and the cost incurred thereon.  
 319. Ground floor door s, etc., not to open outwards on streets .—The Commissioner may at any 
time by notice require the owner of any premises on the ground floor of which any door, gate, bar, or 
window opens outwards upon a street or upon any land required for the improvement of  a street in such 
manner, as in the opinion of the Commissioner, to obstruct the safe or convenient passage of the public 
along such street, to have the said door, gate, bar or window altered so as not to open outwards.  
320. Prohibition of structures or fi xtures which cause obstruction in streets .—(1) No person 
shall, except with the permission of the Commissioner granted in this behalf, erect or set up any wall, 
fence, rail, post, step, booth or other structure whether fixed or movable or whether of a perm anent or 
temporary nature, or any fixture in or upon any street  or upon or over any open channel, drain, well or 
tank in any street  so as to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, or a projection over, or to 
occupy any portion of such street, channel, drain, well or tank.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any erection or thing to which clause ( c) sub -section ( 1) of 
section 325 applies.  
321. Prohibition of deposit, etc., of things in streets .—(1) No person shall, except with the 
permission of the Commissioner and on payment of such fee as he in each case thinks fit, place or deposit 
upon any street, or upon any open c hannel, drain or well in any street or upon any public place any stall, 
chair, bench, box, ladder, bale or other thing whatsoever so as to form an obstruction thereto or 
encroachment thereon.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) applies to building materials.  
322. Power to remove anything deposited or exposed for sale in contravention of this Act .—The 
Commissioner may, witho ut notice, cause to be removed — 
(a) any stall, chair, bench, box, ladder, bale or other thing whatsoever, placed, deposited, 
projected, attached or suspended in, upon from or to any place in contravention of this Act;  
(b) any article whatsoever hawked or exposed for sale on any public street or in other public place 
in contravention of this Act and vehicle, package, box or any other thing in or on which such article is 
placed.  
323. Prohibition of the tethering of animals and milking of cattle .—(1) No person shall tether any 
animal or cause or permit the same to be tethered in any public street.  
(2) No person shall milk or cause or permit to  be milked any cow or buffalo in any street.  
(3) Any animal tethered or any cow or buffalo found being milked as aforesaid in any street may be 
removed by the Commissioner or any municipal officer or employee and be impounded and dealt with 
under the provisions of the Cattle -Trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  91 Provision concerning execution of works in or near to streets  
324. Precautions during repair of streets .—(1) The Commissioner shall, so far as is practicable 
during the construction or repair of any public street, or any municipal drain or any prem ises vested in the 
Corporation — 
(a) cause the same to be fenced and guarded;  
(b) take proper precautions against accident by shoring up and protecting the adjoining buildings;  
(c) cause such bars, chains or posts to be fixed across or in any street in which any such work of 
construction or repair is under execution as are necessary in order to prevent the passage of vehicles 
or animals and avert danger.  
(2) The Commissioner shall cause such street, drain or premises to be sufficiently lighted or guarded 
during night while under construction or repair.  
(3) The Commissioner shall, with all reasonable speed, cause the said work to be completed, the 
ground to be filled in, the said street, drain or premises to be  repaired and the rubbish occasioned thereby 
to be removed.  
(4) No person shall, without the permission of the Commissioner or other lawful authority, remove 
any bar, chain, post or shoring, timber, or remove or extinguish any light set up under this secti on. 
 325. Streets not to be opened or broken up and building materials not to be deposited thereon 
without permission .—(1) No person other than the Commissioner or a municipal officer or other 
municipal employee shall, without the written permission of the  Commissioner — 
(a) open, break up, displace, take up or make any alteration in, or cause any injury to the soil or 
pavement or any wall, fence, post, chain or other material or thing forming part of any street; or  
(b) deposit any building materials in any street; or  
(c) set up in any street any scaffold or any temporary erection for the purpose of any work 
whatever, or any posts, bars, rails, boards or other things by way of an enclosure, for the purpose of 
making mortar or depositing bricks, lime, rubbish or other materials.  
(2) Any permission granted under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be terminable at the 
discretion of the Commissioner on his giving not less than twenty -four hours notice of such termination to 
the person to whom such p ermission was granted.  
(3) The Commissioner may, without notice, cause to be removed any of the things referred to in 
clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) which has been deposited or set up in any street without the 
permission specified in that sub -section, on which having been deposited or set up with such permission 
has not been removed within the period specified in the notice issued under sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to cases under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of                   
sub-section ( 1) in which an application for permission has been made with such fee as may be prescribed 
by the Commissioner in this behalf but not reply has been sent to the applicant within seven days from the 
date of the applicatio n. 
326. Disposal of things removed under this Chapter .—(1) Any of the things caused to be removed 
by the Commissioner under this Chapter shall, unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such thing 
and pays to the Commissioner the charges for the remov al and storage of such thing, be disposed of by 
the Commissioner by public auction or in such other manner and within such time as the Commissioner 
thinks fit.  
(2) The charges for removal and storage of the thing sold under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid ou t of 
the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the thing sold on a 
claim being made therefor within a period of one year from the date of sale, and if no such claim is made 
within the said period, shall be cred ited to the Municipal Fund.  92 Naming and numbering of streets and numbering of buildings  
327. Naming and numbering of streets .—(1) The Commissioner may — 
(a) with the sanction of the Corporation, determine the name or number by which any street or 
public place vested in the Corporation shall be known;  
(b) cause to be put up or painted at a conspicuous part of any building, wall or place at or near 
each end, corner or entrance of such street or on some convenient part of such street the name or 
number by wh ich it is to be known;  
(c) cause to be put up or painted on boards of suitable size the name of any public place vested in 
the Corporation;  
(d) determine the number or sub -number by which any premises or part of such premises shall be 
known and cause such number or sub -number to be fixed to the side or outer door of such premises or 
to some place at the entrance of the enclosure thereof.  
(2) No person shall destroy, remove, deface or in any way injure or alter any such name or number or 
sub-number or put up  or paint any name or number or sub -number different from that put up or painted by 
order of the Commissioner.  
Repair s or enclosure of dangerous places  
328. Commissioner to take steps for repairing or enclosing dangerous places .—(1) If any place 
is, in the  opinion of the Commissioner, for want of sufficient repair or protection or enclosure, or owing 
to some work being carried on thereupon, dangerous or causing inconvenience to passengers along a 
street or to other persons including the owner or occupier of  the said place, who have legal access thereto 
or to the neighbourhood thereof, the commissioner may by notice in writing require the owner or occupier 
of such place to repair, protect or enclose the same or take such other step as shall appear to the 
Comm issioner necessary in order to prevent the danger or inconvenience arising therefrom.  
(2) The Commissioner may before giving any such notice or before the period of any such notice has 
expired, take such temporary measures as he thinks fit to prevent the d anger or inconvenience arising 
therefrom; and any expense incurred by the Commissioner in taking such temporary measures shall be 
recoverable from the owner or occupier of the place as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Lighting of streets  
329. Measures for lighting .—The Commissioner shall — 
(a) take measures for lighting in a suitable manner all such public streets and public places as 
may be specified by the Standing Committee;  
(b) procure, erect and maintain such number of lamps, lamp posts and other appurtenances as 
may be necessary for the said purpose;  
(c) cause such lamps to be lighted by means of oil, electricity or such other light as the Standing 
Committee may determine.  
330. Prohibition of removal, etc., of lamps .—(1) No person shall, without lawful authority, take 
away or wilfully or negligentl y break or throw down or damage — 
(a) any lamp or any appurtenance of any lamp or lamp post or lamp iron set up in  any public 
street or any public place;  
(b) any electric wire for lighting such lamp;  
(c) any post, pole, standard, stay, strut, bracket or other contrivance for  carrying , suspending or 
supporting any electric wire or lamp.  
(2) No person shall wilfully or negligently extinguish the light of any lamp set up  in any public street 
or any public place.  93 (3) If any person wilfully or through negligence or accident breaks, or causes any  damage to , any of 
the things described in sub -section ( 1), he shall in addition  to any penalty to which he may be subjected 
under this Act, pay the expenses of  repai ring the damage so done by him.  
CHAPTER XVI  
BUILDING REGULATIONS  
1[330A. General superintendence , etc., of  the Central Government .—Notwithstanding  anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act, the Commissioner shall  exercise his powers and discharge 
his functions under this Chapter, under the  general superintendence, direction and control of the Central 
Government.]  
 331. Definition .—In this  Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the express ion “to erect a 
building” means — 
(a) to erect a new building on any site whether previously built upon or not;  
(b) tore -erect .— 
(i) any building of which  more than one -half of the cubical contents above the level of the 
plinth have  been pulled down, burnt or destroyed, or  
(ii) any building of which more than one -half of the superficial area of the  external walls 
above the level of the plinth has been pulled down, or  
(iii) any frame building of which more than half of the number of the posts or beams  in the 
external walls have been pulled down;  
(c) to convert into a dwelling house any building or  any part of a building not originally 
constructed for human habitation or, if  originally so constructed, subsequently appropriated for any 
other purpose;  
(d) to convert into more than one dwelling house a building originally constructed as one 
dwelling house only;  
(e) to convert into a place of religious worship or into a sacred building any place  or building not 
originally constructed for such purpose;  
(f) to roof or cover an open space between walls or buildings to the extent of the  structure which 
is formed by the roofing or covering of such space;  
(g) to convert two or more tenements in a building into a greater or lesser number;  
(h) to convert into a stall, shop, warehouse or godown, stable, factory o r garage any  building not 
originally constructed for use as such or which was not so used  before the change;  
(i) to convert a building which when originally constructed was legally exempt from  the 
operations of any building regulations contained in this Act or in any  bye-laws made thereunder or in 
any other law, into a building which had it been  originally erected in its converted form, would have 
been subject to such  building regulations;  
(j) to convert into or use as dwelling house any building which ha s been discontinued  as or 
appropriated for any purpose other than a dwelling house.  
332. Prohibition of building without sanction .—No person shall erect or commence to erect any 
building, or execute any of the works specified in section 334 except with the  previous sanction of the 
Commissioner, not otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and of the bye -laws 
made under this Act in relation to the erection of buildings or execution of works.  
333. Erection of building .—(1) Every person  who intends to erect a building shall apply for sanction 
by giving notice in writing of his intention to the Commissioner in such form and containing such 
information as may be prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 98 (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  94 (2) Every such notice shall be accompanied by such documents and plans as may be so prescribed.  
334. Applications for additions to, or repairs of, buildings .—(1) Every person who intends to 
execute any of the following works, that is to  say— 
(a) to make any addition to a building;  
(b) to make any alteration or repairs to a building involving the removal or  re-erection of any 
external or partly wall thereof or of any wall which  supports the roof thereof to an extent exceeding 
one-half of such wall above  the plinth level, such half to be measured in superficial feet;  
(c) to make any alteration or repairs to a frame building involving the removal or  re-erection of 
more than one -half of the posts in any such wall thereof as  aforesaid; or involving the removal or re -
erection of any such wall thereof as  aforesaid to an extent exceeding one -half of such wall above 
plinth level, such  half to be measured in superficial feet;  
(d) to make any alte ration in a building involving — 
(i) the sub -division of any room in such building so as to convert the same into  two or more 
separate rooms, or  
(ii) the conversion of any passage or space in such building into a room or rooms;  
(e) to repair, remove, construct, reconstruct or make any addition to or structural  alteration in any 
portion of a building abutting  on a street which stands within  the regular line of such street;  
(f) to close permanently any door or window in an external wall;  
(g) to remove or reconstruct the principal staircase or to alter its position;  
shall apply for sanction by giving notice in  writing of his intention to the Commissioner in such form and 
containing such  information as may be prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
(2) Every such notice shall be accompanied by such documents and plans as may be so  prescribed.  
335. Conditions of valid notice .—(1) A person giving the notice required by section 333 shall 
specify the purpose for which it is intended to use the building to which such notice relates; and a person 
giving the notice required by section 334 shall specify wh ether the purpose for which the building is 
being used is proposed or likely to be changed by the execution of the proposed work.  
(2) No notice shall be valid until the information required under sub -section ( 1) and any further 
information and plans which may be required by bye -laws made in this behalf have been furnished to the 
satisfaction of the Commissioner along with the notice.  
 336. Sanction or refusal of building or work .—(1) The Commissioner shall sanction the erection 
of a building or the execution of a work unless such building or work would contravene any of the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of this section or the provisions of section 340.  
(2) The grounds on which the sanction of a building or work may be refused s hall be the following, 
namely:— 
(a) that the building or work or the use of the site for the building or work or any of the 
particulars comprised in the site plan, ground plan, elevation, section or specification would 
contravene the provisions of any bye -law made in this behalf  or of any other law or rule, bye -law or 
order made under such other law;  
(b) that the notice for sanction does not contain the particulars or is not prepared in the manner 
required under the bye -laws made in this behalf;  
(c) that any information or docume nts required by the Commissioner under this Act or any bye -
laws made thereunder has or have not been duly furnished;  
(d) that in cases falling under section 312, lay -out plans have not been sanctioned in accordance 
with section 313;  95 (e) that the building or work would be an encroachment on Government land or land vested in the 
Corporation;  
(f) that the site of the building or work does not ab out on a street or projected street and that there 
is no access to such building or work from any such street by a passage or path -way appertaining to 
such site.  
(3) The Commissioner shall communicate the sanction to the person who has given the notice; and 
where he refuses sanction on any of the grounds specified in sub -section ( 2) or under section 340 he shall 
record  a brief statement of his reasons for such refusal and communicate the refusal along with the 
reasons therefor to the person who has given the notice.  
(4) The sanction or refusal as aforesaid shall be communicated in such manner as may be specified in 
the bye-laws made in this behalf.  
337. When building or work may be proceeded with .—(1) Where within a period of sixty days, or 
in cases falling under clause ( b) of section 331 within a period of thirty days, after the receipts of any 
notice under section 333 or section 334 or of the further information, if any, required under section 335 
the Commissioner does not refuse to sanction the building or work or upon refusal, does not communicate 
the refusal to the person who has given the notice, the Commissioner sh all be deemed to have accorded 
sanction to the building or work and the person by whom the notice has been given shall be free to 
commence and proceed with the building or work in accordance with his intention as expressed in the 
notice and the documents a nd plans accompanying the same:  
Provided that if it appears to the Commissioner that the site of the proposed building or work is likely 
to be affected by any scheme of acquisition of land for any public purpose or by any proposed regular line 
of a public street or extension, improvement, widening or alteration of any street, the Commissioner may 
withhold sanction of the building or work for such period not exceeding three months as he deems fit and 
the period of sixty days or as the case may be, the period  of thirty days specified in this sub -section shall 
be deemed to commence from the date of the expiry of the period for which the sanction has been 
withheld.  
(2) Where a building or work is sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned by the 
Commissioner under sub -section ( 1), the person who has given the notice shall be bound to erect the 
building or execute the work in accordance with such sanction but not so as to contravene any of the 
provisions of this Act or any other law or of any bye -law made thereunder.  
(3) If the person or anyone lawfully claiming under him does not commence the erection of the 
building or the execution of the work within one year of the date on which the building or work is 
sanctioned or is deemed to have been sancti oned, he shall have to give notice under section 333 or, as the 
case may , be under section 334 for fresh sanction of the building or the work and the provisions of this 
section shall apply in relation to such notice as they apply in relation to the origina l notice.  
(4) Before commencing the erection of a building or execution of a work within the period specified 
in sub -section ( 3), the person concerned shall give notice to the Commissioner of the proposed date of the 
commencement of the erection of the bui lding or the execution of the work:  
Provided that if the commencement does not take place within seven days of the date so notified, the 
notice shall be deemed not to have been given and a fresh notice shall be necessary in this behalf.  
338. Sanction accor ded under misrepresentation .—If at any time after the sanction of any building 
or work has been accorded, the Commissioner is satisfied that such sanction was accorded in consequence 
of any material misrepresentation or fraudulent statement contained in th e notice given or information 
further under sections 333, 334 and 335 , he may be order in writing cancel for reasons to be recorded 
such sanction and any building or work commenced, erected or done shall be deemed to have been 
commenced, erected or done wi thout such sanction:  
Provided that before making any such order the Commissioner shall give reasonable opportunity to 
the person affected as to why such order should not be made.  96 339. Buildings at corners of streets .—The Commissioner may require any building intended to be 
erected at the corner of two streets to be rounded off or splayed or cut off to such height and to such 
extent as he may determine, and may acquire such portion of the site at the corner as he may consider 
necessary for public conve nience or amenity.  
340. Provisions as to buildings and works on either side of new streets .—(1) The erection of any 
building on either side of a new street may be refused by the Commissioner unless and until such new 
street has been levelled, and wherever in the opinion of the Commissioner practicable, metalled or paved, 
drained, lighted and laid with a water main to his satisfaction.  
(2) The erection of any such building or the execution of any such work may be refused by the 
Commissioner if such building or any portion thereof or such work comes within the regular line of any 
street, the position and direction of which has been laid down by the Commissioner but which has not 
been actually constructed or if such building or any portion thereof or such work is in contravention of 
any building or any other scheme or plan prepared under this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
341. Period for completion of building or work .—The Commissioner, when sanctioning the 
erection of a building or execution  of a work, shall specify a reasonable period after the commencement 
of the building or work within which the building or work is to be completed and if the building or work 
is not completed within the period so specified, it shall not be continued thereaf ter without fresh sanction 
obtained in the manner hereinbefore provided, unless the Commissioner on application made therefor has 
allowed an extension of that period.  
342. Prohibition against use of inflammable materials for building, etc. , without permiss ion.—In 
such areas as may be specified by bye -laws made in this behalf, no roof, verandah, pandal or wall of a 
building or no shed or fence shall be constructed or reconstructed or cloth, grass leaves, mats or other 
inflammable materials except with the wr itten permission of the Commissioner, nor shall any such roof, 
verandah, pandal, wall, shed or fence constructed or reconstructed in any year be retained in a subsequent 
year except with fresh permission obtained in this behalf.  
 1[343. Order of demolition  and stoppage of buildings and works in certain cases and                
appeal .—(1) Where the erection of any building or execution of any work has been commenced, or is 
being carried on, or has been completed without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 336 or in 
contravention of any condition subject to which such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Act or bye -laws made thereunder, the Commissioner may, in addition to any 
other action that may be taken under this Act, make an order directing that such erection or work shall be 
demolished by the person at whose instance the erection or work has been commenced or is being carried 
on or has been completed, within such period, (not being less than five  days and more than fifteen days 
from the date on which a copy of the order of demolition with a brief statement of the reasons therefor has 
been delivered to that person), as may be, specified in the order of demolition:  
Provided that no order of demoliti on shall be made unless the person has been given by means of a 
notice served in such manner as the Commissioner may think fit, a reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause why such order shall not be made:  
Provided further that where the erection or work has  not been completed, the Commissioner may by 
the same order or by a separate order, whether made at the time of the issue of the notice under the first 
proviso or at any other time, direct the person to stop the erection or work until the expiry of the per iod 
within which any appeal against the order of demolition, if made, may be preferred under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Commissioner made under sub -section ( 1) may prefer an 
appeal against the order to  2[the Appellate Tribunal] within the period specified in the order for the 
demolition of the erection or work to which it relates.  
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under sub -section ( 2) against an order of demolition,  3[the Appellate 
Tribunal may, subject to the provision s of sub -section ( 3) of section 347C ,] stay the enforcement of that 
order on such terms, if any, and for such period, as it may think fit:  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 16, for section 343 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 3, for “the court of the district judge of Delh i” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “the court of the district judge may” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  97 Provided that where the erection of any building or execution of any work has not been completed at 
the time of the m aking of the order of demolition, no order staying the enforcement of the order of 
demolition shall be made by 1[the Appellate Tribunal, unless security , sufficient in the opinion of the said 
Tribunal] , has been given by the appellant for not proceeding, w ith such erection or work pending the 
disposal of the appeal.  
(4) 2[No court] shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding for injunction or other relief 
against the Commissioner to restrain him from taking any action or making any order in pu rsuance of the 
provisions of this section.  
(5) 3[Subject to an order made by the Administrator on appeal under section 347D, every order made 
by the Appellate Tribunal on appeal under this section, and subject to the orders of the Administrator and 
the Appellate Tribunal on appeal] the order of demolition made by the Commissioner shall be final and 
conclusive.  
(6) Where no appeal has been preferred against an order of demolition made by the Commissioner 
under sub -section ( 1) or where an order of demoliti on made by the Commissioner under that sub -
section  4[has been confirmed on appeal, whether with or without variation, by the Appellate Tribunal in a 
case where no appeal has been preferred against the order of the Appellate Tribunal, and by the 
Administrat or in a case where an appeal has been preferred against the order of  the Appellate Tribunal] 
the person against whom the order has been made shall comply with the order within the period specified 
therein, or as the case may be, within the period, if any , fixed by  5[the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Administrator] on appeal and on the failure of the person to comply with the order within such period, the 
Commissioner may himself cause the erection or the work to which the order relates to be demolished and 
the expenses of such demolition shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act].  
344. Order of stoppage of buildings or works in certain cases .—(1) Where the erection of any 
building or execution of any work has been commenced or is being carried on (but has not been 
completed) without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 336 or in contravention of any 
condition subject to which such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of any provisions of this 
Act or bye -laws made thereunder, the Commissioner may in addition to any other action that may be 
taken under this Act, by order require the person at whose instance the building or the work has been 
commenced or is being carried on to stop the same forthwith.  
(2) 6[If an order made by the Commissioner under section 343 or under sub -section ( 1) of this section 
directing any person to stop the erection of any building or execution of any work is not complied with ,] 
the Commissioner may require any police officer to remove such person and all his assistants and 
workmen from the premises  7[or to seize any construction material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or other 
things used in the erection of any building or execution  of any work] within such time as may be specified 
in the requisition and such police officer shall comply with the requisition accordingly.  
7[(2A) Any of the things caused  to be seized by the Commissioner under subsection ( 2) shall be 
disposed of by him in the manner specified in section 326 .] 
(3) After the re quisition under sub -section ( 2) has been complied with, the Commissioner may, if he 
thinks fit, depute by a written order a police officer or a municipal officer or other municipal employee to 
watch the premises in order to ensure that the erection of the building or the execution of the work is not 
continued.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by  Act 42 of 1984,  s. 3, for “the court of the district judge unless security, sufficient in the opinion of the court”                      
(w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid.,  for “Save as provided in this section, no court” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “has been confirmed on appeal, whether with  or without variation” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “the court of the district judge” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
6. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961,  s. 17, for “If such order is not complied with forthwith” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
7. Ins. by Act 42 of 1984,  s. 4 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  98 (4) Where a police officer or a municipal officer or other municipal employee has been deputed under 
sub-section ( 3) to watch the premises, the cost of such deputation shall be paid by the person at w hose 
instance such erection or execution is being continued or to whom notice under sub -section ( 1) was given 
and shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
345. Power of Commissioner to require alteration of work .—(1) The Co mmissioner may at any 
time during the erection of any building or execution of any work or at any time  1[after the completion 
thereof , by a written notice of not less than seven days] , specify any matter in respect of which such 
erection or execution is wi thout or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 336 or is in contravention 
of any condition of such sanction or any of the provisions of this Act or any bye -laws made thereunder 
and require the person who give the notice under section 333 or secti on 334 or the owner o f such building 
or work either — 
(a) to make such alterations as may be specified in the said notice with the object of bringing the 
building or work in conformity with the said sanction, condition or provisions, or  
(b) to show cause why such alterations should not be made, within a period stated in the notice.  
(2) If the person or the owner does not show cause as aforesaid, he shall be bound to make the 
alterations specified in the notice.  
(3) If the person or the owner shows cause as  aforesaid, the Commissioner shall by an order either 
cancel the notice issued under sub -section ( 1) or confirm the same subject to such modifications as he 
thinks fit.  
2[345A. Power to seal unauthorised constructions .—(1) It shall be lawful for the Commis sioner, at 
any time, before or after making an order of demolition under section 343 or of the stoppage of the 
erection of any building or execution of any work under section 343 or under section 344, to make an 
order directing the sealing of such erection  or work or of the premises in which such erection or work is 
being carried on or has been completed in the manner prescribed by rules, for the purpose of carrying out 
the provisions of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and extent of  such erection or 
work.  
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any erection or work is being carried on, 
has or have been sealed, the Commissioner may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection or work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, order such seal to be removed.  
(3) No person  shall remove such seal except — 
(a) under an order made by the Commissioner under sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) under an order of an Appellate Tribunal or the Administrator, made in an appeal under this 
Act.] 
 346. Completion certificat es.—(1) Every person who employs a licensed architect or engineer or a 
person approved by the Commissioner to design or erect a building or execute any work shall, within one 
month after the completion of the erection of the building or execution of the work, deliver or send or 
cause to be delivered or sent to the Commissioner a notice in writing of such completion accompanied by 
a certificate in the form prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf and shall give to the Commiss ioner all 
necessary facilities for the inspection of such building or work.  
(2) No person shall occupy or permit to be occupied any such building or use or permit to be used any 
building or a part thereof effected by any such work until permission has been  granted by the 
Commissioner in this behalf in accordance with bye -laws made under this Act:  
Provided that if the Commissioner fails within a period of thirty days after the receipt of the notice of 
completion to communicate his refusal to grant such permi ssion, such permission shall be deemed to have 
been granted.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 198 4, s. 5, for “within three months after the completion thereof, by a written                                           
notice” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
2. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  99 347. Restrictions on use r of buildings .—No person shall, without the written permission of the 
Commissioner, or otherwise than in conformity with the conditio ns, if any, of such permission — 
(a) use or permit to be used for human habitation any part of a building not originally erected or 
authorised to be used for that purpose or not used for that purpose before any alteration has been 
made therein by any work executed in accordance with the provis ions of this Act and of the bye -laws 
made thereunder;  
(b) change or allow the change of the use of any land or building;  
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into another kind.  
1[347A. Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute one or more Appellate Tribunals with headquarters at Delhi, for deciding appeals 
preferred under section 343 or section 347B.  
(2) An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person to be appointed b y the Central Government on 
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by rules.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding officer of an Appellate Tribunal 
unless he is, or has been, a district judge or an addition al district judge or has, for at least ten years, held a 
judicial office in India.  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special 
knowledge of, or experience in, the matters involved in such appeals, to act as assessors to advise the 
Appellate Tribunal in the proceedings before it, but no advice of the assessors shall be binding on the 
Appellate Tribunal.  
(5) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits 
within which an Appellate Tribunal shall exercise its jurisdiction, and where different Appellate Tribunals 
have jurisdiction over the same territorial limits, the Central Government shall also provide for the 
distribution and allocation of work to be perf ormed by such Tribunals.  
(6) For the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act, every Appellate Tribunal 
shall have a Registrar and such other staff on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed 
by rules:  
Provided that  the Registrar and staff may be employed jointly for all or any number of such Tribunals 
in accordance with the rules.  
 347B . Appeals against certain orders or notices issued under the Act .—(1) Any person aggrieved 
by any of the following orders made or notices issued under this Act, may prefer an appeal against such 
order or notice to t he Appellate Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) an order according or disallowing sanction to a lay -out plan under section 313;  
(b) an order directing the alteration or demolition of any street under section 314;  
(c) a notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 315;  
(d) a notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 317;  
(e) an order directing the disposal of things removed under Chapter XV or seized under section 
344, or an order rejecting th e claim of any person for the balance of the proceeds of sale of the things 
so disposed of;  
(f) an order sanctioning or refusing to sanction the erection of any building or the execution of 
any work under section 336;  
(g) an order with holding  sanction und er the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 337;  
(h) an order cancelling a sanction under section 338;  
                                                 
1. Ins.  by Act 42 of 1984, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  100 (i) an order requiring the rounding off, splaying or cutting off the height of a building intended to 
be erected, or for the acquisition of any portion of a site, under section 339;  
(j) an order disallowing the erection of any building or the execution of any work under                   
section 340;  
(k) an order requiring the stoppage of any erection or work under section 344;  
(l) an order requiring the alteration of any building or work under section 345;  
(m) an order directing the sealing of unauthorised constructions under section 345A;  
(n) an order refusing to grant permission under sub -section ( 2) of section 346;  
(o) an order granting or refusing per mission under section 347;  
(p) any such other order or notice relating to or arising out of planned development under the 
provisions of this Act as may be prescribed by rules.  
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the date  of the order or notice 
appealed against:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An Appeal  to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order or notice appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed by rules.  
347C . Procedure of the Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or annulling the order or notice appealed against or may refer the case back to the authority or 
officer against whose o rder or notice the appeal is filed, for a fresh order or notice, after taking additional 
evidence, if necessary, or such other action as the Appellate Tribunal may specify.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it to the par ties to the appeal.  
(3) No Appellate Tribunal shall, in any appeal pending before it in respect of any order or notice 
under this Act, make an interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay) against the Corporation or 
against any officer or servant of  the Corporation acting or purporting to act in his official capacity, unless 
an opportunity is given to the Corporation or its officer or servant to be heard in the matter:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may without giving an opportunity as aforesai d make an interim 
order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded by it in writing that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the person filing the appeal which cannot be 
adequately compensated in mo ney: 
Provided further that every such interim order shall, if it is not vacated earlier, cease to have effect on 
the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it is made unless before the expiry of that 
period, the Appellate Tribunal confi rms or modifies that order after giving to the Corporation or its officer 
or servant an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) Subject to rules that may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the awarding of 
damages in and the costs of, and incidental to, any appeal before an Appellate Tribunal, shall be in its 
discretion and it shall have full power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to 
what conditions, if any, such dam ages or costs are to be paid and to give, in its order dispo sing of an 
appeal, necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid.  
(5) An order of the Appellate Tribunal made under this section may be executed or caused to be 
executed by it on the application of the person in whose favour the order has been made.  
(6) In hearing and deciding an appeal or in the execution of an order, an Appellate Tribunal shall 
follow such procedure as may be prescribed by rules.  101 (7) Every Appellate Tribunal, shall, in addition to the powers conferred on it under this Act, have                    
the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil                       
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commisisons for the examination of witnesses  or documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by rules, and every proceeding of an Appellate 
Tribunal in hearing or deciding an appeal or in connection with the execution of its order, shall be 
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within th e meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose 
of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and every Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed 
to a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
347D . Appeal against orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator 
against an order of the Appellate Tribunal, made in an appeal under section 343 or section 347B, 
confirming, modifying or annulling an order made or notice issued under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 347B and section 347C and the rules made 
thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section as they 
apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under those sections.  
(3) An order of the Administrator on an appeal under this section, and subject only to such order, an 
order of the Appellate Tribunal under section 347B, and subject to such orders of the Administr ator or an 
Appellate Tribunal, an order or notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) of that section, shall be final.  
347E . Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—(1) After the commencement of section 7 of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1984  (42 of 1 984), no court shall entertain any suit, application 
or other proceedings in respect of any order or notice appealable under section 343 or section 347B and 
no such order or notice shall be called in question otherwise than by preferring an appeal under th ose 
sections.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), every suit, application or other proceeding 
pending in any court immediately before the commencement of section 7 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1984  (42 of 1984) , in respect of any order or notice appealable under 
section 343 or section 347B, shall continue to be dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said 
section had not been brought into force.]  
348. Removal of dangerous buildings .—(1) If it appears to the Commissioner at any time that any 
building is in a ruinous condition, or likely to fall, or in any way dangerous to any person occupying, 
resorting to or passing by such building or any other building or place in the neighbourhood of such 
building, the Commissioner may, by order in writing, require the owner or occupier of such building to 
demolish, secure or repair such building or do one or more of such things within such period as may be 
specified in the order, so as to prevent all cause of danger  therefrom.  
(2) The Commissioner may also, if he thinks fit, require such owner or occupier by the said order 
either forthwith or before proceeding to demolish, secure or repair the building, to set up a proper and 
sufficient hoard or fence for the protection of passers -by and other persons, with a convenient platform 
and hand -rail wherever practicable to serve as a foot -way for passengers outside of such hoard or fence.  
(3) If it appears to the Commissioner that danger from a building which is in a ruinous condition or 
likely to fall is imminent, he may, before making the order aforesaid, fence off, demolish, secure or repair 
the said building or take such steps as may be necessary to prevent the danger.  
(4) If the owner or occupier of the building d oes not comply with the order within the period specified 
therein, the Commissioner shall take such steps in relation to the building as to prevent all cause of danger 
therefrom.  102 (5) All expenses incurred by the Commissioner in relation to any building und er this section shall be 
recoverable from the owner or occupier thereof as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
349. Power to order building to be vacated in certain circumstances .—(1) The Commissioner 
may by order in writing direct that any building which in his opinion is in a dangerous condition or is not 
provided with sufficient means of egress in case of fire or is occupied in contravention of section 346 be 
vacated forthwith or within such period as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that at the time  of making such order the Commissioner shall record a brief statement of the 
reasons therefor.  
(2) If any person fails to vacate the building in pursuance of such order the Commissioner may direct 
any police officer to remove such person from the building and the police officer shall comply with such 
direction accordingly.  
(3) The Commissioner shall, on the application of any person who has vacated, or been removed from 
any building in pursuance of an order made by him, reinstate such person in the building  on the expiry of 
the period for which the order has been in force according as the circumstances prevailing at that time 
permit.  
 1[349A. Power of Central Government  to make bye -laws .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, make bye -laws for carrying out the provisions of this  Chapter:  
Provided that all bye -laws made by the Corporation  under paragraph F of sub -section ( 1) of section 
481 of this Act as it stood  immediately before the commencement of the Delhi Municipa l 
Corporation(Amendment) Act, 1993 and in force immediately before such commencement, shall  be 
deemed to have been made under the provisions of this section and shall  continue to have the same force 
and effect after such commencement until it is  amended, v aried, rescinded or superseded under the 
provisions of this section.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  bye-laws may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the regulation or restric tion of the use of sites for buildings for different  areas;  
(b) the regulation or restriction of buildings in different areas;  
(c) the form of notice of erection of any building or execution of any work and the  fee in respect 
of the same;  
(d) the plans and  documents to be submitted together with such notice and the information  and 
further information to be furnished;  
(e) the level and width of foundation, level of lowest floor and stability of  structure;  
(f) the construction of buildings and the materials t o be used in the construction  of buildings;  
(g) the height of buildings whether absolute or relative to the width of streets or  to different area;  
(h) the number and height of storeys composing a building and the height of rooms  and the 
dimensions of room intended for human habitation;  
(i) the provision of open spaces, external and internal, and adequate means of  light and 
ventilation;  
(j) the provision of means of egress in case of fire, fire -escapes and water  lifting devices;  
(k) the provision of secondary means of access for the removal of house refuse;  
(l) the materials and methods of construction of external and party walls, roofs  and floors;  
(m) the position, materials and methods of construction of hearths, smoke -escapes,  chimneys, 
stair-cases , latrines, drains and cesspools;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 99 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  103 (n) the provision of lifts;  
(o) the paving of yards;  
(p) the restriction on the use of inflammable materials in  buildings;  
(q) the restriction on construction of foundation on certain  sites;  
(r) the measures to be taken to  protect buildings from damp arising from sub -soil; 
(s) the wells, tanks and cisterns and pumps for the supply of water for human  consumption in 
connection with buildings;  
(t) in the case of wells, the dimensions of the well, the manner of enclosing it and  if the well is 
intended for drinking purposes, the means which shall be used to  prevent pollution of the water;  
(u) the supervision of buildings;  
(v) the setting back of garages and shops from the regular line of a street;  
(w) the construction of portable  structures and permission for such construction.  
(3) The  draft of the bye -laws referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded to the  Commissioner, 
who shall cause the same to be published in the Official Gazette  for inviting objections and suggestions 
from the public within thirty days from  the date of such publication.  
(4) The  Commissioner shall forward the draft bye -laws to the Central Government along  with his 
recommendations and the objections and suggestions received from the  public, within three m onths of 
their publication in the Official Gazette.  
(5) The  Central Government may issue such directions to the Commissioner as it thinks  fit, for 
ensuring proper implementation of the bye -laws made under this  section.]  
CHAPTER XVII  
SANITATION AND PUBLIC HEALTH  
Conservancy and sanitation  
350. Provision for daily cleansing of streets and removal of rubbish and filth .—(1) For the 
purpose of securing the efficient scavenging and cleansing of all streets and premises, the Commissioner 
shall provide — 
(a) for the daily surface -cleansing of all streets and the removal of the sweepings therefrom, and  
(b) for the removal of the contents of all receptacles and depots and of the accumulations at all 
places provided or appointed by him under the provisions of this Ac t for the temporary deposit of 
rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter.  
(2) The Commissioner may, by public notice, issue directions as to the time at which, the manner in 
which, and the conditions subject to which, any matter referred to in  sub-section ( 1) may be removed 
along a street or may be deposited or otherwise disposed of.  
351. Rubbish, etc., to be the property of the Corporation .—All matters deposited in public 
receptacles, depots and places provided or appointed under section 352 a nd all matters collected by 
municipal employees or contractors in pursuance of section 350 and section 355 shall be the property of 
the Corporation.  
352. Provision or appointment of receptacles, depots and places for rubbish, etc. —(1) The 
Commissioner shal l— 
(a) provide or appoint in proper and convenient situations public receptacles, depots or places for 
the temporary deposit of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter and for the final 
disposal of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter;  
(b) provide dustbins for the temporary deposit of rubbish;  104 (c) provide vehicles or other suitable means for the removal of rubbish and offensive matter; and  
(d) provide covered vehicles or vessels for the removal of filth and other pollut ed and obnoxious 
matter.  
(2) Different receptacles, depots or places may be provided or appointed for the temporary deposit or 
final disposal of any of the matter specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Commissioner shall make adequate provision for preventi ng receptacles, depots, places, 
dustbins, vehicles and vessels referred to in sub -section ( 1) from becoming sources of nuisance.  
353. Duty of owners and occupiers to collect and deposit rubbish, etc. —It shall be the duty of the 
owners  and occupiers of all premises— 
(a) to have the premises swept and cleaned;  
(b) to cause all filth, rubbish and other polluted and obnoxious matter to be collected from their 
respective premises and to be deposited at such times as the Commissioner, by public notices 
prescribes, in public receptacles, depots or places provided or appointed under section 352 for the 
temporary deposit or final disposal thereof;  
(c) to provide receptacles of the type and in the manner prescribed by the Commissioner for the 
collection ther ein of all filth, rubbish and other polluted and obnoxious matter from such premises 
and to keep such receptacles in good condition and repair.  
354. Collection and removal of filth and polluted matter .—It shall be the duty of the owner and 
occupier of ever y premises situate in any portion of Delhi  1*** in which there is not a latrine, or urinal 
connected by a drain with a municipal drain, to cause all filth and polluted and obnoxious matter 
accumulating upon such premises to be collected and removed to the nearest receptacle or depot provided 
for this purpose under section 352 at such times, in such vehicle or vessel by such route and with such 
precautions as the Commissioner may b y public notice prescribe.  
355. Collection and removal of filth and polluted matter through municipal agency .—2[(1) It 
shall be lawful for the Commissioner to take or cause to be taken measures for the daily collection, 
removal and disposal of all filth and polluted and obnoxious matter  from latrines, urinals and cesspools 
not connected by a drain with a municipal drain from all premises situate in any portion of Delhi.]  
(2) In such portion of Delhi and in any premises wherever situate in which there is a latrine, or urinal 
connected with a municipal drain, it shall not be lawful, except with the written permission of the 
Commissioner, for any person who is not employed by or on behalf of the Commissioner, to discharge 
any of the duties of scavengers.  
356. Removal of rubbish , etc., acc umulated on premises used as factories, workshops, etc. —The 
Comm issioner may, if he thinks fit — 
(a) by written notice require the owner or occupier of any premises used for carrying on any 
manufacture, trade or business or used as a factory, workshop, trade premises or market or in any way 
so that rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter are accumulated in large quantities, to 
collect all such rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter accumulating thereon and to 
remove the sam e at such times and in such carts or receptacles and by such routes as may be specified 
in the notice to a depot or place provided or appointed under section 352, or  
(b) after giving such owner or occupier notice of his intention, cause all rubbish, filth and other 
polluted and obnoxious matter accumulated in such premises to be removed, and charge the said 
owner or occupier for such removal such fee as may, with the sanction of the Standing Committee, be 
specified in the notice issued under clause ( a). 
                                                 
1. The words, brackets, letters and figures “in respect of which the Commissioner has not given public notice under                     
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 115 or”  omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 100 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 101, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  105 357. Prohibition against accumulation of rubbish, etc. —(1) No owner or occupier of any premises 
shall keep or allow to be kept for more than twenty -four hours or otherwise than in a receptacle approved 
by the Commissioner, any rubbish, filth and other pollute d and obnoxious matter on such premises or any 
place belonging thereto or neglect to employ proper means to remove such rubbish, filth and other 
polluted and obnoxious matter from, or to cleanse, such receptacle and to dispose of such rubbish, filth 
and ot her polluted and obnoxious matter in the manner directed by the Commissioner, or fail to comply 
with any requisition of the Commissioner as to the construction, repair, pavement or cleansing of any 
latrine, or urinal on or belonging to the premises.  
(2) No owner or occupier shall allow the water of any sink, drain, latrine or urinal or any rubbish, filth 
and other polluted and obnoxious matter to run down on or to, or be thrown or put upon, any street or into 
any drain in or along the side of any street exc ept in such manner as shall prevent any avoidable nuisance 
from any such water, rubbish, filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter.  
(3) No person shall, after due provision has been made in this respect under the foregoing provisions 
of this Chapter for  the deposit and removal of th e same— 
(a) deposit any rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter in any street or on the 
verandah of any building or on any unoccupied ground alongside any street or on the bank of a water 
course; or  
(b) deposit any filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter in any dustbin or in any vehicle not 
intended for the removal of the same; or  
(c) deposit rubbish in any vehicle or vessel intended for the removal of filth and other polluted 
and obnoxious matter.  
358. Comm issioner’s power to get premises scavenged and cleansed .—If any premises are not 
properly and regularly scavenged or cleansed or are in a filthy and unwholesome condition, the 
Commissioner may cause them to be scavenged and cleansed and recover the expense s from the owner 
or, as the case may be, occupier as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
359. Public latrines, urinals, etc. —(1) The Commissioner shall provide and maintain in proper and 
convenient places a sufficient number of public latrines and urinals.  
(2) Such public latrines and urinals shall be so constructed as to provide separate compartments for 
each sex and not to be a nuisance, and shall be provided with all necessary conservancy establishments, 
and shall regularly be cleansed and kept in proper or der. 
Latrines and urinals  
360. Construction of latrines and urinals .—(1) It shall not be lawful to construct any latrine or 
urinal for any premises except with the written permission of the Commissioner and in accordance with 
such terms not inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act or any bye -laws made thereunder as he may 
prescribe.  
(2) In prescribing any such terms the Commissio ner may determine in each case— 
(a) whether the premises shall be served by the service system or by the flush system or partly by 
the one and partly by the other; and  
(b) what shall be the site or position of each latrine or urinal.  
(3) If any latrine or urinal is constructed on any premises in contravention of the foregoing 
provisions, the Commissioner may, after giving no t less than ten days’ notice  to the owner or occupier of 
such premises, alter, reconstruct, close or demolish such latrine or urinal and the expenditure incurred by 
the Commissioner in so doing shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrear o f tax under 
this Act.  
361. Latrines and urinals, etc., in new buildings .—(1) It shall not be lawful to erect any building or 
execute any work on or in relation to such building without providing such latrine accommodation and 
urinal accommodation and accom modation for bathing or for washing clothes and utensils on each floor 
of such building as the Commissioner may prescribe.  106 (2) In prescribing any such accommodation the Commissio ner may determine in each case — 
(a) whether such building shall be served by the service system or by the flush system or partly 
by the one and partly by the other;  
(b) what shall be the site or position of each latrine, urinal, bathing or washing place or site and 
their number of each floor and their clear internal dimensions.  
(3) It shall not be lawful to erect a residential building composed of separate tenements on the flat 
system without providing at least one latrine and one bathing or washing place for servants on the ground 
floor of such building or at any other suitable pla ce in the same premises.  
(4) In this section the expression “to erect a building ” has the same meaning as in section 331.  
362. Latrines and urinals for labourers, etc. —Every person employing workmen, labourers or 
other persons exceeding twenty in number shall provide and maintain for the separate use of persons of 
each sex so employed, latrines and urinals of such description and number as the Commissioner may b y 
notice require and within such time as may be fixed in the notice and shall keep the same in clean and 
proper order.  
363. Provision of latrines and urinals for markets, etc. —The Commissioner may by notice require 
any owner or manager of a market, cart stand, cattle shed, theatre, railway station and other place of 
public resort within such time as  may be specified in such notice to provide and maintain for the separate 
use of persons of each sex, latrines of such description and number and in such position as may be 
specified and to keep the same in clean and proper order.  
364. Other provisions as to private latrines .—The Commi ssioner may, by written notice — 
(a) require the owner or other person having the control of any private latrine or urinal not to put 
the same to public use; or  
(b) require the owner or other person having the control of such private latrine or urinal which in 
the opinion of the Commissioner  constitutes a nuisance, to remove the latrine or the urinal; or  
(c) require any person having the control whether as owner, le ssee or oc cupier of any land or 
building— 
(i) to have any latrines provided for the same shut out by a sufficient roof, wall or fence from 
the view of persons passing by or dwelling in the neighbourhood; or  
(ii) to cleans in such manner as the Commissioner  may prescribe in the notice any latrine or 
urinal belonging to the land or building; or  
(d) where any premises int ended or used for human habitat ion are without any latrine or urinal 
accommodation or are provided with insufficient latrine or urinal accomm odation, require the owner, 
lessee or occupier of such premises to provide such or such additional latrine or urinal 
accommodation as he may prescribe, if necessary by causing any part of such premises to be vacated 
and demolished in accordance with bye -laws made in this behalf.  
Removal of congested buildings and buildings unfit for human habitation  
365. Removal of congested buildings .—(1) Where it appears to the Commissioner that any block of 
buildings is in an unhealthy condition by reason of the manner in which the buildings are crowded 
together, or of the narrowness, closeness, or faulty arrangement of streets, or of the want of proper 
drainage and ventilation, or of the impracticability of cleansing the buildings or other similar cause, he 
shall cause the block to be inspected to by the Municipal Health Officer and the Municipal Engineer who 
shall make a report in writing to him regarding the sanitary condition of the block.  
(2) If upon receipt of such report the Commissioner considers that the sanitary  condition of the block 
is likely to cause risk of disease to the inhabitants of the buildings or of the neighbourhood or otherwise to 
endanger the public health, he shall with the approval of the Standing Committee select the buildings 
which in his opinio n should wholly or in part be removed in order to abate the unhealthy condition of the 107 block and may thereupon by notice in writing require the owners of such buildings to remove them within 
such period as may be specified in the notice:  
Provided that befo re issuing the notice reasonable opportunity should be afforded to the owners to 
show cause why the building should not be removed:  
Provided further that the Commissioner shall make compensation to the owners for any buildings so 
removed which may have bee n erected under proper authority.  
(3) If a notice under sub -section ( 2) requiring any owner of a building to remove it is not complied 
with, then, after the expiration of the time specified in the notice the Commissioner may himself remove 
the building req uired to be removed by the notice and recover from the owner of the building the 
expenses of such removal as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
366. Power of Commissioner to require improvement of buildings unfit for human 
habitation .—(1) Where the Commissioner upon information in his possession is satisfied that any 
building is in any respect unfit for human habitation, he may, unless in his opinion the building is not 
capable at a reasonable expense of being rendered fit, serve upon the owner of th e building a notice 
requiring him within such time not being less than thirty days as may be specified in the notice to execute 
the works of improvement specified therein and stating that in his opinion those works will render the 
building fit for human ha bitation.  
(2) In addition to serving a notice under this section on the owner the Commissioner may serve a 
copy of the notice on any other person having an interest in the building whether as a lessee, mortgagee or 
otherwise.  
(3) In determining whether a b uilding can be rendered fit for human habitation at a reasonable 
expense regard shall be had to the estimated cost of the work necessary to render it so fit and the value 
which it is estimated that the building will have when the works are completed.  
367. Enforcement of notice requiring execution of works of improvement .—If a notice under 
section 366 requiring the owner of the building to execute works of improvement is not complied with, 
then, after the expiration of the time specified in the notice the Co mmissioner may himself do the works 
required to be done by the notice and recover the expenses incurred in connection therewith as an arrear 
of tax under this Act.  
368. Power of Commissioner to order demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation .—(1) 
Where the Commissioner upon any information in his possession is satisfied that  any building is unfit for 
human habitation and is not capable at a reasonable  expense of being rendered so fit he shall serve upon 
the owner of the building,  and upon any other  person having an interest in the building, whether as a  
lessee, mortgagee or otherwise a notice to show cause within such time as maybe specified in the notice 
as to why an order of demolition of the building  should not be made.  
(2) If any of the person upon whom a notice has been served under sub -section ( 1), appears in 
pursuance thereof before the Commissioner and gives an undertaking  to him that such person shall, 
within a period specified by the Commissioner,  execute such works of improvement in relat ion to the 
building as will, in the  opinion of the Commissioner, render the building fit for human habitation or an  
undertaking that the building shall not be used for human habitation until the  Commissioner on being 
satisfied that it has been rendered fit  for that purpose,  cancels the undertaking, the Commissioner shall not 
make an order of demolition  of the building.  
(3) If no such undertaking as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) is given, or if in a  case where any such 
undertaking has been given, any work of improvement to  which the undertaking relates is not carried out 
within the specified period,  or the building is at any time used in contravention of the terms of the  
undertaking, the Commissioner shall forthwith make an order of demolition of  the buildi ng requiring that 
the building shall be vacated within a period to be  specified in the order not being less than thirty days 
from the date of the  order, and that it shall be demolished within six weeks after the expiration  of that 
period.  108 (4) Where  an order of demolition of a building under this section has been made, the owner  of the 
building or any other person having an interest therein, shall demolish  that building within the time 
specified in that behalf by the order, and if the  building is not demolished within that time, the 
Commissioner shall demolish  the building and sell the materials thereof.  
(5) Any  expenses incurred by the Commissioner under sub -section ( 4) if not satisfied  out of the 
proceeds of the sale of materials of the building shal l be recovered  from the owner of the building or any 
other person having an interest therein  as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(6) In determining for the purposes of section 366 and this section whether a building  is unfit for 
human habitation, regard sh all be had to its condition in respect  of the follo wing matters, that is to say, — 
(a) repair;  
(b) stability;  
(c) freedom from damp;  
(d) natural light and air;  
(e) water supply;  
(f) drainage and sanitary conveniences;  
(g) facilities for storage, preparation  and cooking of food and for the disposal of  rubbish, filth and 
other polluted matter;  
and the building shall be deemed to be unfit as  aforesaid if it is so far defective in one or more of the said 
matters that it  is not reasonably suitable for occupation in that condition.  
(7) For  the purposes of section 366, section 367 and this section, “work of  improvement ” in relation 
to a building includes any one or more of the  following works, namely: — 
(a) necessary repairs;  
(b) structural alterations;  
(c) provision  of light points and water taps;  
(d) construction of drains, open or covered;  
(e) provision of latrines and urinals;  
(f) provision of additional or improved fixtures and fittings;  
(g) opening up or paving of courtyard;  
(h) removal of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter;  
(i) any other work including the demolition of any building or any part thereof  which, in the 
opinion of the Commissioner, is necessary for executing any of  the works specified above.  
(8) The provisions of section 365, section 366,  section 367 and this section shall not apply in relation 
to any building in any  area which has been declared to be a slum area under the Slum Area (Improvement  
and Clearance) Act, 1956 (96 of 1956).  
369. Insanitary huts and sheds .—Where the Commissioner upon any information in his possession 
is satisfied that any hut or shed used as a dwelling house or as a stable or for any other purpose, is likely, 
by reason of its being constructed without a plinth or upon a plinth of insufficient height o r without 
proper means of drainage or on account of the impracticability of scavenging and cleansing it or owing to 
the manner in which it and other huts of sheds are crowded together, to cause risk of disease to the 
inmates thereof or to the inhabitants o f the neighbourhood, or is for any reason likely to endanger public 
health or safety, he may by notice in writing require the owner or occupier of the hut of shed or the owner 
or occupier of the land on which the hut or shed stands to remove or alter the h ut or shed or carry out such 
improvement thereof as the Commissioner may deem necessary within such time as may be specified in 
the notice.  109 Regulation of washing by washermen  
370. Prohibition against washing by washermen .—(1) The Commissioner may by public  notice 
prohibit the washing of clothes by washermen in the exercise of their callings except at such places as he 
may appoint for the purpose.  
(2) When any such prohibition has been made, no person who is by calling a washerman shall in 
contravention of s uch prohibition wash clothes except for himself or for personal and family service or 
for hire on or within the premises of the hirer, at any place other than a place appointed under sub -section 
(1). 
Prevention of dangerous diseases  
371. Obligation to give information of dangerous disease .—Any person being in charge of, or in 
attendance, whether as a medical practitioner or otherwise, upon any person whom he knows or has 
reason to believe to be suffering from a dangerous disease, or being  the owner, lessee, or occupier of any 
building in which he knows that any such person is so suffering shall forthwith give information 
respecting the existence of such disease to the Municipal Health Officer.  
372. Removal to hospital of patients suffering  from dangerous disease .—(1) When any person 
suffering from any dan gerous disease is found to be — 
(a) without proper lodging or accommodation, or  
(b) living in a room or house which the neither owns or pays rent for nor occupies as the guest or 
relative of  any person who owns, or pays rent for it, or  
(c) living in a sarai, hotel, boarding house or other public hotel, or  
(d) lodged in premises occupied by members of two or more families,  
the Commissioner or any person authorised by him in this behalf, may on  the advice of any medical 
officer of the rank not inferior to that of an assistant surgeon remove the patient to any hospital or place at 
which persons suffering from such disease are received for medical treatment and may anything 
necessary for such remo val. 
(2) The Corporation shall if required by the Central Government erect an infectious diseases hospital 
of such type and dimension as that Government may direct.  
373. Disinfection of buildings and articles .—Where the Commissioner is of opinion that the 
cleansing and disinfection of any building or part of a building or of any articles in such building or part 
which are likely to retain infection, or the renewal of flooring of any building or part of such building, and 
the renewal of plastering of the wal ls thereof, would tend to prevent or check the spread of any dangerous 
disease; he may, by notice in writing, require the owner or occupier to cleanse and disinfect the said 
building, part or articles, as the case may be, or to renew the said flooring and if necessary, the said 
plastering also within such time as may be specified in the notice:  
Provided that where in the opinion of the Commissioner the owner or occupier is from poverty or any  
other cause unable  effectually , to carry out any such requisition , the Commissioner may at the expense of 
the Municipal Fund cleanse and disinfect the building, part or articles, or, as the case may be, renew the 
flooring and if necessary, the plastering also.  
374. Destruction of infectious huts or sheds .—(1) Where the destruction of any hut or shed is in the 
opinion of the Commissioner necessary to prevent the  spread  of any dangerous disease, the Commissioner 
may by notice in writing require the owner to destroy the hut or shed and the materials thereof within 
such time  as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Where  the Commissioner is satisfied that the destruction of any hut or shed is immediately 
necessary for the purpose of preventing the spread of any dangerous disease, he may order the owner or 
occupier of the hut or  shed to destroy the same forthwith or may himself cause it to be destroyed after 
giving not less than six hours ’ notice to the owner or occupier.  110 (3) Compensation  may be paid by the Commissioner, in any case which he thinks fit, to any person 
who sustains  substantial loss by the destruction of any such hut or shed, but, except as so allowed by the 
Commissioner, no claim for compensation shall lie for any loss or damage caused by any exercise of the 
power conferred by this section.  
375. Means of disinfection .—(1) The Commissioner shall — 
(a) provide proper places with necessary attendants and apparatus for the disinfection of 
conveyances, clothing, bedding and other articles which have been exposed to infection;  
(b) cause conveyances, clothing and other articles brought for disinfection to be disinfected either 
free of charge or on payment of such charges as he may fix.  
(2) The Commissioner may notify places at which articles of clothing, bedding and conveyances or 
other articles which have been exposed to  infection shall be washed and if he does so, no person shall 
wash any such thing at any place not so notified without having previously disinfected such thing.  
(3) The Commissioner may  direct  the destruction of any clothing, bedding or  other article likely to 
retain infection and may give such compensation as he thinks fit for any article so destroyed.  
376. Special measures in case of outbreak of dangerous epidemic diseases .—(1) In the event of 
Delhi or any part thereof being visited or  threatened by an outbreak of any dangerous disease among the 
inhabitants thereof or of any epidemic disease among any animals  therein, the Commissioner, if he thin ks 
that the other provisions of this Act and the provisions of any other law for the time be ing in force are 
insufficient for the purpose, may, with the previo us sanction of the Corporation ,— 
(a) take such special measures, and  
(b) by public notice, give such directions to be observed by the public or by any class or section 
of the public,  
as he thinks necessary to prevent the outbreak or spread of the disease:  
Provided that where in the opinion of the Commissioner immediate measures are necessary, he may 
take action without such sanction as aforesaid and if he does so, shall forthwith report such  action to the 
Corporation.  
(2) No person shall commit a breach of any direction given under sub -section ( 1) and if he does so he 
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860).  
377. Infected clothes not to be sent to washerman or to laundry .—(1) A person shall not send or 
take to any washerman or to any laundry or place set a part for the exercise by washerm en of their calling, 
for the purpose of being washed or to anyplace for the p urpose of being cleansed, any cloth or other 
article which he knows to have been exposed to infection from a dangerous disease unless that cloth or 
article   has been disinfected by or to the satisfaction of the Municipal Health Officer.  
(2) The occupier of  any building in which a person is suffering from a  dangerous  disease shall, if 
required by the Municipal Health Officer, furnish to him the address of any washerman to whom or any 
laundry or other place to which clothes and other articles from the buildin g have been, or will be, sent 
during the continuance of the disease, for the purpose of being washed or cleaned.  
378. Contamination and disinfection of public conveyance .—(1) Whoev er— 
(a) uses a public conveyance while suffering from a dangerous  disease, or 
(b) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of a person who is suffering from any disease, or  
(c) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of the corpse of a person who has died from any 
such disease,  
shall be bound to take proper precautions against  the communication of the disease to other persons using 
or who may thereafter use the conveyance and to notify such use of the owner, driver or person incharge 
of the conveyance, and further report without delay to the Commissioner the number of the conve yance 
and the name of the person so notified.  111 (2) Where  any person suffering from, or the corpse of any person who has died from, a dangerous 
disease has been carried in public conveyance which ordinarily plies in Delhi or any part thereof, the 
driver ther eof shall forthwith report the fact to the Commissioner who shall forthwith cause the 
conveyance to be disinfected if that has not already been done.  
(3) No  such conveyance shall be again brought into use until the Municipal Health Officer has 
granted a certificate stating that it can be used without causing risk of infection.  
(4) Whoever  fails to make to the Commissioner any report which he is required to make under this 
section shall be guilty of an offence.  
379. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry persons suffering from dangerous                     
disease .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in any law for the time being in force no owner, driver or 
person in charge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey or to allow to be conveyed in such 
conveyance in or in the vicinity of Delhi any person suffering from a dangerous disease or the corpse of 
any person who has die d from such disease unless and until such person pays or tenders a sum sufficient 
to cover any loss and expense which would ordina rily be incurred in disinfecting the conveyance.  
380. Disinfection of buildings before letting the same .—(1) Where any building or part of a 
building is intended to be let in which any person has, within six weeks immediately preceding, been 
suffering from  a dangerous  disease, the person letting the building or part shall, before doing so, disinfect 
the same in such manner as the Commissioner may by general or special notice direct together with all 
articles therein liable to retain infection.  
(2) For the p urposes of this section the keeper of a hostel,  lodging house or sarai  shall be deemed to 
let to any person who is admitted as a guest therein that part of the building in which such person is 
permitted to reside.  
381. Disposal of infected articles without  disinfection .—No person shall, without previous 
disinfection of the same, give, lend, sell, transmit or otherwise dispose of to another person any article or 
thing which he knows or has  reason to believe has been exposed to contamination by any dangerous 
disease and is likely to be used in or taken into Delhi or any part thereof.  
382. Prohibition of making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes by infected             
persons .—No person while suffering from or in circumstances in which he is likely to spread , any 
dangerous  disease, shall — 
(a) make, carry or offer for sale or take any part in the business of making, carrying or offering 
for sale, any article of food or drink or any medicine or drug for human consumption, or any article of 
cloth ing or bedding for personal use or wear , or 
(b) take any part in the business of the washing or carrying of clothes.  
 383. Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink .—When Delhi or any part thereof is visited 
or threatened by an outbreak of any dangerous disease the Commissioner may, by public notice, restrict in 
such manner  or prohibit for such period as may be specified in the notice, the sale or preparation of any 
article of food or drink for human consumption specified in the notice or the sa le of any flesh of any 
description of animal so specified.  
384. Control over wells and tanks, etc. —(1) If the Commissioner is of opinion that the water in any 
well, tank or other place, is likely, if used for drinking, to endanger, or cause the spread of, any disease, 
he may— 
(a) by public notice, prohibit the removal  or use of such water for drinking; or  
(b) by notice in writing require the owner or person having control of such well, tank or place to 
take such steps as may be directed by the notice to pre vent the public from having access to or using 
such water; or  
(c) take such other steps as he may consider expedient to prevent the outbreak or spread of any 
such disease.  112 (2) In the event of Delhi or any part  thereof  being visited or threatened by an outb reak of a dangerous 
disease the Municipal Health Officer or any person authorised by him in this behalf may, without notice 
and at any time, inspect and disinfect any well, tank or other place from which water is, or is likely to be , 
taken for the purposes  of drinking and may further take such steps as he may think fit to ensure the purity 
of the water or to prevent the use of the same for drinking purposes.  
385. Duty of persons suffering from dangerous disease .—No person shall ,— 
(a) knowing that he is suffering from a dangerous disease, expose other persons to the risk of 
infection by his presence or conduct in any public street or public place;  
(b) having the care of a person whom he knows to be suffering from a dangerous disease, cause 
or permit that person to expose other persons to the risk of infection by his presence or conduct in any 
such street or place as aforesaid;  
(c) place or cause to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle for the deposit of rubbish, any 
matter which he knows to have been  exposed to infection from a dangerous disease and which has not 
been disinfected properly;  
(d) throw or cause to be thrown into any latrine or urinal any matter which he knows to have been 
exposed to infection from a dangerous disease and which has not be en disinfected properly.  
386. Disposal of infectious corpses where any person has died from any dangerous                
disease .—Where any person has died from any dangerous disease the Commissioner may, by notice in 
writing— 
(a) require any person having charge of the corpse to convey the same to a mortuary thereafter to 
be disposed of in accordance with law, or  
(b) prohibit the removal of corpses from the place where death occurred except for the purpose of 
being burnt, buried or for being conveyed to a mortuary.  
Special conditions regarding essential services  
387. Conditions of service of sweepers and certain other class of persons employed in municipal 
service .—(1) No person being a sweeper employed by the Corporation shall in  the absence of any 
contract authorising him so to do and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself 
from his duty without having  given one month's notice to the Commissioner or shall neglect or without 
reasonable cause refuse to per form his duties.  
(2) The Corporation may by resolution direct that on or from such date as may be specified in the 
resolution, the  provisions of this section shall apply in the case of any specified class of persons employed 
by the Corporation whose functi ons are intimately concerned with public health or safety.  
388. Conditions of service of sweepers employed for doing house scavenging .—No sweeper, 
being employed for doing house scavenging of any building shall discontinue to do such house 
scavenging, with out reasonable cause or without having given fourteen days notice  to his employer.  
Burning and burial grounds  
389. Power to call for information regarding burning and burial grounds .—The Commissioner 
may, by notice in  writing, require the owner or person in charge of any burning or burial ground to  supply 
such information as may be specified in the notice concerning the condition, management, or position of 
such ground.  
390. Permission for use of new burning or burial ground .—(1) No place which has not bee n used 
as a burning or burial ground before the commencement of this Act shall be so used without the 
permission in writing of the  Commissioner.  
(2) Such permission may be granted subject to any conditions which the Commissioner may think fit 
to impose for  the purpose of preventing any annoyance to, or danger  to the health of, any persons residing 
in the neighbourhood.  113 391. Power to require closing of burning and burial grounds .—(1) Where the Commissioner, after 
making or causing to be made local enquiry is  of opinion that any burning or burial ground has become 
offensive to, or dangerous to the  health  of, persons residing in the neighbourhood, he may, with the 
previous sanction of the Standing Committee, by notice in writing, require the owner or person in charge 
of such ground to close the same from such date as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) No corpse shall be burnt or buried at the burning or burial  ground  in respect of which a notice has 
been issued under this section.  
392. Removal of corpses .—The Commissioner may by public notice prescribe routes by which alone 
corpses may be removed to burning or burial ground.  
Disposal of dead animals  
393. Disposal of dead animals .—(1) Whenever any animal in charge of any person dies, the person 
in charge thereof  shall w ithin twenty -four hours either — 
(a) convey the carcass to a place provided or appointed under section 352 for the final disposal of 
the carcasses of dead animals, or  
(b) give notice of the death to the Commissioner whereupon he shall cause the carcass to be 
disposed of.  
(2) In respect of the disposal of  the carcass of a dead animal under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) the 
Commissioner may charge such fee as he may by public notice prescribe.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
VITAL STATISTICS  
394. Appointment of Chief Registrar and registrars .—(1) The Municipal Health Officer shall be 
the Chief Registrar of births and deaths for Delhi and shall keep in such form as may be prescribed by 
bye-laws a register of all births and deaths occurring in Delhi . 
(2) The Commissioner shall for the purposes of this Chapter appoint such number of persons to be 
registrars of births and deaths as he deems necessary and define the respective areas which shall be under 
the charge of such registrars.  
395. Duties of regi strar .—The registrar shall keep himself informed of every birth or death 
occurring within the area under his charge and shall ascertain and register as soon as conveniently may be 
after the event, and without fee or reward such particulars in respect of ev ery birth or death as may be 
prescribed b y bye -laws made in this behalf.  
396. Information of births and deaths .—(1) It shall be the duty of the father or mother of every 
child born in Delhi and in default of the father or mother, of any relation of the chi ld living in the same 
premises, and in default of such relation, of the person having charge of the child, to give to the best of 
his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area concerned within eight days after such birth, 
information containing suc h particulars as may be prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the nearest relation present at the time of the death or in attendance during 
the last illness of any person dying in Delhi and in default of such relation, of any person present or in 
attendance at the time of the death , and of the occupier of the premises in which to his knowledge the 
death took place and in default of the person hereinbefore mentioned, of each inmate of such premises 
and of the undertaker or other person causing the corpse of the deceased person to be d isposed of, to give 
to the best of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area within which the death took place 
information containing such particulars as may be prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
(3) If a birth or death occurs in the h ospital, none of the persons mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or, as 
the case may be, in sub -section ( 2) shall be bound to give information required by that sub -section, but it 
shall be the duty of the medical officer in charge of the hospital within twenty -four hours after the birth or 
death, to send to the Municipal Health Officer a notice containing such particulars as may be prescribed 
by bye -laws made in this behalf.  114 CHAPTER XIX  
  PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
Nuisances  
397. Prohibition of nuisances. —(1) No pe rson shall — 
(a) in an y public street or public  place— 
(i) ease himself; or  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(iv) carry meat exposed to public view;  or 
(v) picket animals, or collect carts; or  
(vi) being engaged in the removal of  rubbish, filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter 
wilfully or negligently  permit any portion thereof to spill or fail, or neglect to sweep away or  
otherwise effectually to remove any portion thereof which may spill or fall in  such street or place; 
or 
(vii) without prope r authority affix,  upon any building monument, post, wall, fence, tree or 
other thing, any bill,  notice or other document; or  
(viii) without proper authority  deface  or write upon or otherwise mark any building, 
monument, port, wall, fence, tree  or other th ing; or  
(ix) without proper authority  remove, destroy,  deface or  write upon or otherwise obliterate 
any notice or other document put up or  exhibited under this Act or the rules or bye -laws made 
thereunder; or  
(x) without proper authority displace,  damage, make any alteration in, or otherwise interfere 
with, the pavement,  gutter, storm water -drain, flags or other materials of any such street, or any  
lamp bracket, direction -post, hydrant or water -pipe maintained by the  Corporation in any such 
street or place,  or extinguish a public light; or  
(xi) carry rubbish, filth or other  polluted and obnoxious matter at any hour prohibited by the 
Commissioner by  public notice, or in any pattern of cart or receptacle which has not been  
approved for the purpose by the Commi ssioner, or fail to close such cart or  receptacle when in 
use; or  
(b) carry rubbish, filth or other  polluted and obnoxious matter along any route in contravention of 
any prohibition made in this behalf by the Commissioner by public notice; or  
(c) deposit o r cause or permit to be  deposited, earth or materials of any description or any rubbish 
or polluted and  obnoxious matter in any place not intended for the purpose in any public street  or 
public place or waste or unoccupied land under the management of the  Corporation; or  
(d) make any grave or burn or bury an y corpse at any place not set apart for such purpose; or  
(e) at any time or place at which the same  has been prohibited by the Commissioner by public or 
special notice, beat a  drum or tom -tom, or blow a horn or trumpet, or beat any utensil, or sound any  
brass or other instrument, or play any music; or  
(f) disturb the public peace or order by  singing, screaming or shouting, or by using any apparatus 
for amplifying or  reproducing the human voice, such as a megaphone or a loudspeaker; or  
(g) let loose any animal so as to cause,  or negligently allow any animal to cause, injury, danger, 
alarm or annoyance to  any person; or  
(h) save with the written permission of  the Commissioner and in such manner as he may 
authorise, store or use  night -soil, cow  dung, manure, rubbish or any other substance emitting an  
offensive smell; or  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  115 (i) use or permit to be used as a latrine any place not intended for  that purpose.  
(2) Every person shall take all  reasonable means to prevent  every child under the age of twelve years 
being in  his charge from easing himself in any public street or public place.  
(3) The owner or keeper of any animal  shall not allow it straying in a public street or public place 
without a  keeper.  
(4) Any animal found straying as  aforesaid may be removed by an officer or employee of the 
Corporation or by any  police officer to a pound.  
(5) 1[Swine] found straying  in a public street or public place shall be liable to be destroyed by any  
officer or other employee of the Corporation appointed in this behalf.  
398. Power of Commissioner to require removal or abetment of nuisance .—Where the 
Commissioner is of opinion that there is a nuisance on any land or building, he may, by notice in writing, 
require the person by whose act, default or sufferance the nuisance arises or continues or the owner, 
lessee or occupier of the land or building, or any one or more of these persons, to remove or abate the 
nuisance by taking such measures in such manner and within such period a s may be specified in the 
notice.  
399. Registration and control of dogs .—(1) The Corporation may, b y bye -laws made in this 
behalf ,— 
(a) require the registration, by the registration authority appointed by the Commissioner in this 
behalf of all dogs kept wi thin Delhi;  
(b) require that every registered dog shall wear a collar to which shall be attached a metal token to 
be issued by the registration authority, and fix the fee payable for the issue thereof;  
(c) require that any dog which has not been registered  or which is not wearing such token shall, if 
found in any public place, be detained at a place set apart for the purpose; and  
(d) fixed the fee which shall be charged for such detention and provide that any such dog shall be 
liable to be destroyed or othe rwise disposed of unless it is claimed and the fee in respect thereof is 
paid within one week.  
(2) The Commissioner may — 
(a) cause to be destroyed, or to be confined for such period as he may direct, any dog or other 
animal which is, or is  reasonably suspected to be, suffering from rabies, or which has been bitten by 
any dog or other animal suffering or suspected to be suffering from rabies;  
(b) by public notice direct that, after such date as may be specified in the notice, dogs which are 
without collars or without marks distinguishing them as private property and are found straying on 
the streets or beyond the enclosures of the houses of their owners, if any, may be destroyed and cause 
them to be destroyed accordingly.  
(3) No damages shall  be payable in respect of any dog or other animal destroyed or otherwise 
disposed of under this section.  
(4) No one, being the owner or person in charge of any dog, shall allow it to be at large in any public 
street or public place without being muzzled an d without being secured by a c hain lead in any case in 
which— 
(a) he knows that the dog is likely to annoy or intimidate any person, or  
(b) the Commissioner has, by public notice during the prevalence of rabies, directed that dogs 
shall not be at large wit hout muzzles and chain leads.  
(5) No one shall — 
(a) allow any ferocious dog which belongs to him or is in his charge to be at large without being 
muzzled, or  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 58  of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Swine s” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  116 (b) set on or urge any dog or other animal to attack, worry or intimidate any person, or  
(c) knowing or having reason to believe that any dog or animal belonging to him or in his charge 
has been bitten by an animal suffering or reasonably suspected to be suffering from rabies, fail or 
neglect to give immediate information of the fact to the Commis sioner or give information which is 
false.  
Prevention of fire, etc.  
400. Stacking or collecting inflammable materials .—The Commissioner may, by public notice, 
prohibit in any case where such prohibition appears to him to be necessary for the prevention of danger to 
life or property, the stacking or collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable materials, or the 
placing of mats or thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place which may be specified in the notice.  
401. Care of naked lights .—No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any public 
street or other public place in such manner as to cause danger of fire:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of lights for the purposes of 
illumina tion on the occasion of a festival or public or private entertainment.  
402. Discharging fireworks, fire -arms, etc. —No one shall discharge any fire -arm or let of fire -
works or fire -baloons, or engage in any game in such manner as to cause or to be likely to  cause danger to 
persons passing by or dwelling or working in the neighbourhood or risk of injury to property.  
403. Power to require buildings, wells, etc. to be rendered safe .—Where any building, or wall, or 
anything affixed thereto, or any well, tank, re servoir, pool, depression, or excavation, or any bank or tree, 
is in the opinion of the Commissioner, in a ruinous state, for want of sufficient repairs, protection or 
enclosure, a nuisance or dangerous to persons passing by or dwelling or working in the n eighbourhood, 
the Commissioner may by notice in writing require the owner or part -owner or person claiming to be the 
owner or part -owner thereof or failing any of them the occupier thereof to remove the same or may 
require him to repair, protect or enclose  the same in such manner as he thinks necessary; and if the danger 
is, in the opinion of the Commissioner, imminent, he shall forthwith take such steps as he thinks 
necessary to avert the same.  
404. Enclosure of waste land used for improper purposes .—The C ommissioner may, by notice in 
writing, require the owner or part -owner, or person claiming to be the owner or part -owner of any land or 
building, or the lessee or the person claiming to be the lessee of any such land which, by reason of disuse 
or disputed ownership or other cause, has remained unoccupied and has become the resort of idle and 
disorderly persons or of persons who have no ostensible means of subsistence or cannot give a 
satisfactory account of themselves or is used for gaming or immoral purpos es or otherwise occasions or is 
likely to occasion a nuisance, to secure and enclose the same within such time as may be specified in the 
notice.  
CHAPTER XX  
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER HOUSES, TRADE AND OCCUPATIONS  
Maintenance and regulation of markets and slaughter houses  
405. Provisions of municipal markets and slaughter houses .—(1) The Commissioner, when 
authorised by the Corporation in this behalf, may provide and maintain municipal markets and slaughter 
houses in such number as he thinks fit together wi th stalls, shops, sheds, pens and other buildings and 
conveniences for the use of persons carrying on trade or business in, or frequenting such markets or 
slaughter houses and may provide and maintain in any such markets, buildings and places machines, 
weights, scales and measures for the weighment or measurement of goods sold therein.  
(2) Municipal markets and slaughter houses shall be under the control of the Commissioner who may, 
at any time, by public notice, close any municipal market or slaughter hous e or any part thereof.  
406. Use of municipal markets .—(1) No persons shall, without the general or special permission in 
writing of the Commissioner, sell or expose for sale any animal or article in any municipal market.  117 (2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1), and any animal or article exposed for 
sale by such person, may be summarily removed from the market by or under the orders of the 
Commissioner or any officer or employee of the Corporation authorised by the Commissioner in th is 
behalf.  
 407. Private markets and slaughter houses .—(1) No place other than a municipal market shall be 
used as a market unless such place has been licensed as a market by the Commissioner.  
(2) No place other than a municipal slaughter house sha ll be us ed as a slaughter house : 
Provided that nothing in th is sub -section shall be deemed — 
(a) to restrict the slaughter of any animal in any place on the occasion of any religious festival or 
ceremony, subject to such conditions (non -compliance with which shall be punishable under this Act) 
as the Commissioner may, by public or special notice, impose in this behalf, or  
(b) to prevent the Commissioner, with the sanction of the Corporation, from setting apart places 
for the slaughter of animals in accordance with r eligious custom.  
408. Conditions of grant of licence for private market .—(1) The Commissioner may charge such 
fees as he thinks fit to impose for the grant of a licence to any person to open a private market and may 
grant such licence subject to such conditions, consistent with this Act and any bye -laws made thereunder, 
as he thinks fit to impose.  
(2) When the Commissioner refuses to grant any licence, he shall record a brief statement of the 
reasons for such refusal.  
(3) The Commissioner may, with the  previous approval of the Standing Committee and for reasons to 
be recorded, suspend a licence in respect of a private market for such period as he thinks fit or cancel such 
licence.  
(4) A private market of which the licence has been suspended or cancelled  as aforesaid shall be closed 
with effect from such date as may be specified in the order of suspension or cancellation.  
409. Prohibition of keeping market open without licence, etc. —(1) No person shall keep open for 
public use any market in respect of whi ch a licence is required by or under this Act without obtaining a 
licence therefor, or while the licence therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled.  
(2) When a licence to open a private market is granted or refused or is suspended or cancel led the 
Commissioner shall cause a notice of the grant, refusal, suspension or cancellation to be posted in such 
language or languages as he thinks necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the 
place to which the notice relates.  
410. Prohibition of use of unlicenced markets .—No person knowing that any market has been 
opened to the public without a licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or 
under this Act or that the licence granted therefor is for the time  being suspended or that it has been 
cancelled, shall sell or expose for sale any animal or article in such market.  
411. Prohibition of business and trade near a market .—(1) No animal or article shall be sold or 
exposed for sale within a distance of one hu ndred yards of any municipal market or licensed private 
market without the permission of the Commissioner.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and any animal or article exposed for 
sale by such person may be summarily removed by o r under the orders of the Commissioner or any 
officer or employee of the Corporation appointed by him in this behalf.  
412. Levy of stallages, rents and fees .—The Commissioner, with the previous approval of the 
Standing Committee, may — 
(a) charge such stallages, rents or fees as may from time to time be fixed by him in this behalf — 
(i) for the occupation or use of any stall, shop, stand, shed or pen in a municipal market or 
municipal slaughter house;  118 (ii) for the right to expose articles for sale in a m unicipal market;  
(iii) for the use of machines, weights, scales and measures provided for in any municipal market; and  
(iv) for the right to slaughter animals in any municipal slaughter house, and for the feed of such 
animals before they are ready for slau ghter; or  
(b) farm the stallages, rents and fees chargeable as aforesaid or any portion thereof for such 
period as he may think fit; or  
(c) put up to public auction or dispose of by private sale, the privilege of occupying or using any 
stall, shop, stand, shed or pen in a municipal market or municipal slaughter house for such period and 
on such conditions as he may think fit.  
413. Stallages, rents, etc., to be published .—A copy of the table of stallages, rents and fees, if any, 
chargeable in any municipal market or municipal slaughter house, and of the bye -laws made under this 
Act for the purpose of regulating the use of such market or slaughter house printed in such language or 
languages as the Commissioner may direct, shall be affixed in same conspicuous place in the market or 
slaughter house.  
414. Power to expel  lepers and disturbers, etc. from markets .—The person in charge of a market 
shall prevent the entry therein of, and shall expel therefrom, any person suffering from leprosy in whom 
the process of u lceration has commenced or from any dangerous disease, who  sells or exposes for sale 
therein any article or who, not having purchased the same handles any articles exposed for sale therein; 
and he may expel therefrom any person whom is creating a disturban ce therein.  
415. Butcher’s, fish -monger’s and poulter ’s licence .—(1) No person shall without or otherwise  
than in conformity with a licence from the Commissioner carry on the trade of a  butcher, fish -monger, 
poulterer or importer of flesh intended for human food or  use any place for the sale of flesh, fish or 
poultry intended for human food:  
Provided  that no licence shall be required for any place used for the sale or storage  for sale of 
preserved flesh or fish contained in airtight or hermetically  sealed receptacles.  
(2) The Commissioner may by order and  subject to such conditions as to supervision and inspection 
as he thinks fit to  impose grant a licence or may by order refuse for reasons to be recorded, to  grant the 
same.  
(3) Every such licence sh all expire at  the end of the year for which it is granted or at such earlier date 
as the  Commissioner may, for special reasons, specify in the licence.  
(4) If any place is used for the sale of  flesh , fish or poultry in contravention of the provisions of this 
section, the  Commissioner may stop the use thereof by such means as he may consider  necessary.  
Trades and Occupations  
416. Factory, etc., not to be established without permission of the Commissioner .—(1) No person 
shall, without the previous permissio n in writing of the Commissioner, establish in any premises, or 
materially alter, enlarge or extend, any factory, workshop or trade premises in which it is intended to 
employ steam, electricity, water or other mechanical power.  
(2) The Commissioner may refuse to give such permission, if he is of the opinion that the 
establishment, alteration, enlargement or extension of such factory, workshop or trade premises, in the 
proposed position would be objectionable by reason of the density of the population in the neighbourhood 
thereof, or would be a nuisance to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.  
417. Premises not to be used for certain purposes without licence .—(1) No person shall use or 
permit to be used any premises for any of the following purposes withou t or otherwise than in conformity 
with the terms of a licence granted by the Commis sioner in this behalf, namely: — 
(a) any of the purposes specified in Part I of the Eleventh Schedule;  
(b) any purpose which is, in the opinion of the Commissioner dangerous to life, health or property 
or likely to create a nuisance;  119 (c) keeping horses, cattle or other quardruped animals or birds for transportation, sale or hire or 
for sale of the produce thereof; or  
(d) storing any of the articles specified in Part II of the Eleventh Schedule except for domestic use 
of any those article ’s: 
Provided that the Corporation may declare that premises in which the aggregate quantity of articles 
stored for sale does not exceed such quantity as may be prescribed by bye -laws in respect of any such 
articles shall be exempted from the operation of clause ( d). 
(2) In prescribing the terms of a licence granted under this section for the use of premises as mills or 
iron yards or for similar purposes the Commissioner may, when he thinks fit, r equire the licensee to 
provide a space or passage within the premises for carts for loading and unloading purposes.  
(3) The Corporation shall fix a scale of fees to be paid in respect of premises licensed under sub -
section ( 1): 
Provided that no such fee sh all exceed five hundred rupees.  
418. Seizure of certain animals .—(1) If any horses, cattle or other quadruped animals or birds are 
kept on any premises in contravention of the provisions of section 417, or are found abandoned and 
roaming or tethered on any  street or public place or on any land belonging to the Corporation, the 
Commissioner or any officer empowered by him may seize them and may cause them to be impounded or 
removed to such place as may be appointed by the Government or the Corporation for th is purpose and 
the cost of seizure of these animals or birds and of impounding or removing them and of feeding and 
watering them shall be recoverable by sale by auction of these animals or birds:  
Provided that anyone claiming such animal or bird may, withi n seven days of the seizure get them 
released on his paying all expenses incurred by the Commissioner in seizing, impounding or removing 
and in feeding and watering such animal or bird, and on his producing a licence for keeping these animals 
and birds iss ued under the provisions of section 417.  
(2) Whenever the Commissioner is of opinion that the user of any premises for any of the purposes 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 417 is causing a nuisance and such nuisance should be 
immediately stopped, the Commissioner may order the owner or the occupier of the premises to stop such 
nuisance within such time as may be specified in the order and in the event of the failure of the owner or 
occupier to comply with such order, the Commissioner may himself or  by an officer subordinate to him 
cause such user to be stopped.  
(3) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section any person by whom or at whose 
instance any horses, cattle or other quadruped animals or birds are so kept, abandoned or tethered, shall 
also be punishable under this Act.  
419. Power of Commissioner to prevent use of premises in particular area s for purposes 
referred to in section 417 .—(1) The Commissioner may give public notice of his intention to declare 
that in any area s pecified in the notice no person shall use any premises for any of the purposes referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 417, which may be specified in such notice.  
(2) No objections to any such declarations shall be received after a period of one month f rom the 
publication of the notice.  
(3) The Commissioner shall consider all objections received within the said period, giving any person 
affected by the notice an opportunity of being heard during such consideration, and may thereupon make 
a declaration in  accordance with the notice published under sub -section ( 1), with such modifications, if 
any, as he may think fit but not so as to extend its application.  
(4) Every such declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the  
Commissioner may determine, and shall take effect from the date of its publication in the Official 
Gazette.  120 (5) No person shall, in any area specified in any declaration published under sub -section ( 4), use any 
premises for any of the purposes referred to  in section 417 specified in the declaration and the 
Commissioner shall have the power to stop the use of any such premises by such means as he considers 
necessary.  
420. Licences for hawking articles, etc. —No person shall, without or otherwise than in conformity 
with the terms of a licence granted by th e Commissioner in this behalf, — 
(a) hawk or expose for sale in any place any article whatsoever whether it be for human 
consumption or not;  
(b) use in any place his skill in any handicraft or for renderin g services to and for the convenience 
of the public for the purposes of gain or making a living.  
 421. Eating houses, etc. not to be used without licence from the Commissioner .—(1) No person 
shall, without or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted by the Commissioner in 
this behalf, keep any eating house, lodging house, hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee house, cafe, 
restaurant, refreshment room or any place where the public are admitted for repose or for the consumption 
of an y food or drink or any place where food is sold or prepared for sale.  
(2) The Commissioner may at any time cancel or suspend any licence granted under sub -section ( 1) if 
he is of the opinion that the premises covered thereby are not kept in conformity with  the conditions of 
such licence or with the provisions of any bye -law made in this behalf whether the licensee is prosecuted 
under this Act or not.  
422. Licensing and control of theatres, circuses and places of public amusement .—No person 
shall, without or  otherwise than in confirmity with the terms of a licence granted by the Commissioner in 
this behalf, keep open any theatre, circus, cinema house, dancing hall or other similar place of public 
resort, recreation or amusement:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to private performances in any such place.  
423. Power of Commissioner to stop use of premises used in contravention of licences .—If the 
Commissioner is of opinion that any eating House, lodging house, hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee 
house, cafe, restaurant, refreshment room or other place where the public are admitted for repose or for 
consumption of any food or drink or where food is sold or prepared for sale or any theatre, circus, cinema 
house, dancing hall or similar other place of public resort, recreation or amusement is kept open without a 
licence or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted in respect thereof, he may stop 
the use of any such premises for any such purpose for a specified period by s uch means as he may 
consider necessary.  
Inspection of places of sales, etc.  
424. Power of Commissioner to inspect places where unlawful slaughter of animals, etc., is 
suspected .—(1) If the Commissioner or any person authorised by him in this behalf has rea son to believe 
that any animal intended for human consumption is being slaughtered or that the flesh of any such animal 
is being sold or exposed for sale, in any place or manner not duly authorised under this Act, he may, at 
any time by day or night withou t notice, inspect such place for the purpose of satisfying himself as to 
whether any provision of this Act or of any bye -law under this Act at the time in force is being 
contravened thereat and may seize any such animal or the carcass of such animal or suc h flesh found 
therein.  
(2) The Commissioner may remove and sell by auction or otherwise dispose of any animal or carcass 
of any animal or any flesh seized under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If within one month of such seizure the owner of the animal, carcass or fl esh face to appear and 
prove his claim to the satisfaction of the Commissioner or if the owner is convicted of an offence under 
this Act in respect of such animal, carcass or flesh, the proceeds of any sale under sub -section ( 1) shall 
vest in the Corporati on. 
(4) Any person slaughtering any animal or selling or exposing for sale the flesh of any such animal in 
any place or manner not duly authorised under the provisions of this Act may be arrested by any police 
officer without a warrant.  121 (5) No claim shall lie against any person for compensation for any damage necessarily caused by any 
such entry or by the use of any force necessary for affecting such entry.  
CHAPTER XXI  
IMPROVEMENT  
425. Improvement scheme .—Where the Commissioner upon information in his possession is 
satisfied as respects any area — 
(a) that the buildings in that area are by reason or disrepair or sanitary defects unfit for human 
habitation or are by reason of their bad arrangement, or the narrowness or bad arrangement of the 
streets or th e want of light, air, ventilation of proper conveniences, dangerous or injurious to the 
health of the inhabitants of the area; and  
(b) that the most satisfactory method of dealing with the conditions in the area is the re -
arrangement and reconstruction of the streets and buildings in the area in accordance with an 
improvement scheme, he may frame an improvement scheme in respect of the area in accordance 
with the bye -laws made in this behalf.  
426. Matters to be provided for in an improvement scheme .—(1) An improvement scheme may 
provide for all  or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the acquisition by agreement or under the  Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), of any 
property necessary for or  affected by the execution of the scheme;  
(b) the relaying out of any land comprised in  the scheme;  
(c) the redistribution of sites belonging to  owners of property comprised in the scheme;  
(d) the closure or demolition of buildings or  portions of buildings unfit for human habitation;  
(e) the demotion of o bstructive buildings or  portions thereof;  
(f) the construction and reconstruction of  buildings;  
(g) the construction and alteration of streets;  
(h) the water supply, street lighting, drainage  and other conveniences;  
(i) the provision of open spaces for the  benefit of any area comprised in the scheme;  
(j) the sanitary arrangements required for the  area comprised in the scheme;  
(k) the provision of accommodation for any  class of the inhabitants;  
(l) the provision of facilities for  communication;  
(m) the sale,  letting or exchange of any  property comprised in the scheme;  
(n) any other matter for which, in the opinion  of the Commissioner it is expedient to make 
provision with a view to the  improvement of the area to which the scheme relates.  
(2) Where any land is  designated in an  improvement scheme as subject to acquisition or is required 
by the scheme to be  kept as an open space, then, if at the expiration of ten years from the date of  sanction 
of the scheme by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 427, the land is not acquired by 
the Commissioner, the owner of the  land may serve on the Commissioner a notice requiring his interest in 
the land  to be so acquired.  
(3) If the Commissioner fails to acquire the  land with a period of six months from  the receipt of the 
notice, the  improvement scheme shall have effect after the expiration of the said six  months as if the land 
were not designated as subject to acquisition by the  Commissioner or were not required to be kept as an 
open space.  
427. Submiss ion of improvement scheme to the Corporation for approval and to the Central 
Government for sanction .—(1) Every improvement scheme shall, as soon as may be after it has been 
framed, be submitted by the Commissioner for approval to the Corporation and the C orporation may 122 either approve the scheme without modifications or with such modifications as it may consider necessary 
or reject the scheme with directions to the Commissioner to have a fresh scheme framed according to 
such directions.  
(2) No improvement s cheme approved by the Corporation under sub -section ( 1) shall be valid unless 
it has been sanctioned by the Central Government.  
428. Rehousing scheme .—The Commissioner while framing an improvement scheme under this 
Chapter for any area may also frame a sch eme (hereafter in this Act referred to as the rehousing scheme) 
for the construction, maintenance and management of such and so many buildings as he may consider 
necessary for providing accommodation for persons who are likely to be displaced by the execut ion of the 
improvement scheme.  
429. Improvement scheme and rehousing scheme to comply with the master plan and zonal 
development plan .—No improvement scheme or rehousing scheme framed under this Chapter after a 
master plan for Delhi or a zonal development plan for any part thereof has been prepared in accordance 
with law shall be valid unless such scheme is in conformity with the provisions of the master plan or the 
zonal development plan.  
CHAPTER XXII  
POWERS, PROCEDURE, OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
Licences and written permissions  
 430. Signature, conditions, duration, suspension, revocation, etc., of licences and written 
permissions .—(1) Whenever it is provided in this Act or any bye -law made thereunder that a licence or a 
written permission may be granted for any purpose, such licence or written permission shall be signed by 
the Commissioner or by the officer empowered to grant the same  under this Act or the bye -laws made 
thereunder or by any municipal officer authorised by the Commissioner or such officer in this behalf and 
shall specify in addition to any other matter required to be specified under any other provision of this Act 
or an y provision of any bye -law made thereunder — 
(a) the date of the grant thereof;  
(b) the purpose and the period (if any) for which it is granted;  
(c) restrictions or conditions, if any, subject to which it is granted;  
(d) the name and address of the person t o whom it is granted; and  
(e) the fee, if any, paid for the licence or written permission.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye -law made thereunder, for every such licence 
or written permission a fee may be charged at such rate as may fr om time to time be fixed by the 
Commissioner with the sanction of the Corporation and such fee shall be payable by the person to whom 
the licence or written permission is granted.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye -law made thereunder any licence or written 
permission granted under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder may at any time be suspended or 
revoked by the Commissioner or by the officer by whom it was granted, if he is satisfied that it has been 
secured by the grantee through  misrepresentation or fraud or if any of its restrictions or conditions has 
been infringed or evaded by the grantee, or if the grantee has been convicted for the contravention of any 
of the provisions of this Act or any bye -law made thereunder relating to any matter for which the licence 
or permission has been granted.  
Provided that — 
(a) before making any order of suspension or revocation reasonable opportunity should be 
accorded to the grantee of the licence or the written permission to show cause why it s hould not be 
suspended or revoked;  
(b) every such order shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the suspension or revocation 
of the licence or the written permission.  123 (4) When any such licence or written permission is suspended or revoked, or wh en the period for 
which the same was granted has expired, the grantee shall, for all purposes of this Act or any bye -law 
made thereunder, be deemed to be without a licence or written permission until such time as the order 
suspending or revoking the licenc e or written permission is rescinded or until the licence or written 
permission is renewed.  
(5) Every grantee of any licence or written permission granted under this Act shall at all reasonable 
times, while such licence or written permission remains in force, if so required by the Commissioner or 
the authority by whom it was granted, produce such licence or written permission.  
Entry and inspection  
431. Powers of entry and inspection .—The Commissioner , 1*** 2*** or  any municipal officer or 
other municipal  employee authorised in this behalf by  3[him] or empowered in this behalf, by or under 
any provision of this Act, may enter into or upon any land or building with or without assistants and 
workmen — 
(a) for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is or has been on or in connection with the land 
or building any contravention of the provisions of this Act or any bye -law made thereunder;  
(b) for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not circumstances ex ist which would authorise or 
require the Commissioner,  1*** 2*** or any municipal officer or employee authorised or empowered 
in this behalf to take any action or execute any work under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder;  
(c) for the purpose of taking  any action or executing any work authorised or required by this Act 
or any bye -law made thereunder;  
(d) to make any inquiry, inspection, examination, measurement, valuation or survey authorised or 
required by or under this Act or necessary for the proper administration of this Act;  
(e) generally for the purpose of efficient discharge of the functions by any of the municipal 
authorised under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder.  
432. Power to enter land adjoining land in relation to any work .—(1)4[The Commissioner or any 
person authorised by him in this behalf] or empowered in this behalf by or under any provision of this 
Act, may enter on any land within fifty yards of any work authorised by or under this Act, with or without 
assistants and workmen for  the purpose of depositing thereon any soil, gravel, stone or other materials or 
for obtaining access to such work or for any other purposes connected with the execution of the same.  
(2) The person so authorised shall, before entering on any such land, state the purpose thereof, and 
shall, if so required by the owner or occupier thereof, fence off so much of the land as may be required for 
such purpose.  
(3) The person so authorised shall, in exercising any power conferred by this section, do as little 
damage as may be, and compensation shall be payable by the Corporation in accordance with bye -laws 
made in this behalf to the owner or occupier of such land or to both for any such damage, whether 
permanent or temporary.  
433. Breaking into buildings .—(1) It shall be lawful for  5[the Commissioner or any person 
authorised by him in this behalf]  or empowered in this behalf by or, under any provision of this Act, to 
make any  entry into any place, and to open or cause to be opened any door, gate or other  barrier— 
(a) if he considers the opening thereof  necessary for the purpose of such entry; and  
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent or being  present refuses to open such door, gate or barrier.  
                                                 
1. The words  and brackets  “the General Manager (Electricity)” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 102 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words and brackets “or the General Manager (Transport)” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second 
Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 102, for “any of the aforesaid municipal authorities” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 103,  ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 104,  ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  124 (2) Before making any entry into any such place  or opening or causing t o be opened any such door, 
gate or other barrier, the  Commissioner,  1*** 2*** or the person authorised or  empowered in this behalf, 
shall call upon two or more respectable in  habitants  of the locality in which the place to be entered into is 
situate, to witness  the entry or opening and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them  so to do.  
(3) A report shall be made to the Standing  Committee as soon as may be after any entry has been 
made into any place or any  door, gate or other barrier has been opened under this section.  
434. Time of making entry .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye -law made 
thereunder, no entry authorised by or under this Act shall be made except between the hours of sunrise 
and sunset  
 435. Consent ordinarily to be obtained .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye -law 
made thereunder, no land or building shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no 
occupier, of the owner thereof and no such entry shall be  made without giving the said owner or occupier, 
as the case may be, not less than twenty -four hours written notice of t he intention to make such entry : 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be inspected is a factory or workshop o r 
trade premises or a place used for any of the purposes specified in section 417 or a stable for horses or a 
shed for cattle or a latrine or urinal or a work under construction, or for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether any animal intended for human food  is slaughtered in that place in contravention of this Act or 
any bye -law made thereunder.  
 436. Regard to be had to social or religious usages .—When any place used as a human dwelling is 
entered under this Act, due regard shall be paid to the social and r eligious customs and usages of the 
occupants of the place entered, and no apartment in the actual occupancy of a female shall be entered or 
broken open until she has been informed that she is at liberty to withdraw and every reasonable facility 
has been af forded to her for withdrawing.  
437. Prohibition of obstruction or molestation in execution of work .—No person shall obstract or 
molest any person authorised or empowered by or under this Act or any person with whom the 
Corporation or any of the municipal a uthorities specified in section 44 has lawfully contrac ted, in the 
execution of his duty or of anything which he is authorised or empowered or required to do by virtue or 
inconsequence of any of the provisions of this Act or any bye -law made thereunder, or  in fulfilment of hi s 
contract, as the case may be.  
Public notices and advertisements  
438. Public notices how to be made known .—Every public notice given under this Act or any bye -
law made thereunder shall be in writing under the signature of  3[the Commiss ioner or of any municipal 
officer authorised by him in this behalf]  and shall be widely made known in the locality to be affected 
thereby by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality or by publishing 
the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in local newspaper or by any two or more of these means 
and by any other means that the  4[Commissioner] may think fit.  
 439. Newspaper in which advertisements or notices to be published .—Whenever it is provided by 
this Act or any b ye-law made thereunder that notice shall be given by advertisement in local newspapers, 
or that a notification or information shall be published in local newspapers, such notice, notification or 
information shall be inserted, if practicable, in at least th ree newspapers in such languages as the 
Corporation may from time  to time specify in this behalf : 
Provided that if the Corporation publishers a municipal journal, a publication in that journal shall be 
deemed to be a publication in a newspaper of the langu age in which the said journal may be published.  
                                                 
1. The words and brackets “, the General Manager (Electricity)” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 104 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words and brackets “or the General Manager (Transport)” omitted by Ac t 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second 
Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 105, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 105, ibid.,  for “appropriate municipal authority” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  125 Evidence  
440. Proof of consent etc., of Commissioner, General Managers, etc .—Whenever under this Act 
or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder, the doing of, or the omission to do, anything or the 
validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or 
satisfaction of the Commissioner  1[or of any municipal officer, a written document signed by the 
Commissioner]  or officer purporting to convey or set fo rth such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, 
declaration, opinion or satisfaction , shall be sufficient evidence thereof.  
Notices, etc.  
441. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time .—Where any notice, bill, order or requisition issued or 
made under this Act o r any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder requires anything to be done for 
the doing of which no time is fixed in this Act or the rule, regulation or bye -law, the notice, bill, order or 
requisition shall specify a reasonable time for doing the  same.  
442. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamp ed.—2[(1) Every licence, written permission, notice, 
bill, summons or other document which is required by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made 
thereunder to bear the signature of the Commissioner or of any municipal officer, shall be deemed to be 
properly signed if it bears a fascimile of the signature of the Commissioner or officer, as the case may be, 
stamped thereupon.]  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to apply to a ch eque drawn upon the Municipal Fund 
under section 101.  
443. Notices, etc., by whom to be served or issued .—All notices, bills, summonses and other 
documents required by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder to be served upon, or 
issued  to, any person, shall be served or issued by municipal officers or other municipal employees or by 
other persons authorised by  3[the Commissioner].  
444. Service of notices, etc. —(1) Every notice, bill, summons, order, requisition or other document 
required or authorised by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder to be served or 
issued by or on behalf of the Corporation, or by any of the municipal authorities specified in section 44 or 
any municipal officer, on any person shall, s ave as otherwise provided in this Act or such rule, regulation 
or bye -law, b e deemed to be duly served — 
(a) where the person to be served is a company, if the document is addressed to the secretary of 
the company at its registered office or at its principa l office or place  of the business and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal office or place of business of the 
company;  
(b) where the person to be served is a partnership, if the document is addressed to the partnership 
at its principal place of business, identifying it by the name or style under which its busines s is carried 
on, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the said place of business;  
(c) where the person to be served is a public body, or a corporation, society or other body, if the 
document is addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, corporation or 
society at its p rincipal office, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post,  or 
(ii) delivered at that office;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s . 106, for certain words and brackets (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 107, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 108, ibid.,  for certain words and brackets (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  126 (d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the person to be served and — 
(i) is given or tendered to him, or  
(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some conspicuous part of his last known 
place of residence or business, if within the Union territory of Delhi, or is given or tendered to 
some adult member of his family or is affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or building, if 
any, to which it relates, or  
(iii) is sent by registered post to th at person.  
(2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or occupier of any land 
or building may be addressed "the owner" or "the occupier", as the case may be, of that land or building 
(naming that land or building) without fu rther name or description, and sha ll be deemed to be duly 
served— 
(a) if the document so addressed is sent or delivered in accordance with clause ( d) of                         
sub-section ( 1); or 
(b) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is delivered to some person on 
the land or building or, where there is no person on the land or building to whom it can be delivered, 
is affixed to some conspicuous part of the land or building.  
(3) Where a document is served on a partnership in  accordance with this section, the document shall 
be deemed to be served on each partner.  
(4) For the purpose of enabling any document to be served on the owner of any premises the 
Commissioner may by notice in writing require the occupier of the premises to state the name and address 
of the owner thereof.  
(5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a minor, the service upon his guardian 
or any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be service upon the minor.  
(6) Nothing in sections 44 2 and 443 and in this section shall apply to any summons issued under this 
Act by a court.  
(7) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section.  
445. Service of bills for tax or notice of demand by ordinary post .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sections 443 and 444 a bill for any tax or a notice of demand may be served by sending it by 
ordinary post with a prepaid letter under a certificate of posting addressed to the appropriate person 
specified in section 444 at his last k nown place of residence or business and in proving the service of 
every bill or notice so sent it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter was properly addressed and posted 
under a certificate of posting.  
446. Powers in case of non -compliance with noti ce, etc.—In the event of non -compliance with the 
terms of any notice, order or requisition issued to any power under this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -
law made thereunder, requiring such person to execute any work or to do any act it shall be lawful for the 
authority or officer at whose instance the notice, order or requisition has been issued, whether or not the 
person in default is liable to punishment for such default or has been prosecuted or sentenced to any 
punishment therefor, after giving noti ce in writing to such person, to take such action or such steps as 
may be necessary for the completion of the act or the work required to be done or executed by such 
person and all the expenses incurred on such account shall be payable to the Commissioner on demand 
and if not paid within ten days after such demand, shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Recovery of expenses  
447. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner .—(1) If any notice, order or requisition has 
been issued to any  person in respect of property of which he is the owner, the authority or officer at 
whose instance such notice, order or requisition has been issued, may require the occupier of such 
property or of any part thereof to pay to him, instead of to the owner, any rent payable by him in respect 
of such property, as it falls due up to the amount recoverable from the owner under section 446:  127 Provided that if the occupier refuses to disclose the correct amount of the rent payable by him or the 
name or address of th e person to whom it is payable, the authority or officer may recover from the 
occupier the whole amount recoverable under section 446 as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(2) Any amount recovered from an occupier instead of from an owner under sub -section ( 1), shall, in 
the absence of any contract between the owner and the occupier to the contrary, be deemed to have been 
paid to the owner.  
448. Execution of work by occupier in default of owner and deduction of expenses from            
rent.—Whenever the owne r of any land or building fails to execute any work which he is required to 
execute under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder, the occupier, if any, of such land or building 
may, with the approval of the Commissioner, execute the said work and he shall , subject to any contract 
between the owner and occupier to the contrary, be entitled to recover from the owner the reasonable 
expenses incurred by him in the execution of the work and may deduct the amount thereof from the rent 
payable by him to the owner . 
449. Relief to agents and trustees .—(1) Where any person, by reason of his receiving rent of 
immovable property as a receiver, agent or trustee, or of his being as a receiver, agent or trustee the 
person who would receive the rent if the property were le t to a tenant, would under this Act or any bye -
law made thereunder, be bound to discharge any obligation imposed on the owner of the property for the 
discharge of which money is required, he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has, or 
but for his own improper act or default might have had funds in his hands belonging to the owner 
sufficient for the purpose.  
(2) The burden of proving any fact entitling a receiver, agent or trustee to relief under sub -section ( 1) 
shall lie upon him.  
(3) Where any receiver, agent or trustee has claimed and established his right to relief under this 
section, the Commissioner may, by notice in writing require him, to apply to the discharge of his 
obligation as aforesaid the first moneys which may come to his hands on behalf, or for the use, of the 
owner , and on failure to comply with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally liable to discharge 
the obligation.  
Payment of compensation  
1[450. General power to pay compensation .—In any case not otherwise provided for in this Act or 
in any bye -law made thereunder, the Commissioner, with the previous approval of the Standing 
Committee, may pay compensation to any person who sustains damage by reason of the exercise of any 
of the powers vested by this Act or any bye -law in the Commissioner or in any municipal officer or other 
municipal employee.]  
 451. Compensation to be paid by offe nders for damage caused by them .—(1) Any person who 
has been convicted of an offence against this Act or any bye -law made thereunder shall, notwithstanding 
any punishment to which he may have been sentenced for the said offence, be liable to pay such 
compensation for any damage to the property of the Corporation resulting from the said offence as the 
appropriate municipal aut hority may consider reasonable.  
(2) In the event of a dispute regarding the amount of compensation payable under sub -section ( 1) 
such amount shall, on application made to him, be determined by the magistrate before whom the said 
person was convicted of the  said offence; and on non -payment of the amount of compensation so 
determined the same shall be recovered under a warrant from the said magistrate as if it were a fine 
imposed by him on the person liable therefor.  
Recovery of expenses or compensation in ca se of dispute  
452. Reference to the court of the district judge in certain cases .—(1) If, when the Commissioner 
demands payment of any expenses referred to in section 446, his right to demand the same or the amount 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 109, for section 450 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  128 of the demand is disputed within ten days  after such demand, the Commissioner shall  1[refer the case for 
determination — 
(a) to the Appellate Tribunal, if such demand relates to the expenses incurred in taking necessary 
action or steps for the completion of any act or work required to be done or executed in the event of 
non-compliance with any notice, order or requisition under sections 317, 325, 343, 344 and 345;  
(b) to the court of the district judge of Delhi, in any other case.]  
(2) The Commissioner shall, pending the decision on any such refer ence, defer further proceedings 
for the recovery of the sum claimed by him, and shall, after the decision, proceed to recover only such 
amount, if any, as is thereby declared to be due in the manner referred to in section 446.  
453. Application to the Court  of the district judge in other cases .—(1) Where, in any case not 
provided for by section 452, the Corporation or any municipal authority or any municipal officer or other 
municipal employee is required by this Act or by any bye -law made thereunder to pay any expenses or 
any compensation, the amount to be so paid and if necessary, the apportionment of the same, shall, in 
case of dispute, be determined by the court of the district judge of Delhi on application having been made 
to it for this purpose at any t ime within one year from the date when such expenses or compensation first 
became claimable.  
 (2) If the amount of any expenses or compensation ascertained in accordance with sub -section ( 1) is 
not paid by the person liable therefor on demand, it shall be recoverable as if the same were due under a 
decree passed by the court of the district judge in an original suit tried by it.  
454. Power to sue for expenses o r compensation .—Instead of proceeding in the manner aforesaid 
for the recovery of any expenses or compensation of which the amount due has been ascertained as 
hereinbefore provided, or after such proceedings have been taken unsuccessfully or with only partial 
success, the  sum due or the balance of the sum due, as the case may be, may be recovered by a suit 
brought against the person liable for the same in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Recovery of certain dues  
 455. Mode of recovery of certain dues .—In any case not expressly provided for in this Act or any 
bye-law made thereunder any sum due to the Corporation on account of any charge, costs, expenses, fees, 
rates or rent or any other account under this Act or any such bye -law may be recoverable from any person 
from whom such sum is due as an arrear of tax under this Act:  
Provided that no proceedings for the recovery of any sum under this section shall be commenced after 
the expiry of three years from the date on which such sum becomes due.  
Obstruction of owner by occ upier  
 456. Right of owner to apply to the court of the district judge in case of obstruction by 
occupier .—(1) The owner of any land or building may, if he is prevented by the occupier thereof from  
2[complying wi th— 
(a) the provisions of section 317, section 325, section 343, section 344, section 345 or section 347 
or any bye -law made thereunder or with any notice or order issued under any such provision, apply to 
the Appellate Tribunal; and  
(b) any other provision or any bye -law made thereunder or wit h any notice, order or requisition 
issued under such provision, apply to the court of the district judge of Delhi,  
and where such application is made ] within any time that may be fixed for the compliance with such 
provision or notice, order or requisition,  the owner shall not be liable for his failure to comply with the 
provision, or notice, order or requisition within the time so fixed.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 8, for “refer the case for determination to the court of the district judge of Delhi.”                             
(w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
2. Subs. by s. 9,  ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  129 (2) 1[The Appellate Tribunal or the court, as the case may be] on receipt of such application, may 
make a written order requiring the occupier of the land or building to afford all reasonable facilities to the 
owner for complying with the said provision or notice, order or requisition and may also, if it thinks fit 
direct that the costs of such application and order be paid  by the occupier.  
(3) After eight days from the date of the order referred to in sub -section ( 2), the occupier shall afford 
all such reasonable facilities to the owner for the purpose , aforesaid as may be specified in the order; and 
in the event of his con tinued refusal to do so, the owner shall be discharged during the continuance of 
such refusal, from any liability which may have been otherwise incurred by reason of his failure to 
comply with the said provision or notice, order or requisition.  
Proceedings  before the court of the district judge  
 457. General powers and procedure of the court of the district judge .—The procedure provided 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in regard to suits shall be followed, as far as it can be 
made applicable, in the disposal of applications, appeals or references that may be made to the court of 
the district judge of Delhi under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder.  
458. Fees in proceedings before the court of the district judge .—(1) The  2*** Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribe what fee shall be paid— 
(a) on any application, appeal or reference under this Act  or any bye -law made thereunder to the 
court of the district judge of Delhi; and  
(b) for the issue, in connection with any inquiry or proceedings before that court under this Act or 
such bye -law, of any summons or other process:  
Provided that the fee, if a ny, prescribed under clause ( a) shall not, in cases in which the value of the 
claim or subject matter is capable of being estimated in money, exceed the fees leviable for the time being 
under the provisio ns of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), in cases  in which the amount of the claim 
or subject matter is of a like amount.  
(2) The  2*** Government may, by like notification, determine the person by whom the fee, if any, 
prescribed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), shall be payable.  
(3) No application, appeal or reference shall be received by the court of the district judge until the fee, 
if any, prescribed therefor under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) has been paid:  
Provided that the court may, in any case in  which it thinks  fit so to do, — 
(i) receive an  application, appeal or reference made by or on behalf of a poor person, and  
(ii) issue process on behalf of any suc h person,  
without payment or on  part payment of the fees prescribed under this section.  
459. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing .—Whenever any application, appeal or 
reference made under this Act or any bye -law made thereunder to the court of the district judge is settled 
by agreement between the parties before the hearing, half t he amount of all fees paid up to that time shall 
be repaid by the court to the parties by whom the same have respectively been paid.  
 460. Power of the court of the district judge to delegate certain powers and to make rules .—The 
court of the district judg e of Delhi may — 
(a) delegate, either generally or specially, to the court of any additional district judge , power to 
receive applications,  3[election petitions,] appeals and references under this Act or any rule, 
regulation or bye -law made thereunder, and to hear and determine such applications,  3[election 
petitions,] appeals and references ; 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 9, for “The court” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1986).  
2. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 110 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 18 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  130 (b) with the approval of the  1*** Government, make rules not inconsistent with this Act or any 
rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder, providing for any matter connected with the exercise of 
jurisdiction conferred upon the court by this Act which is not herein specifically provided for.  
Offences and Penalties  
461. Punishment for certain offences .—2[(1)] Whoever — 
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the sections, sub -sections, clauses, provisos or other 
provisions of this Act mentioned in the first column of the Table in the Twelfth Schedule; or  
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully 
made upon him  under any of the said sections, sub -sections, clauses, provisos or other p rovisions, 
shall be punishable — 
(i) with fine which may extend to the amount, or with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to the period, specified in that behalf third column o f the said Table or with both; and  
(ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an additional fine which may 
extend to the amount specified in the fourth column of that Table for every day during which 
such contravention or failure conti nues after conviction for the first such contravention or failure.  
3[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), whoever contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 317 or sub -section ( 1) of section 320 or sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 321 or sub -
section ( 1) of section 325 or section 339, in relation to any street which is a public street, shall be 
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees or with both.]  
462. Punishment for acquiring share or interest in contract, etc., with the Corporation .—4[Any 
councillor or  any person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 of any  committee of the 
Corporation]  who knowingly acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in any  contract made 
with, or any work done for, the Corporation not being a share or  interest such as under section 9 it is 
permissible for a councillor to have  without being thereby disqualified for being a councillor  5***, and 
the Commissioner,  6*** 7*** or any municipal officer or  other municipal employee who knowingly 
acquires, directly or indirectly, any  share or interest in any contract made with, or any work done for, the  
Corporation not being a share or interest su ch as under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 9 or sub -
clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of that section it is permissible for a councillor  5*** to 
have, without being  thereby disqualified for being a councillor  5***, shall be deemed to have committed 
the offence made punishable under section 168of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
463. Punishment for offences relating to terminal tax .—Whoever brings within the Union territory 
of Delhi any goods liable to terminal tax without the payment of such tax shall, on conviction, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees or with both, and the court trying an offence under this section may, on such 
convi ction, also confiscate the goods in respect of which the offence has been committed.  
464. Penalty for evasion of terminal taxes .—Where any goods imported into Delhi are liable to the 
payment of terminal tax, any person who, with the intention of evading pa yment of the tax introduces or 
attempts to introduce or causes or abets the introduction of any such goods within the Union territory of 
Delhi, upon which payment of terminal tax due on such introduction, has neither been made nor tendered, 
shall be punish able with fine which may extend to ten times the amount of such terminal tax.  
                                                 
1. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 111 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Section 461 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 42 of 1984, s. 10 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
3. Ins. by s. 10 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
4. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 112 , for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words “or an alderman” omitted by s. 112 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. The words and brackets “the General Manager (Electricity) ” omitted by s. 112 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. The word s and brackets  “the General Manager (Transport) ” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule                              
(w.e.f. 3-11-1971).  131  465. General penalty .—Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this 
Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision thereof, or otherwise 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, and in the case of a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which 
may extend to twent y rupees for every day after the first during which he has persisted in the failure or 
contravention.  
466. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time of offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the  conduct of the  business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that no thing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offenc e. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance 
of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a fi rm means a partner in the firm,  
1[466A. Certain offences to be cognizable .—The Code of Criminal Procedure, 19 73 (2 of 1974) , 
shall apply to, — 
(a) an offence under sub -section ( 5) of section 313 or section 332 or sub -section ( 1) of section 
333 or sub -section ( 1) of section 334 or section 343 or section 344 or section 345 or section 347;  
(b) an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 317 or sub -section ( 1) of section 320 or sub -
section ( 1) of section 321 or sub -section ( 1) of section 325 or section 339 in relation to any street 
which is a public street,  
as if it were a cognizable offence — 
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence; and   
(ii) for the purposes of all matter s other than — 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and  
(2) arrest of a person, except on the complaint of, or upon information received from, such 
officer of the Corporation, not being below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner, as may be 
appointed by the Administrator:  
Provided that no offence of the contravention of any condition subject of which sanction was 
accorded for the erection of any building or the execution of any work shall be cognizable, if such 
contravention relates to any deviation from any plan of such erection or execution sanctioned by the 
Commissioner which is compoundable on payment of an amount under the bye -laws relating to buildin gs 
made under this Act.]  
2[467. Prosecutions .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no  court shall proceed to the trial of 
any off ence,— 
(a) under sub -section ( 5) of section 313 or  section 332 or sub -section ( 1) of section 333 or                
sub-section ( 1) of section 334  or section 343 or section 344 or section 345 or section 347 except on 
the complaint of or upon information received from, such officer of the  Corporation, not being below 
the rank of a Deputy Commissioner, as may be  appointed  by the Administrator;  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 11 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for section 467 (w.e.f. 10 -12-1085).  132 (b) under sub -section ( 1) of section 317 or  sub-section ( 1) of section 320 or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 321 or sub -section  (1) of section 325 or section 339, if any such offence was committed in  
relation to any street which is a pub lic street, except on the complaint of, or  upon information 
received from, such officer of the Corporation, not being  below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner, 
as may be appointed by the  Administrator;  
(c) other than those specified in clauses ( a) and ( b), except on the complaint of, or upon 
information received from,  1[the Commissioner , or a person  authorised by him] by a general or 
special order in this behalf.]  
468. Composition of offences .—(1) 2[The Commissioner or any person authorised by him] by 
general or special order in this behalf, may either before or after the institution of the proceedings 
compound any offence made punishable by or under this Act : 
Provided that no offence shall be compou ndable which is committed by failure to comply with a 
notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Corporation or of any of the municipal authorities 
specified in section 44 unless and until the same has been complied with so far as the compl iance is 
possible.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence so compounded.  
Magistrates and proceedings before magistrates  
469. Municipal magistrates .—(1) The  3*** Government may appoint one or more  4[Metropolitan 
Magistrates] for the trial of offences against this Act and against any rule, regulation or bye -law made 
thereunder and may prescribe the time and place at which such magistrate or magistrates shall sit for the 
despatch of business.  
(2) Such magistrates shall be called municipal magistrates and shall besides the trial of offences as 
aforesaid, exercise all other powers and discharge all other functions of a magistrate a s provided in this 
Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder.  
(3) Such magistrates and the members of their staff shall be paid such salary, pension, leave and other 
allowances as may, from time to time, be fixed by the  3*** Government.  
(4) The Corporation shall, out of the Municipal Fund, pay to the  3*** Government the amounts of the 
salary, pension, leave and other allowances as fixed under sub -section ( 3) together  with all other 
incidental charges in connection with the establishments of the  said magistrates.  
(5) Each such magistrate shall have jurisdiction over the whole of Delhi.  
(6) For the purposes of  5[the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] all municipal magistrates 
appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be magistrates ap pointed under  6[section 16] of the said 
Code.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude any magistrate appointed hereunder from 
trying any offence under any other law.  
470. Cognizance of offences .—All offences against this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made 
thereunder, whether committed within or without the limits of Delhi, shall be cognizable by a municipal 
magistrate and such magistrate shall not be deemed to be incapable of taking cognizance of any such 
offence or of any offence  under any enactment which is repealed by, or which ceases to have effect under, 
this Act by reason only of his being liable to pay any municipal tax or  rate or benefi ted out of the 
Municipal Fund.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 113, for certain words and brackets (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 114,  ibid.,  for certain words and brackets (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. The word “Central” omitted by s. 115 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 115, ibid.,  for “magistrates of the first class” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 115, ibid.,  for “the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 115, ibid.,  for “section 12” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993). 133 471. Limitation of time for prosecution .—No person shall be liable to punishment for any offence 
against this Act or any rule, regulation or by -law made thereunder, unless complaint of such offence is 
made before a municipal magistrat e within six months next after — 
(a) the date of the commission of such offence,  or 
(b) the date on which the commission or existence of such offence was first brought to the notice 
of the complainant.  
472. Power of magistrate to hear cases in absence of accused when summoned to appear .—If 
any person summoned to appear before a magist rate to answer a charge of an offence against this Act or 
any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder fails to appear at the time and place mentioned in the 
summons, or on any date to which the hearing of case is adjourned, the magistrate may hear and 
determi ne the case in his absence, if — 
(a) service of the summons is proved to his satisfaction, and  
(b) no sufficient cause is shown for the non -appearance of such person.  
473. Complaints concerning nuisances and Procedure therefor .—(1) The Commissioner,  1[or any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee authorised by him] in this behalf or any person who 
resides or owns property in Delhi, may compl ain to a municipal magistrate of the existence of any 
nuisance.  
(2) Upon the receipt of any such complaint the magistrate, after making such inquiry as he thinks 
necessary, may by written order direct the person responsible for the nuisance or the owner of the land or 
building on which the nuisance has taken place, to take such measures as to such mag istrate may seem 
practicable and reasonable, and within such period as may be specified in the order, for abating, 
preventing, removing or remedying such nuisance and may direct  2[the Commissioner] to put into force 
any of the provisions of this Act or any  bye-law made thereunder.  
(3) The magistrate may further direct the person found responsible for the nuisance to pay to the 
complainant such reasonable costs of and relating to the said complaint as he shall determine, inclusive of 
compensation for the com plainant ’s loss of time in prosecuting such complaint.  
(4) Where in the opinion of the magistrate immediate action to prevent the nuisance is necessary he 
may dispense with the inquiry as required by sub -section ( 2) and make such other as he considers 
necessary forthwith.  
(5) If the person directed to take action by an order under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) fails to do 
so within the period specified in the order, the Commissioner  3*** may on the expiry of the said period 
proceed to take action as di rected in the order or may take such other measures to abate, prevent, remove 
or remedy the nuisance as he considers necessary, and all expenses incurred in that connection shall be 
recoverable from the person against whom the magistrate has made the order  as an arrear of tax under this 
Act. 
Powers and duties of police officers  
474. Arrest of offenders .—(1) Any police officer may arrest any person who commits in his view 
any offence against this Act or against any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder, if — 
(a) the name and address of such person be unknown to him, and  
(b) such person on demand declines to give his name and address or gives a name and address 
which such officer has reason to believe to be false.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 116, for certain words  and brackets  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by s. 116, ibid.,  for “any of the appropriate municipal authorities” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. The words “or any other appropriate municipal authority” omitted by s. 116 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  134 (2) No person so arrested shall  be detained in custody after his true name and address are ascertained 
or, without the order of the nearest magistrate , for a period longer than twenty -four hours from the time of 
arrest exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of such 
magistrate.  
475. Duties of police officers .—It shall be the duty of all police officers to giv e immediate 
information to the Commissioner  1*** of the commission of, or the attempt to commit any offence against 
this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder and to assist all municipal officers and other 
municipal employees in the exerci se of their lawful authority . 
Legal proceedings  
 476. Power to institute, etc., legal proceedings and obtain legal advice .—(1) The Commissioner 
may— 
(a) take, or withdraw from, proceedings against any person who is charged with — 
(i) any offence against this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder; or  
(ii) any offence which affects or is likely to affect any property or interest of the Corporation 
or the due administration of this Act; or  
(iii) committing any nuisance whatsoever;  
(b) contes t or compromise any appeal against rateable  value or assessment of any tax or rate;  
(c) take, or withdraw from, or compromise, proceedings under sections 451, 452 and 453 for the 
recovery of expenses or compensation claimed to be due to the Corporation;  
(d) withdraw or compromise any claim for a sum not exceeding one thousand rupees against any 
person;  
(e) defend any suit or other legal proceeding brought against the Corporation or against the 
Commissioner or a municipal officer or other municipal employee in respect of anything done or 
omitted to be done by any one of them in his official capacity;  
(f) with the approval of the Standing Committee1[or the Wards Co mmittee] admit or compromise 
any claim, suit or other legal proceeding brought against the Corporation or against the Commissioner 
or any municipal officer or other municipal employee in respect of anything done or omitted to be 
done as aforesaid;  
(g) with draw or compromise any claim against any person in respect of a penalty payable under a 
contract entered into with such person by the Commissioner on behalf of the Corporation;  
(h) institute and prosecute any suit or other legal proceeding or with the appr oval of the Standing 
Committee1[or the Wards Committee] withdraw from or compromise any suit or any claim for any 
sum not exceeding five hundred rupees which h as been instituted or made in the name of the 
Corporation or of the Commissioner;  
(i) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he from time to time thinks necessary or expedient 
to obtain or as he may be required by the Corporation or the Standing Commit tee 2[or the Wards 
Committee] to obtain, for any of the purposes mentioned in the foregoing clauses or for securing 
lawful exercise or discharge of any power or duty vesting in or imposed upon any municipal authority 
or any municipal officer or other munic ipal employee.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
477. Protection of action of the Corporation, etc. —No suit or prosecution shall be entertained in 
any court against the Corporation or against any municipal authority or against any municipal officer or 
other municipal employee or against any person acting under the order or direction of any municipal 
                                                 
1. The words “or any other appropriate municipal authority” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 117 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 118 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Omitted by s. 118 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  135 authority or any municipal officer or other municipal employee, for anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done, under this Act or any rule, regulation or b ye-law made thereunder.  
478. Notice to be given of suits .—(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Corporation or against 
any municipal authority or against any municipal officer or other municipal employee or against any 
person acting under the order o r direction of any municipal authority or any municipal officer or other 
municipal employee, in respect of any act done, or purporting to have been done, in pursuance of this Act 
or any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder until the expiration of tw o months after notice in 
writing has been left at the municipal office and, in the case of such officer, employee or person, unless 
notice in writing has also been delivered to him or left at his office or place of residence, and unless such 
notice states explicitly the cause of action, the nature of the relief sought, the amount of compensation 
claimed, and the name and place of residence of the intending plaintiff, and unless the plaint contains a 
statement that such notice has been so left or delivered.  
(2) No suit, such as is described in sub -section ( 1), shall , unless it is a suit for the recovery of 
immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the expiry of six months from 
the date on which the cause of action arises.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an 
injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the postponement of the 
institution of the suit.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
RULES, REGULATIONS AND BYE-LAWS  
479. Supplemental provisions respecting rules .—(1) Any rule which the Central Government is 
empowered to make under this Act may provide that any contravention thereof shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
1[(2) Every rule made under this Act, every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 3A 
and sub -section ( 2) of section 52 and bye -laws made by the Central Government under section 349A shall 
be laid as soon as may be after it is made or  issued before each House of Parliament, while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the  successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, bye -law or notification or 
both Houses agree that the rule, bye -law or notification should not be made or issued, the rule, bye -law or 
notification shall thereafter h ave effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule, bye -law or notification.]  
 480. Suppl emental provisions respecting regulations .—(1) Any regulation which may be made by 
the Corporation under this Act, may be made by the Central Government within one year of the 
establishment of the Corporation; and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the 
Corporation in the exercise of its powers under this Act.  
(2) No regulation made by the Corporation under this Act shall have effect until it has been approved 
by the Central Government and published in the Official Gazette.  
481. Power to make bye -laws .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act the Corporation may, in 
addition to any bye -laws which it is empowered to make by any other provision of this Act, make                  
bye-laws to provide for all or any of the following matters, n amely:— 
A. Bye-laws relating to taxation  
(1) the maintenance of tax books and registers by the Commissioner and the particulars which 
such books and registers should contain;  
(2) the inspection of and the obtaining of copies and extracts from such books and registers  and 
fees, if any, to be charged  for the same;  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993 , s. 119, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  136 (3) the publication of rates of taxes as determined by the Corporation from time to time;  
(4) the requisition by the Commissioner of information and returns from persons liable to pay 
taxes;  
(5) the notice to be given to the Commissioner by any person who becomes the owner or 
possessor of a vehicle or animal in respect of which any tax is payable under this Act;  
(6) the wearing of badge by the driver of any such vehicle and the display of number p late on 
such vehicle;  
(7) the submission of returns by persons liable to pay any tax under this Act;  
(8) the collection by the registrar or sub -registrar of Delhi appointed under th e Indian Registration 
Act, 1908  (16 of 1908), of the additional stamp duty payable to the Corporation under this Act, the 
periodical payment of such duty to the Corporation and the maintenance , by such registrar or sub -
registrar of separate accounts in relation thereto;  
(9) any other ma tter relating to the levy, assessment, collection, refund or remission of taxes 
under this Act;  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2*   *   *   *   * 
E. Bye-laws relating to streets  
(1) the closure of streets when any work is in progress and alternative passage during the  progress 
of such work;  
(2) the erections of a temporary nature during festivals;  
(3) the setting up of hoards on buildings adjacent to streets during their construction or repair;  
(4) the precautions to be taken when permission is granted to any private i ndividual for opening 
or breaking up any public street and the fees to be paid for the restoration of a street in its original 
condition;  
(5) the permission, regulation or prohibition of use or occupation of any street or place by 
intinerant vendors or haw kers or by any person for the sale of articles or the exercise of any calling or 
the setting up of any booth or stall and the fees chargeable for such occupation;  
(6) any other matter in connection with the construction, repair, maintenance, naming, number ing 
and lighting of streets for which provision is necessary or should be made;  
3*   *   *   *   * 
G. Bye-laws relating to sanitation and public health  
(1) the position of latrines and urinals;  
(2) the provision of air spaces between latrines and buildings  or places used for various purposes;  
(3) the white -washing of buildings;  
(4) the provision of living accommodation for sweepers in buildings newly erected requiring ten 
or more latrines;  
(5) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals or any class of animals so as 
to prevent danger to public health;  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 120 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7 (b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3-11-1971).  
3. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 120 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  137 (6) the seizure of ownerless animals straying within the limits of Delhi and the regulation and 
control of pounds;  
(7) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bathing and wash ing places;  
(8) the prevention of the spread of dangerous disease;  
(9) the segregation in or the removal or exclusion from any part of Delhi or the destruction of 
animals suffering or reasonably suspected to be suffering from any infectious or contagious d isease;  
(10) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury, contamination or 
trespass, of sources and means of public water supply and of appliances for the distribution of water;  
(11) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and in oculation;  
(12) the proper disposal of corpses, the regulation and management of burning and burial places 
and other places for the disposal of corpses and the fees chargeable for the use of such places where 
the same are provided or maintained at the expe nse of the Municipal Fund;  
H. Bye-laws relating to vital statistics  
(1) the prescribing of qualifications of persons to be appointed as registrars under Chapter XVIII;  
(2) the registration of births, deaths and marriages and the taking of a census;  
I. Bye-laws relating to public safety and suppression of nuisances  
The regulation or prohibition for the purpose of sanitation or the prevention of disease or the 
promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which occasions or is likely to occasion a 
nuisance and for the regulation or prohibition of which on provision is made elsewhere by this Act;  
J. Bye-laws relating to markets, slaughter houses, trades and occupations  
(1) the days on, and the hours during which any market or slaughter house may be  kept open for 
use; 
(2) the regulation of the design, ventilation and drainage of markets and slaughter houses and the 
materials to be used in the construction thereof ; 
(3) the keeping of markets and slaughter houses and the lands and buildings appertainin g thereto 
in a clean and sanitary condition, the removal of filth, rubbish and other polluted and obnoxious 
matter therefrom and the supply therein of pure water and of a sufficient number of latrines and 
urinals for the use of persons using or frequenting  the same;  
(4) the manner in which animals shall be admitted in a slaughter house;  
(5) the manner in which animals may be slaughtered;  
(6) the provision of passages of sufficient width between the stalls in market buildings and market 
places for the convenient use of the public and the prevention of encroachment of such passages;  
(7) the setting apart of separate areas for different classes of articles in market buildings and 
market places;  
(8) the disposal or destruction of animals offered for slaughter which are, from disease or any 
other cause, unfit for human consumption;  
(9) the destruction of carcasses which from any disease or any other cause are found after 
slaughter to be unfit for human consumption;  
(10) the regulation of the entry of a nimals into slaughter house and the bringing out of the 
carcasses of such animals after slaughter and the fee to be paid for use of slaughter houses;  
(11) the proper custody and care of animals for the keeping of which licences are granted under 
section 41 7; 
(12) the regulation of the import of animals and flesh within Delhi;  138 (13) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises within Delhi as stables or                 
cow-houses or as an accommodation for sheep, goat or buffalo, and the fees p ayable for such licences 
and the conditions subject to which such licences may be granted, refused, suspended or revoked;  
(14) the regulation of sarais, hotels, dak bungalows, lodging houses, boarding houses, buildings, 
let-in-tenements, residential clubs,  restaurants, eating houses, cafes, refreshment rooms and places of 
public recreation, entertainment or resort;  
(15) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades are carried on so 
to secure cleanlines therein or to minimise inj urious, offensive or dangerous effects arising or likely 
to arise therefrom ; 
(16) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertisements and of the position, size, shade or 
style of the name boards, sign -boards and sign -posts;  
(17) the fixation of a met hod for the sale of articles whether by measure, weight; piece or any 
other method;  
(18) the procedure regarding the grant of permit to establish a factory, workshop or trade 
premises;  
(19) the regulation of smoke in factories workshops and trade premises;  
(20) the regulation of sanitary conditions in factories, workshops, and trade premises;  
(21) the regulation of the use in any factory, workshop or trade premises of whistle, trumpet, 
siren, or horn worked by steam, compressed air, electricity or other mechanical means;  
(22) the prevention of nuisance in any market building, market place, slaughter house or any 
factory, workshop or trade premises;  
K. Bye-laws relating to improvement  
(1) the form and content of an improvement scheme or a rehousing scheme;  
(2) the procedure to be followed in connection with the framing, submission, approval and 
sanction of such schemes;  
(3) the local inquiries and other hearings that may be held before a scheme is framed, approved or 
sanctioned;  
(4) the alteration of an imp rovement scheme or a rehousing scheme after approval and sanction;  
L. Bye-laws relating to miscellaneous matters  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(2) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of land or building in Delhi temporarily 
absent therefrom or not resident therein may be required to appoint as their agents for all or any of the 
purposes of this Act or of any bye -laws made thereunder, persons residing within or near Delhi ; 
(3) the maintenance of schools and the furtherance of education generally;  
(4) the regulation and control of municipal hospitals and dispensaries;  
(5) the r endering necessary of licences — 
(a) for the proprietors or drivers of hackney -carriages, cycle -rickshaws, thelas and rehries 
kept or plying for hire or used for hawking articles;  
(b) for persons working as job -porters for the conveyance of goods;  
(6) the classification of cinema theatres for the purposes of the Fourth Schedule;  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 120 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  139 (7) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed by bye -laws made under this Act or in 
respect o f which this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the 
opinion of the Corporation, necessary for the efficient municipal government of Delhi.  
(2) Any bye-law which may be made under sub -section (1) may be made by the C entral Government 
within one year of the establishment of the Corporation; and any bye -law so made may be altered 
rescinded by the Corporation in the exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
1[481A. Regulations and bye -laws to be laid before Parliamen t.—The Central Government shall 
cause every regulation made under this Act and every bye -law made under section 481 to be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days w hich may be comprised in one session or i n two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid both 
Houses agree in making any  modification in the regulation  or bye -law or both Houses agree that the 
regulation or bye -law should not be made, the regulation or bye -law shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulme nt shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation or 
bye-law.]  
482. Penalty for breaches of bye -laws .—(1) Any bye -law made under this Act may provide that a 
contraventi on thereof shall be punishable — 
(a) with f ine which may extend to five hundred rupees; or  
(b) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which 
such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention; or  
(c) with fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which the contravention 
continues, after the receipt of a notice from the Commissioner or any municipal officer duly 
author ised in that behalf, by the person contravening the bye -law requiring such person to discontinue 
such contravention:  
Provided that a contravention of any bye -law relating to the road transport services may be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend t o three months, or with fine which may extend to 
fifteen hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any such bye -law may also provide that a person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, caused by such c ontravention.  
483. Supplemental provisions respecting bye -laws .—(1) Any power to make bye -laws conferred 
by this Act is conferred subject to the conditions of the bye -laws being made after previous publication 
and in the case of such bye -laws being made by  the Corporation of their not taking effect until they have 
been approved by the  2*** Government and published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The  2*** Government in approving a bye -law may make any change therein which appears to it to 
be necessary.  
(3) The  2*** Government may,  after previous publication of its intention cancel any bye -law which it 
has approved, and thereupon the bye -law shall cease to have effect . 
484. Bye-laws to be available for inspection and purchase .—(1) A copy of all bye -laws made 
under this Act shall be kept at the municipal office and shall, during office hours, be open free of charge 
to inspection by any inhabitant of Delhi.  
(2) Copies of all such bye -laws shall be kept at the municipal office and shall be sold to the public at 
cost price either singly or in collections at the option of the purchaser.  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984). 
2. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 121 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  140 CHAPTER XXIV  
CONTROL  
485. Power of Central Government  1[or the Government] to require production of 
document s.—The Central Government  1[or the Government] may at any time require the 
Commissioner — 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document in his possession or under his 
control;  
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics relating to the 
proceedings, duties or works of the Corporation or any of the municipal authorities;  
(c) to furnish or obtain and furnish any report.  
 486. Inspection .—The Central Government  1[or the Government] may depute any person in the 
service of Government to inspect or examine any municipal department or office or any service or work 
undertaken by the Corporation or any of the municipal authorities or any property belonging to the 
Corporation and to report thereon and the Corporation and  every municipal authority and all municipal 
officers and other municipal employees shall be bound to afford the person so deputed access at all 
reasonable times to the premises and properties of the Corporation and to all records, accounts and other 
documents the inspection of which he  may consider necessary to enable him to discharge his duties.  
 487. Directions by Central Government .—(1) If, 2[whether on receipt of a report or on receipt of] 
any information or report obtained under section 485 or section 486 or otherwise, the Ce ntral Government 
is of opinion — 
(a) that any duty imposed on the Corporation or any municipal authority by or under this Act has 
not been performed or has been performed in an imperfect, insufficient or unsuitable manner, or  
(b) that adequate financial provision  has not been made for the performance or any such duty, it 
may direct the Corporation or the municipal authority concerned, within such period as it think fit, to 
make arrangements to its satisfaction for the proper performance of the duty, or, as the cas e may be, 
to make financial provision to its satisfaction for the performance of the duty and the Corporation or 
the municipal authority concerned shall comply with such direction:  
Provided that, unless in the opinion of the Central Government the immediate execution of such order 
is necessary, it shall before making any direction under this section give the Corporation or the municipal 
authority concerned a n opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be made.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
 488. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 487 .—If, within the period 
fixed by a direction made under sub -section ( 1) of section 487, any action the taking of which has been 
directed under that sub -section has not been duly taken, the Ce ntral Government may make arrangements 
for the taking of such action and may direct that all expenses connected therewith shall be defrayed out of 
the Municipal Fund.  
 489. Power of Central Government to give directions in relation to primary schools, etc. —(1) 
The Central Government may give the Corporation all such directions as it considers necessary in respect 
of subjects, curricula, text books, standards and methods of teaching in primary schools vested in the 
Corporation or maintained wholly or partly by grants paid out of the Municipal Fund and in respect of 
such other matters as that Government considers necessary and the Corporation shall comply with all 
such directions.  
(2) It shall be lawful for any officer appointed by the Central Government in th is behalf to inspect any 
such school; and all reasonable facilities shall be given to such officer in connection with the inspection.  
                                                 
1. Ins by Act 67 of 1993, s. 122 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993)   
2. Subs. by s. 123, ibid., for “whether on receipt of” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Omitted by s. 123 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  141 (3) The Central Government, after considering the report of inspection made by such officer, may 
give the Corporation such  directions as it considers necessary and the Corporation shall comply with such 
directions.  
1[490. Dissolution of the Corporation .—(1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the 
Corporation persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or under this Act 
or exceeds or abuses its powers, the Central Government may by an order published, together with a 
statement of reasons therefor, in the Official Gazette, dissolve the Corporation:  
Provided that the Corporation sha ll be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its 
dissolution.  
(2) When the Corporation is dissolved by a n order under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all councillors shall, on the date of the dissolution, vacate their office as such councillors and 
the persons referred to in clause ( b) of subsection ( 3) of section 3 shall cease to be represented in the 
Corporation;  
(b) during the period of dissolution of the Corporation, all powers and duties conferred and 
imposed upon the Corporation by or under this A ct or any other law, shall be exercised and 
performed by such officer or authority as the Central Government may appoint in that behalf;  
(c) all property vested in the Corporation shall, until it is re -constituted, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) An el ection to constitute the Corporation shall be completed before the expiration of a period of 
six months from the date of its dissolution.  
(4) An order of dissolution made under this section together with a statement of the reasons therefor 
shall be laid be fore each House of Parliament and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi as soon as may be, after it has been made.]  
CHAPTER XXV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
2[490A. Delegation of power by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification be exercisable by the Government or any 
of its officers or by the Commissione r or any other authority.]  
491. Power to delegate functions of Commissioner .—The Commissioner may by order direct that 
any power conferred or any duty imposed on him by or under this Act shall, in such circumstances and 
under such conditions, if any, as ma y be specified in the order, be exercised and performed also by any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee specified in the order.  
492. Validity of notices and other documents .—No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission in 
writing or any other document issued under this Act shall be invalid merely by reason of defect of form.  
493. Admissibility of document or entry as evidence .—A copy of any receipt, application, plan, 
notice, order or other document or of any entry in a register in the po ssession of any municipal authority 
shall, if duly certified by the legal keeper thereof or other person authorised by the Commissioner in this 
behalf, be admissible in evidence of the existence of the document or entry, and shall be admitted as 
evidence o f the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent to 
which, the original document or entry would, if produced, have been admissible to prove such matters and 
transactions.  
494. Evidence of Municipal officer or empl oyee.—No Municipal officer or other municipal 
employee shall, in any legal proceedings to which the Corporation is not a party, be required to produce 
any register or document the contents of which can be proved under section 493 by a certified copy, or to  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 124, for section 490 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 125 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  142 appear as a witness to prove any matter or transaction recorded therein save by order of the court made 
for special cause.  
495. Prohibition against obstruction of Mayor or any municipal authority, etc. —No person shall 
obstruct or molest the Corporation or  any municipal authority, the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor, any 
councillor or aldermen or any person employed by the Corporation or any person with whom the 
Commissioner has entered into a contract on behalf of the Corporation, in the performance of their dut y 
or of anything which they are empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any provision 
of this Act or of any rule, regulation or bye -law made thereunder.  
496. Prohibition against removal of mark .—No person shall remove any mark set up for  the 
purpose of indicating any level or direction incidental to the execution of any work authorised by this Act 
or of any rule or bye -law made thereunder.  
497. Prohibition against removal or obliteration of notice .—No person shall, without authority in 
that behalf, remove, destroy, deface or otherwise obliterate any notice exhibited by or under orders of the 
Corporation or any municipal authority or any municipal officer or other municipal employee specified 
by the Commissioner in this behalf.  
498. Prohibi tion against unauthorised dealings with public place or materials .—No person shall , 
without authority in that behalf, remove earth, sand or other m aterial or deposit any matter or make any 
encroachment from, in , or on any land vested in the Corporation or in any way obstruct the same.  
499. Liability of Commissioner, etc., for loss, waste or misapplication of Municipal Fund or 
property .—(1) 1[Every councillor and every person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section (3) of section 
3, the Commissioner ,] 2*** and every municipal officer and other municipal employee shall be liable for 
the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property owned by or vested in Corporation, if 
such loss, waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct and a suit for 
compensation may be instituted against him by the Corporation with the previous sanction of the  3*** 
Government or by the  3*** Government.  
(2) Every such suit shall be insti tuted within three years after the date on which the cause of action 
arose.  
 500. Councillors and municipal officers and employees to be public servants .—4[Every 
Councillor and every person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3, the Commissioner ,] 
5*** and every municipal officer and other municipal employee shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , and in the definition of “legal 
remuneration ” in section 161 of that  Code the word “Government ” shall, for the purpose of this section, 
be deemed to include the Corporation.  
501. Annual administration report .—(1) As soon as may be after the 1st day of April in every year 
and not later than such date as may be fixed by the  6*** Government in this behalf, the Corporation shall 
submit to that Government a detailed report of the municipal government of Delhi during the preceding 
year in such form as that Government may direct.  
(2) The Commissioner shall prepare such report and the Corporation shall consider it and forward the 
same to the  6*** Government with its resolution thereon, if any.  
(3) Copies of the report shall be kept for sale at the municipal office.  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 126, for “Every councillor and alderman, the Commissioner, the General Manager 
(Electricity),” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The words and brackets “, the General Manager (Transport)” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second                                   
Schedule (w.e.f. 3-11-1971).  
3. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 126 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 127,  ibid.,  for “Every councillor and alderman, the Commissioner, the General Manager (Electricity),”                
(w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The words and brackets “, the General Manager (Transport)” omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second                                      
Schedule (w.e.f. 3-11-1971).  
6. The word “Central” omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 128 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  143 502. Other laws not to be disregarded .—Save as provided in this Act,  nothing contained in this Act 
shall be construed as authorising the disregard by the Corporation or any municipal authority or any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee of any law for the time being in force.  
503. Exemption of diplomatic or consul ar missions from payment of tax etc. —The Central 
Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, exempt from the payment of any tax, rate, fee or other 
charge payable under the provisions of this Act, any diplomatic or consular mission of a foreign State  or 
the High Commission of a Commonwealth country and any official of such mission or High Commission.  
504. Construction of references .—1*                   *                *                     *                   * 
(2) After the establishment of the Corporation any reference in any enactment, rule, bye -law, order, 
scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law, to any of the bodies or local authorities 
specified in the Second Schedule shall, unless the context or subject otherwise re quires, be construed as a 
reference to the Corporation.  
505. [Amendment of Delhi Act  3 of 1955.]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending                                    
Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
506. [Amendment of Act  43 of 1950.] —Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
507. Special provisions as to rural areas .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the for egoing 
provisions of this Act ,— 
(a) the Corporation with the previous approval of the 2*** Government, may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare that any portion of the rural areas shall cease to be included therein and 
upon the issue of such notification that portion shall be included in and form part of the urban areas;  
(b) the Corporation with the previous approval of the  2*** Government may, by notific ation in 
the Official Gazette ,— 
(i) exempt the rural areas or any portion thereof from such of the provisions of this Act as it 
deems fit,  
(ii) levy taxes, rates, fees and o ther charges in the rural areas or any portion thereof at rates 
lower than those at which such taxes, rates, fees and other charges are levied in the urban areas or 
exempt such areas or portion from any such tax, rate, fee or other charge;  
(c) the Corp oration shall pay a Gaon Sabha — 
(i) an amount equal to the proceeds of the tax on profession, trades, callings and 
employments, as and when that tax is levied in the Gaon Sabha area, and  
(ii) an amount equal to such portion of the proceeds of the property taxes on lands and 
buildings in that area as may from time to time to be determined by the Corporation,  
after deducting the cost of collection from such proceeds.  
Explanation .—In this section the expressions “Gaon Sabha ” and “Gaon Sabha area ” have the same 
meanings as in the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954 (Delhi Act 3 of 1955).  
508. Special provisions as to Red Fort area .—(1) In administering the provisions of this Act within 
the Red Fort area the Corporation shall comply with the military rule s and regulations for the time  being  
in force within that area.  
(2) In this section the expression “Red Fort area ” means the Red Fort and such areas continuous 
thereto as may be declared by the Central Government by notification in the Gazette of India to be 
included within the Red Fort area.  
3[508A. Corporation to undertake work on agency basis .—Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in 
any other provision of this Act, the Corporation may on such terms and conditions as may be determined 
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 67 of 19 93, s. 129 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
2. The word “Central” omitted by s. 130 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Ins. by s. 131 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  144 by agreement between the Corporation and any authority, body or person, carry out any work which is not 
connected with its functions on agency basis.]  
CHAPTER XXVI  
SUPPLEMENTAL AND TRANSITIONAL  PROVISIONS  
509. [Power of Central Government to make first appointments .]—Omitted by the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993 (67 of 1993) , s. 132 ( w.e.f.  1-10-1993).  
510. Provisions relating to existing local authorities in Delhi till the establishment of the 
Corporation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab              
Act 3 of 1911) or as the case may be, the Punjab District B oards Act, 1883, (20 of 1883) as in force in 
Delhi, as from  the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) the persons who immediately before such commencement are members of any of the local 
authorities specified in items 1 to 10 of the Second Schedule shall cease to  be such members;  
(b) all the powers, duties and functions which may, under any of the aforesaid Acts or any other 
law, be exercised and performed by any such local authority, or by its President or Chairman, or by 
any Committee thereof shall, until the es tablishment of the Corporation, be exercised and performed 
by a person (whether an officer of Government or not) to be appointed by the Central Government 
with such designation as it may specify:  
Provided that the same person may be appointed in respect of  all the aforesaid local authorities.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as effecting or implying in any way the dissolution 
of the aforesaid local authorities as bodies corporate.  
511. Provisions as to employees of bodies and local authorities whose functions are taken over 
by the Corporation .—(1) Every officer and other employee of each of the bodies and local authorities 
specified in the Second Schedule shall, on and from the establis hment of the Corporation, be transferred 
to and become an officer or other employee of the Corporation with such designation as the 
Commissioner may determine and shall hold office by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and on 
the same terms and cond itions of service as he would have held the same if the Corporation had not been 
established, and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions are duly altered by the Corporation:  
Provided that the tenure, rem uneration and terms and conditions of service of any such officer or 
other employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central 
Government:  
Provided further that any service rendered by any such officer or other em ployee before the 
establishment of the Corporation shall be deemed to be service rendered under the Corporation.  
(2) The Commissioner may employ any officer or other employee transferred to the Corporation 
under sub -section ( 1) in the discharge of such functions under this Act as the Commissioner may think 
proper and every such officer or other employee shall dischar ge those functions accordingly.  
1[511A. Temporary provision with respect to electricity, water, sewage, etc. —Notwithstanding 
the commencement of the Delhi  Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993, all the provisions 
existing in the  principal Act before  such commencement relating to — 
(a) water supply, drainage and sewage disposal;  
(b) electric supply; and  
(c) prevention and exting uishing of fire , 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 133 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  145 and matters connected therewith or incidental  thereto shall be deemed to continue in operation till such 
date as the Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and different  dates 
may be specified by the Central Government for any of the aforementioned  different matters.  
511B. Special provision as to transferred functions .—(1) In this section, “transferred  functions ” 
means such functions of the Corporation which immediately  before the commencement of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act,1993 were the functions of the Corporation but as from such 
commencement become  the functions of any other authority or functionary hereinafter called the  “new 
authority ”. 
(2) On and from such commencement, — 
(a) all lands and buildings (together with all  interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein) 
vested in the Corporation  immediately before such commencement and used for the purposes of  
“transferred functions ” shall pass to and vest in the new authority  conc erned;  
(b) all stores, articles and other movable  properties belonging to the Corporation immediately 
before such commencement  and utilised for or in connection with the “transferred functions ” shall 
pass to and vest in the new authority concerned;  
(c) all appointment, notifications, orders, schemes, rules, forms, notices or bye -laws made or 
issued or any licence or permissions granted by the Corporation  immediately before such 
commencement in connection with the “transferred  functions ” shall continue in fo rce and be deemed 
to have been made, issued  or granted by the new authority concerned unless and until they are 
superseded  by any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or 
issued or any licence or permission granted by  the new authority  concerned;  
(d) all debts, obligations and liabilities  incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be  done by, with or for , the Corporation immediately before such commencement 
for or in connection with the “transferred functions ” shall be deemed to  have been incurred, entered 
into, engaged to be done by, with or for, the new  authority concerned;  
(e) all assessments, valuations, measurements  or divisions made by the Corporation immediately 
before such commencement in or  in connection with the “transferred functions ” shall continue in  
force and be deemed to have been made by the new authority concerned unless and  until they are 
superseded by any assessment, valuation, measurement or division  made by that  authority;  
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other  sums of money due to the Corporation in relation to the 
“transferred  functions ” immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be due  to the 
new authority concerned;  
(g) all rates, fees, rent s and other charges  leviable in, or in relation to, the “transferred functions ” 
shall,  unless and until they are varied by the new authority concerned continue to be  levied at the 
same rate at which they were being levied by the Corporation  immediately bef ore such 
commencement;  
(h) all suits, prosecutions and other legal  proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against the  Corporation immediately before such commencement for any matter in 
relation to  the “transferred functions ” may be continued or instituted by or  against the new authority 
concerned;  
(i) every officer and other employee serving  under the Corporation immediately before such 
commencement in connection with  the “transferred functions ” shall be transferred to and be come an  
officer or other employee of the new authority concerned with such designation  as such authority may 
determine and hold office by the same tenure and at the  same remuneration and on the same terms 
and conditions of service as he would  have held the  same is the new authority concerned had not been 
established and  shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms  and 
conditions are duly altered by that authority:  146 Provided that the tenure, remuneration and  terms and condition s of service of any such officer or 
other employee shall not  be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central  
Government:  
Provided further that any service rendered by  any such officer or other employee before such 
commencement s hall be deemed to  be service rendered under the new authority concerned:  
Provided also that the new authority concerned  may employ any such officer or other employee in the 
discharge of such  functions as it may think proper and every such officer or other employee shall  
discharge those functions accordingly.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of  the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) 
Act, 1993, the C entral Government  shall decide, — 
(a) which stores, articles and other movable  properties referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
have been utilised by  the Corporation for or in connection with the “transferred  functions ”; 
(b) which debts, obligations, liabilities,  contracts, matters and things referred to in clause ( d) of 
the said sub -section have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the  
Corporation for or in connection with the “transferred functions ”; 
(c) which officers and other employees referred  to in clause ( i) of that sub -section served under 
the Corporation in connection  with the “transferred functions ”. 
(4) In case of any dispute in relation to any  of the matters referred to in the various clauses of         
sub-section ( 2) other than  clauses ( b), (d) and ( i), the dispute may be referred to the C entral Government  
by the Corporation or the new authority concerned and the decision of th at Government shall be final.]  
 512. Special provisions as to the area transferred from New Delhi to Delhi .—(1) In this section 
“transferred  area” means that area of Delhi which immediately before the commencement  of this Act is 
included within the local limits of the New Delhi Municipal  Committee but as from such commencement 
is included in and forms part of Delhi  by virtue of the provisions of thi s Act.  
(2) As from the est ablishment of the  Corporation, — 
(a) all lands and buildings (together with all  interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein) 
situated in the transferred  area and vested in the New Delhi Municipal Committee immediately before 
such establishment shall pass to and vest in the Corporation;  
(b) all stores, articles and other movable  properties belonging to the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee immediately before  such establishment and utilised for or in connection with the 
transferred area shall pass to and vest in the Corporation;  
(c) all appointments, notifications, orders,  schemes, rules, forms, notices or bye -laws made or 
issued or any licence or  permission granted by the New Delhi Municipal Committee immediately 
before such  establi shment in or in connection with the transferred area shall, in so far as  they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act continue in force and  be deemed to have been made, 
issued or granted under the provisions of this Act  unless and until they a re superseded by any 
appointment, notification , order,  scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or issued or any licence 
or permission granted under the said provisions;  
(d) all debts, obligations and liabilities  incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be  done by, with or for the New Delhi Municipal Committee immediately before 
such establishment for or in connection with the transferred area shall be deemed to  have been 
incurred, entered into, engaged to be done by, wit h or for the  Corporation or the municipal authority 
concerned;  
(e) all assessments, valuations, measurements  or divisions made by the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee immediately before such  establishment in or in connection with the transferred area shall 
in so far as  they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force  and be deemed 
to have been made under the provisions of this Act unless and  until they are superseded by any 147 assessment, valuation, measurement or division  made by the Corporation or the municipal authority 
concerned under the said  provisions;  
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other  sums of money due to the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee in, or in relation to,  the transferred area immediately before such establishment  shall be 
deemed to  be due to the Corporation;  
(g) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other  charges leviable in, or in relation to, the transferred area 
shall unless and  until they are varied by the Corporation, continue to be levied at the same  rate at 
which they were being levied by the New Delhi Municipal Committee  immediately before such 
establishment;  
(h) all suits, prosecutions and other legal  proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against the  New Delhi Municipal Committee imm ediately before such establishment 
for any  matter in relation to the transferred area may be continued or instituted by or  against the 
Corporation;  
(i) every officer and other employee serving  under the New Delhi Municipal Committee 
immediately before such  establishment  in connection with the transferred area shall be transferred to 
and become an  officer or other employee of the Corporation with such designation as the  
Commissioner may determine and hold office by the same tenure and at the same  remuneratio n and 
on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have  held the same if the Corporation had 
not been established and shall continue to  do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms 
and conditions are  duly altered by the Corporation  : 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and  terms and conditions of service of any such officer or     
other employee shall not  be altered to his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central  
Government:  
Provided further that any service rend ered by  any such officer or other employee before the 
establishment of the Corporation  shall be deemed to be service rendered under the Corporation:  
Provided also that the Commissioner may employ  any such officer or other employee in the discharge 
of such functions under  this Act as the Commissioner may think proper and every such officer or other  
employee shall discharge those functions accordingly.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of  this Act, the Central Government shall decide — 
(a) which sto res, articles and other movable  properties referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
have been utilised by  the New Delhi Municipal Committee for or in connection with the transferred  
area;  
(b) which debts, obligations, liabilities,  contracts, matters an d things referred to in clause ( d) of 
the said sub -section  have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the New  
Delhi Municipal Committee for or in connection with the transferred area;  
(c) which officers and other employees refer red to in clause ( i) of that sub -section served under 
the said committee in  connection with the transferred area.  
(4) In case of any dispute in relation to any  of the matters referred to in the various clauses of                    
sub-section ( 2) other than clauses ( b), (d) and ( i), the dispute may be referred to the Central Government  
by the Corporation or the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the decision of  that Government shall be 
final.  
513. Expenditure in connection with the municipal affairs from the commencement of this Act 
to the adoption of the budget by the Corporation .—(1) Any expenditure incurred during the period  
between the commencement of this Act and the establishment of the Corporation  under any of the 
provisions of this Act shall be bor ne by the Central  Government and the amount of the expenditure so 
incurred shall on such  establishment be recoverable by that Government out of the Municipal Fund.  
(2) If in respect of the period between the  establishment of the Corporation and the adoption of the 
first budget by the  Corporation further expenditure from the Municipal Fund becomes necessary over  and 148 above the expenditure thereto for authorised for that year by the  sanctioned budget estimates of the 
various bodies and local authorities  specified in the Second Schedule, the Corporation shall adopt a 
supplementary  statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure.  
(3) Every item of expenditure shown in the  supplementary statement as adopted by the Corporation 
shall be deemed to b e expenditure covered by a current budget -grant within the meaning of section102.  
(4) The supplementary statement shall be  prepared, presented and adopted in such manner and shall 
provide for such  matters as may be determined by the Corporation.  
514. Limit s of New Delhi Municipality .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Punjab 
Municipal Act, 1911, (Punjab Act 3 of 1911) as applicable to New Delhi Municipality or in any 
notification issued thereunder, the limits of that Municipality shall be as describe d in the First Schedule.  
1[514A. Transitory provision .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Government may, if necessary, appoint a person to be called the Special Officer, to exercise the powers 
and discharge the functions of the Corporation until the day on which the first meeting of the Corporation 
is held after the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993.]  
515. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition from  the 
provisions of any of the enactments referred to in section 516, or in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order as occasion requires, do anything which appears to it to be 
necessary for the purpose of removing t he difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the establishment of 
the corporation.  
516. Repeal, etc., and savings .—(1) As from the date of the e stablishment of the Corporation ,— 
(a) the Delhi Joint Water Sewage Board Act,1926, (23 of 1926) and the Delhi Road Transport 
Authority Act, 1950, (13 of  1950), shall stand repealed; and  
(b) the enactments specified in the Thirteenth Schedule shall cease to have effect within Delhi.  
(2) Notwithstanding the provision s of sub-section ( 1) of this section or of clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) 
of section  286,— 
(a) any appointment, notification, order,  scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or issued, 
and any licence or  permission granted under any of the Acts or enactme nts referred to in                 
sub-section  (1) of this section or under the Act referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section  (2) of section 
286 and in force immediately before the establishment of the  Corporation, shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of  this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been made, 
issued or granted  under the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is superseded by any  
appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or  issued or any licence 
or permission granted under the said provisions;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities  incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be  done by, with or for any of the bodies or local authorities spe cified in the  Second 
Scheduled before such establishment shall be deemed to have been  incurred, entered into or engaged 
to be done by, with or for the Corporation or  the municipal authority concerned;  
(c) all budget estimates, assessments,  valuations, meas urements or divisions made by any of the 
aforesaid bodies or  local authorities shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the  provisions of 
this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been made under  the provisions of this Act unless 
and until  they are superseded by any budget  estimate, assessment, valuation, measurement or division 
made by the  Corporation or the municipal authority concerned under the said provisions;  
(d) all properties, movable and immovable and  all interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein, 
vested in any of the  aforesaid bodies and local authorities immediately before such establishment  
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 134 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  149 shall, with all rights of whatsoever description, used, enjoyed or possessed by  any such body or 
authority, vest in the Corporation;  
(e) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other  sums of money due to any of the aforesaid bodies or local 
authorities  immediately before such establishment shall be deemed to be due to the  Corporation;  
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents, fares and  other charges  shall, until and unless they are varied by the 
Corporation  continue to be levied at the same rate at which they were being levied by the  aforesaid 
bodies or local authorities immediately before such establishment;  
(g) all suits, prosecutions and other leg al proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against any of  the aforesaid bodies or local authorities may be continued or instituted 
by or  against the Corporation.  
  150 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( 32) and section 514 ] 
BOUNDARIES OF NEW DELHI 
The area bounded by — 
the junction of the Pusa Road and Upper Ridge Road towards east along the new Link Road, 
the Panchkuian Road up to its junction with the Old Gurgaon Road; thence towards north - east 
along the Old  Gurgaon Road and Chelmsford Road up to the New Delhi Railway Station; thence 
towards south and south - east along the railway line up to its junction with the Hardings Bridge; 
thence towards south along the Mathura Road up to its junction with Lodi Road; thence towards 
south along the Lodi Road up to its junction with the first road leading to Lodi Colony; thence 
towards south along the first road leading to Lodi Colony up to its junction with the Ring 
Railway; thence towards west along the railway line up  to its junction with the Qutab Road; 
thence towards south along the Qutab Road up to its junction with Kaushak Nulla; thence towards 
east along the Kaushak Nulla up to its junction  with the boundary of the New Delhi Municipality; 
thence towards south and thence towards west along the boundary of the New Delhi Municipality 
and along the south boundary of the Medical Enclave up to its junction with the Ring Road near 
Gwalior Potteries; thence towards north - west along the Ring Road up to its junction with 
Kitchner Road; thence towards north along the Upper Ridge Road up to the starting point.151 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 99, 286, 504, 511 and 516 ] 
BODIES AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES WHOSE FUNCTIONS ARE TAKEN OVER BY THE CORPORATION  
1. The Municipal Committee, Delhi,  
2. The Notified Area Committee, Civil Station.  
3. The Notified Area Committee, Red Fort.  
4. The Municipal Committee, Delhi - Shahdara.  
5. The Municipal Committee, West Delhi.  
6. The Municipal Committee, South Delhi.  
7. The Notified Area Committee, M ehrauli.  
8. The Notified Area Committee, Najafgarh.  
9. The Notified Area Committee, Narela.  
10. The District Board, Delhi.  
11. The Delhi State Electricity Board.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
13. The Delhi Joint Water and Sewage Board.  
  
                                                 
1. Omitted by Act 71 of 1971, s. 7( b) and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -11-1971).  152 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 136 ] 
RATES OF TAXES LEVIABLE ON VEHICLES AND ANIMALS  
 
   Maximum amount of tax per annum  
   For vehicles with 
pneumatic tyres    For vehicles without  
pneumatic tyres  
   Rs. Rs. 
1.  Each four -wheeled vehicle drawn by camels, horses, ponies, 
mules,  donkeys, bullocks or buffaloes —     
 (a) Labour Carts  12 24 
 (b) Other vehicles in this class  32 48 
2.  Each two - wheeled vehicle drawn by camels, horse s, ponies, 
mules, donkeys, bullocks or buffaloes —     
 (a) Labour Carts  8 16 
 (b) Other vehicles in this class  16 24 
3. Each vehicle drawn or impelled otherwise than by camels, horses, 
ponies, mules, donkeys, bullocks, buffaloes or machinery   
8  
12 
                                                                             Maximum amount of tax per  annum  
4. Each cycle rickshaw .   .      .      .     .      .    .      .      .     .      .  6 
5. Each bicycle  3 
6. Each Camel  10 
7. Each horse, pony or mule of a height of 12 hands or upwards  20 
8. Each horse, pony or mule of a height of less than 12 hands  10 
9. Each bullock or buffalo kept for drought or pack purposes  8 
10. Each donkey/ass kept for drought or pack purposes or for riding  6 
11. Each pig  4 
12. Each dog  5 
13. Each she - buffalo Kept for milking  50 
14. Each cow kept for milking  30 
 
  153 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 140 ] 
THEATRE -TAX  
 
Type of entertainment  Maximum amount of tax  
1. Class I Cinema theatre .       .       .        .       .          .  Rs. 10 per show.  
2. Class II Cinema theatre .      .       .        .       .         . Rs. 7 per show.  
3. Drama, concert, circus, variety entertainment or   
tamasha  .      .       .        .       .       .       .       .       .  Rs. 7 per show.  
4. Carnival or fete  .     .         .       .       .       .      .       .  Rs. 10 per da y. 
5. Any other entertainment    .       .        .      .      .       .  Rs. 7 per show or if there are  no separate 
shows Rs. 7 per day.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Schedule class I cinema theatres and class II cinema theatres  
mean theatres classified respectively as class I cinema theatres and class II cinema theatres by bye -laws 
made in this behalf.  
  154 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 142 ] 
TAX ON ADVERTISEMENTS OTHER THAN ADVERTISEMENTS PUBLISHED IN THE NEWSPAPERS  
 
S. No . Particulars  Maximum amount of tax per annum  
    Rs. 
1. Non -illuminated advertisements on land, building, wall, 
hoardings , frame, post, structures, etc. —  
(a) For a space up to 10 sq. ft.  18 
(b) For a space over 10 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft  30 
(c) For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  30 
2. Non-illuminated advertisements carried on vehicles, drawn by 
bullocks, horses, or other animals, human beings, cycle or any 
other device, carried on any vehicle or tramcar —  
(a) For a space up to 50 sq. ft.  120 
(b) For every additional 50 sq. ft. or less  120 
3. Illuminated advertisement boards carried on vehicles —  
(a) For a space up to 50 sq. ft.  240 
(b) For every additional 50 sq. ft. or less  240 
4. Non -illuminated advertisement boards, carried by sandwich 
boardmen —  
(a) For each board not exceeding 10 sq. ft.  24 
(b) For each board exceeding 10 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  48 
(c) For each additional 10 sq. ft. in area or less  24 
5. Illuminated advertisement b oards carried by sandwich 
board men—  
(a) For each board not exceeding 10 sq. ft.  48 
(b) For each board exceeding 10 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  96 
(c) For each additional 10 sq. ft. in area or less  48 
6. Illuminated advertisements on land, building, wall or hoardings, 
frame, post, structures, etc. —  
(a) For a space up to 2 sq. ft.  24 
(b) For a space over 2 sq. ft. and up to 5 sq. ft.  48 
(c) For a space over 5 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  60 
(d) For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  60 
7. Advertisements exhibited on screen in cinema houses and other 
public places by means of lantern slides or similar devices —  
(a) For a space up to 5 sq. ft.  96 
(b) For a space over 5 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  120 
(c) For every additional 25 sq.ft. or less  120 155 S. No .                                     Particulars  Maximum amount of tax per annum  
 Rs. 
8. Non -illuminated advertisements suspended across streets —  
(a) For a space up to 10 sq. ft.  18 
(b) For a space over 10 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  30 
(c) For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  30 
N.B.—The tax for item 8 will be in addition to the space which will 
be chargeable according to the scale to be determined by the 
Commissioner.   
9. Non -illuminated advertisements hoarding standing blank but 
bearing the name of the advertiser or with the announcement 
“To be let ” displayed thereon —  
(a) For a space up to 10 sq. ft.  9 
(b) For a space over 10 sq. ft. and up to 25 sq. ft.  15 
(c) For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  15 
10. Permission to auctioneers to put up not more than two boards of 
reasonable size advertising each auction sale, other than those in 
the premises where the auction is held, one on a prominent site 
in the locality a nd one on municipal lamp post.  200 (including the rent for exhibiting 
the board on a municipal lamp post).  
 
  156 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 149 ] 
TAX ON BUILDING APPLICATIONS  
 
S. No.  Area For the first 
storey  For the second storey or 
any subsequent storey  
  Rs. Rs. per storey  
1. For a ground area up to 100 sq. 
yds. 20 40 
2. For a ground area of more than 
100 sq.  yds. but not exceeding 
250 sq. yds.  60 120 
3. For a ground area of more than 
250 sq. yds. but not exceeding 
500 sq. yds.  150 300 
4. For a ground area of more than 
500 sq. yds. but not exceeding 
1,000 sq. yds.  300 600 
5. For a ground area of more than 
1,000 sq. yds.  600 1,500  
 
N.B. 1.— For purposes of assessment and calculation of the tax, ground area shall mean the area of 
the portion which is proposed to be built upon including the internal courtyard.  
N.B. 2.— For purposes of the above Schedule, the basement where provided will be reg arded as the 
first storey, the ground floor over the basement as the second story and so on.  
N.B. 3.—In cases where an application is deemed to have been sanctioned under the provisions of 
section  1[337] the tax shall become payable in the same manner as i n cases where an application is 
sanctioned.  
N.B. 4.— In case an application is rejected 5 per cent . of the tax due shall be retained and the balance 
shall be refunded to the applicant, under the orders of the Commissioner.  
  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 21, for “336” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  157 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 154 ( 1)] 
NOTICE OF DEMAND  
To 
Shri/Shrimati  
residing at  
Please take notice that the Commissioner demands from                                                              the 
sum of                                           due from                             on account of                                  (here 
described the property, occupation , circumsta nce or thing in respect of which the sum is payable ) 
leviable under                                                    for the perio d of                                 commencing on 
the                             day of                                          19   ,                and ending on                                        
the                                     day of                           19      , and that if, within thirty days from the 
service of this notice, the said sum is not paid to the Commissioner at                              or sufficient 
cause for non -payment is not shown to the satisfaction of the Commissi oner a warrant of distress or 
attachment will be issued for the recovery of the same with costs.  
Dated this  day of  19         . 
(Signed)  
Commissioner,  
Delhi Municipal Corporation.  
  158 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 156 ( 1)] 
FORM OF WARRANT  
(Here insert the  name of the officer charged with the execution of the warrant ) 
Whereas A. B. of                                               has not paid, and has not shown satisfactory cause for 
the non -payment of, the sum of                                      due on  account of                                (here 
describe the liability ) for the period of                                           commencing on the                           day 
of            19        ,  and ending with                                 day of                              19        , which sum is 
leviable under                                    ; 
AND WHEREAS  thirty days have elapsed since the service on him of notice of demand for the same;  
THIS is to direct you to  distrain , the        movable                     property                 of the said  A.B. of  a 
                                       attach        immovable property   (described below ) 
value  approximately equal to the said sum of Rs .                s ubject to the provisions of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, and the bye -laws made thereunder and forthwith to certify to me, 
together with this warrant, all particulars of the property  seized  by you thereunder.  
                                                                                         attached,  
Dated this  day of  19    . 
 (Signed)  
 Commissioner,  
 Delhi Municipal Corporation  
Description of immovable property  
  159 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 157 ( 2)] 
FORM OF INVENTORY OF PROPERTY DISTRAINED AND NOTICE OF SALE  
To 
Shri/Shrimati  
residing at  
Please take notice that I have this day seized the property specified in the inventory annexed hereto , 
for the value of                                  due for the liability. Here describe liability mentioned in the margin 
for the period commencing on the                             day of                         19               ,  and ending with 
the                     day of                            19             , together with Rs.                        due for service of 
notice of demand, and that unless within ten days from the date of the service of this notice you pay to the 
Commissioner the said amount, together with the costs of recovery, the said property will be sold by 
public auction.  
Dated this   day of  19       . 
(Signature of officer executing the warrant)  
 Inventory,  
(Here state particulars of property seized .) 
  160  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE   
[See section 178 (I)] 
RATES OF TERMINAL TAXES ON GOODS  
Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs. 
Class I . —Articles of food and drink  
1. Refined sugar, i.e., khand, sugar candy, bura, qand, kachchi 
khand, ilaichidana,   nuqal, batasha, ola, khand -ka-khilona, 
gindors khand and all kinds of sharbat or shira khand not in 
bottle . 1.75 
2. Unrefined sugar, i.e., gur, shakkar, shira, rab, mizan khand, 
muthia, sonthia, gindora and tiloncha -khand (a sort of 
unrefined sugar .)  
 3. Ghee including vegetable ghee, and admixtures of ghee also 
vegetable solidified oil, dripping, marvo, trex, cocogold, 
purico, crisco and cocogem . 1.75 
4. Butter and cream  1.75 
5. Dried fruits and nuts excluding betel -nuts 0.29 
6. Betel -nuts 0.07 
7. Provisions (not included in any other class) including oilman ’s 
stores,  confectionary, jams, pickles, cheese, coffee and 
essences of fruits  1.17 
8. Country sweets made wholly or part ly from or coated with sugar 
(refined  or unrefined) fresh meat, fish and eggs . 0.15 
9. Oranges, apples, locat,  peaches   (aru),   grapes, lichi, melon 
(kharbooza),  lemon ( of all kinds),   pears (nashpati), plums 
(alucha), appricot (khubani),  banana,   pomegranates (anar), 
sarda,   water -melon (tarbuz), custard apple  (sarifa) and 
rasberry . 0.15 
10. Country and foreign  liquors  1.17 
11. Bhang  0.07 
12. Betal leaf  1.75 
13. Tea (Indian or foreign)  0.29 
14. Grain or pulses including parched grains  0.04 
15. Flour  0.04 
16. Animal fat, tallow and oil of all kinds except oils mentioned in  
Class III, V and IX .  0.29 
Class II.—Animals  
1. Oxen, cows, buffaloes and calves (per head)  0.58 
2. Sheep, goats, lambs and kids (per head)  0.15 161 Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs. 
3. Pigs (per head)  0.58 
Class III .—Articles used for fuel, lighting and washing  
1. Mava oil   0.15 
2. Kerosene oil (per gallon)   0.02 
3. Diesel oil   0.07 
4. Methylated spirit   0.15 
5. All sorts of oil -seeds including cotton seeds   0.04 
6. Wax and tallow candles   0.04 
7. Chandeliers, globes, lamps, chimneys and all other articles made 
of glass intended for electric or gas lighting, etc .(except 
electric bulbs)    0.04 
8. Chandeliers, globes, lamps, lanterns, electric poles, electric 
bulbs and  all other articles made of metal intended for electric 
or gas lighting, etc . 0.36 
9. Potash, ritha, soda, sajji, multani, saltpetre, alum, khari (sitta) 
salt and  other saline substances .  0.04 
10. Soap of all kinds   0.04 
11. Carbide   0.04 
12. Fireworks and their component parts   0.04 
13. Steam -coal, soft coke and hard coke  0.04 
Class   IV.—Articles used in the construction of buildings  
1. Wood (unmanufactured), i .e., wood which can be used for 
building purposes including trunk of trees, bamboos and 
ballies, but not firewood  0.02 
2. Wood (manufactured), i .e., all manufactured wood which can be 
used for  building purposes, including karies, planks, sleepers, 
beams, doors  and  door frames, etc .  0.07 
3. Stone for building (except Agra stone as defined in item 4 
below, marble  and lime stone),  bajri, kankar, lime of kankar, 
coal ashes, reh, surkhi, rori,  brick -bats or broken bricks   0.01 
4. Agra stone, i .e., stone so named in the market irrespective of its 
place of  origin   0.04 
5. Chalk, chalk powder, kharia mitti, lime stone, lime, Harsaru, 
flooring stone  and white and coloured stone chips   0.04 
6. Dammar, bitumen and asphalt   0.04 
7. Cement   0.15 
8. Marble and tiles of all kinds (othe r than those referred in item 9 ) 0.22 
9. Tile of common earth, e .g., Allahabad tiles   (per thousand)   0.58 162 Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs.  
10. Marble chips   0.04 
11. Asbestos sheets   0.11 
12. Whole bricks of all sizes (per thousand)   0.58 
13. Paints and colour washes  0.15 
14. Peori, ramraj, hiramzi, geru and sailkhari   0.04 
15. Roofing felt, roofing board and canec insulating board   0.29 
Class V .—Drugs, spices and perfumes  
1. All foreign medicines including mineral waters, syrups and 
medicinal  tinctures, soda bicarb and caustic soda (imported in 
packages or boxes),  sulphur in bottles and packets, iron 
sulphate, barium sulphate, haemorrhagic septicaemia serum, 
dextrosol, castor oil in bottles, potash permanganate,  glucose, 
oxygen gas, camphor oil, sugar of milk, medicated coloured 
and fragrant syrup .  0.44 
2. All Indian medicines including gulqand, sharbat in bottle, araq 
majun,  cowries, etc ., soda bicarb and caustic soda (imported in 
bags or drums),  Amritanjan, ivory dust, Sudha Sindhu and Bal 
Sudha, Khansol and  Zandu  Drakshasava   0.07 
3. Hair oil and perfumed oil of all kinds   0.58 
4. Spices and wet imli excluding saltpetre   0.07 
5. Opium   0.15 
6. Charas   0.15 
Class VI .—Tobacco  
1. All sorts of foreign tobacco, cigars, cheroots and cigarettes of all 
kinds. 0.87 
2. Indian tobacco   3rd quality (Kanni)   0.04 
3. Indian tobacco 1st and 2nd qualities, i .e., all tobacco not 
included in  Class VI items 1 and 2 .  0.15 
4. Biries and biri leaves .  0.15 
Class VII .—Piecegoods and textile fabrics   
1. Piecegoods made of cotton, wool or any admixture of these and 
articles  made thereof including thread and yarn, dhoties, 
saries, dopattas, pagrees,  safas, chadras, towels, bedspreads, 
sheets, blankets, tents, carpets, durries,  pillows, razais, laces, 
edgings, ribbons, handkerchief in bale s (i.e., not cut  up), old 
clothes imported in bulk, and all such goods as are not made 
up ready for wearing . 0.29 
2. Piecegoods made of silk and artificial silk or any admixture of 
these and  articles made thereof including shawls, doshalas, 
laces, edgings  and ribbons . 0.58 163 Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs. 
3. Unginned cotton   0.11 
4. Ginned cotton   0.22 
5. Cotton waste and waste yarn cotton   0.07 
6. Raw wool, hemp and other fibres, and rope   0.04 
7. Hides and skins   0.29 
8. Jute gunny bags and jute cloth   0.11 
9. Leather, including harness, saddles, bags, boxes, desi shoes, 
chapel and all other articles made of leather excluding boots, 
shoes, slippers  and sandals . 0.58 
10. Apparel, boots and  shoes including slippers and sandals (other 
than desi shoes and chappel), drapery, millinery, caps and hats, 
readymade  clothes, barret caps and hat shapes, etc .  1.75 
11. Hosiery including knitted woollen caps   1.17 
12. Lametta including kinari, gota, gold and silver lace, wire and 
thread  real or imitation .  1.17 
Class VIII .—Metals and articles made of metals  
1. Metals (iron and steel -wrought and unwrought) including bars, 
sheets,  girders, iron, stanchions, top columns, girders fitted 
with rivets, metallic -ores and scrap iron .  0.07 
2. Tin scrap   0.06 
3. Metals (hardware and cutlery), i .e., knives, razors, scissors, 
needles,  tin plates, rivets, nails, screws, bolts nuts, enamelled 
ware (other sanitary  fittings) wire, wire -nettings, hinges, locks, 
pipes, post and pans, weights,  empty tins, iron and tin boxes 
and iron furniture, etc .  0.44 
4. Metals (all other kinds  - manufactured and unmanufactured) 
including  bicycles, perambulators, carriages, sewing machines,  
harmoniums, type -writters, ice -machines, soda -water 
machines, clocks and watches, spectacles -their cases and 
frames, umbrella frames and handles,   brass, copper,  german 
silver, aluminium, bronze, zinc and articles made thereof, 
channels of all kinds and for whatever purpose imported, 
sanitary fittings, iron  washers, bicycle saddles, radio goods, 
and tram car parts . 
N.B.—Sanitary fittings include baths, water closets, lavatory 
basins,  bidets (tubs), urinals, flushing cistern, sinks and 
water taps . 0.36 
5. Motor cars — 
(a)  2 seater (each)   
(b)  4 or more seater (each)    
17.50 
39.37 164                                                  
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1961, s. 22, for “betal” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs. 
6. Chassis and lorries — 
         (a)  without body (each)    
29.17 
         (b)  with body (each)  35.00 
7. Component  parts of motor cars   1.17 
8. Old component parts of motor vehicles   0.36 
9. Stoppers made of 1[metal]  0.58 
10. Complete motor cycle without side car (each)   5.83 
11. Motor cycle with side car   (each)   7.00 
Class IX .—Miscellaneous  
 1. Dyes and tans including green coloured sand (for mixing with 
mehndi)  boot polishes, indigo, safflower (kusum) and all kinds 
of colouring matter .  0.15 
2. Stationery including paper, paste, boards and all articles made 
thereof  including waste papers, cards, cardboards, forms, 
envelopes, calendars,  ink, pens, pencils, inkpots, ink -stands, 
takhtis, pincushions, nibs, holders,  pins, pads, drawing 
instruments, paper weights, rulers, measuring tapes,  slates 
manufactured or unmanufactured, strawboard, gelatine paper, 
account  books, ledger and cash books .  0.18 
3. Chemicals (except those chargeable under any other class), 
distilled water  and sulphur in casks or barrels or bags .  0.15 
4. Horn and articles made of horn except buttons .  0.04 
 5. Lac and cork and articles made thereof   0.04 
6. Kikar bark and other bark including bark dust   0.04 
7. Wood (manufactured) such as walking sticks, empty barrels, 
country  carts, umbrella sticks of cane or bamboo 
(manufactured or unmanufactured),  wooden payas and pattis .  0.07 
8. Furniture other than iron furniture   0.18 
9. Articles of sports and games including playing cards .  0.58 
10. Goods imported by circus, theatres, carnivals, etc .  0.22 
11. Glass and articles made thereof (except glass, tiles, empty glass  
phials having lids, glass beads and other imitation jewels)   0.04 
12. Articles made of china, stone, earth (glazed or unglazed)  
including  drain pipes and drain fitting, but excluding sanitary 
fittings, earthen  tiles and toys made of china clay or earth . 0.04 
13. Empty  glass phials having lids   0.18 
14. Celluloid goods including celluloid sheets and imitation 
mother pearl  sheets  1.75 
15. Nut, shell, horn and ivory buttons   0.36 165  Articles  Terminal Tax payable per  
maund of gross weight  except 
where otherwise stated  
 Rs. 
16. Glass beads and other imitation jewels   0.36 
17. Toilets powders and cosmetic creams including tooth pastes, 
powders  and creams .  1.17 
18. Ivory and articles made thereof   1.75 
19. Rubber goods including rubber stoves, and bakelite goods   0.36 
 20. Disinfectants —dry or liquid —including Flit, Creosote, shell 
tox and naphthalene ball .  0.36 
21. Lubricating oil   0.36 
22. Grease   0.29 
23. Photographic accessories including pictures, photos and 
printed  pictures   1.17 
24. Coir matting   0.15 
25. Toys made of celluloid   1.75 
26. Toys made of china clay or earth   0.15 
27. Toys made of cotton, rubber, paper, wool and metals   0.36 
28. All kinds of cinema carbons   0.36 
29. Vaseline, Vaseline Pomade, petroleum, jelly, or amber 
petroleum (grease)  and Yardley Brilliantine .  0.44 
30. Safety fuses and catridges   0.04 
31. All other articles not chargeable under any other class   0.04 166 THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 417 ] 
PART I  
PURPOSES FOR WHICH PREMISES MAY NOT BE USED WITHOUT A LICENCE  
Carrying out any of the following trades or ope rations connected with trades: — 
1. Baking.  
2. Ci nematograph films, shooting of — 
3. Cinematograph films by any p rocess whatsoever. Treating of — 
4. Chillies or masala or corn or seeds. G rinding of by mec hanical means — 
5. Cloth, yarn or leather in indigo or in other colours dyeing or printin g of— 
6. Cloth or yarn. Bleaching — 
7. Eating house or a catering establishment. Keeping of an — 
8. Grain. Parching — 
9. Ground -nut-seeds, tamarind seeds or any other seeds. Parching — 
10. Hair dressing saloon or a barber ’s shop. Keeping of a — 
11. Hides or skins, whether raw or dried. Tanning, pressing or packing — 
12. Laundry shop. Keeping a — 
13. Leather goods. Manufacturing of by mechanical means — 
14. Litho press. Keepi ng a— 
15. Lodging house. Keeping a — 
16. Metal. Casting — 
17. Precious metals. Refining of -or recovering of them from embroideries — 
18. Printing press. Keeping a — 
19. Sweetmeat shop except in premises already licensed as an eating house. Keeping — 
20. Carryin g on the trade or business of or any operati on connected with the trade of — 
(i) Autocar or autocycle servicing or repairing.  
(ii) Blacksmithy.  
(iii) Coppersmithy.  
(iv) Electroplating.  
(v) Glass bevelling.  
(vi) Glass cutting.  
(vii) Glass polishing.  
(viii) Goldsmithy.  
(ix) Marble cutting, grinding, dressing or polishing.  
(x) Metal (ferrous or non -ferrous or antimony but excluding previous metal) cutting or treating 
metal by hammering, drilling, pressing, filing, polishing, heating or by any other process 
whatever or assembling parts of metal.  
(xi) Photography -studio.  167 (xii) Radio (wireless receiving set) selling, repairing, servicing or manufacturing.  
(xiii) Silversmithy.  
(xiv) Spinning or weaving cotton, silk, art silk, or jute or wool with the aid or power.  
(xv) Stone grinding, cutting dressing or polishing.  
(xvi) Timber or wood sawing or cutting by mechanical or electric power.  
(xvii) Tinsmithy.  
(xviii) Washerman's trade.  
(xix) Welding of metal by electric, gas or any process whatsoever.  
21. Manufacturing, p arching, packing, pressing, cleanings, cleansing, boiling, melting, grinding or 
preparing by any process whatever  any of the following articles .— 
(i) Aerated waters.  
(ii) Bakelite goods.  
(iii) Bidis (indigenous cigarettes), snuff, cigars or cigarettes.  
(iv) Bitumen.  
(v) Blasting powder.  
(vi) Bones.  
(vii) Bricks or tiles by hand power.  
(viii) Bricks or tiles by mechanical power.  
(ix) Brushes.  
(x) Candles.  
(xi) Catgut.  
(xii) Celluloid or celluloid goods.  
(xiii) Cement concrete designs or models.  
(xiv) Charcoa l. 
(xv) Chemicals.  
(xvi) Cinematograph films stripping in connection with any trade.  
(xvii) Cosmetics or toilet goods.  
(xviii) Cotton, cotton refuse, cotton waste, cotton yarn, silk, silk yarn, silk inclusive of waste yarn, 
art silk, art silk waste, art silk yarn, wool or woollen refuse or waste.  
(xix) Cotton seeds.  
(xx) Dammar.  
(xxi) Dynamite  
(xxii) Fat.  
(xxiii) Fireworks.  
(xxiv) Flax.  
(xxv) Ink for printing, writing, stamping, etc.  
(xxvi) Gas  
(xxvii ) Ghee.  168 (xxviii ) Glass or glass articles.  
(xxix) Gunpow der. 
(xxx) Hemp.  
(xxxi) Ice (including dry ice.)  
(xxxii ) Insecticide or disinfectants.  
(xxxiii ) Leather cloth or rexine cloth or water proof cloth.  
(xxxiv ) Lime.  
(xxxv) Linseed oil.  
(xxxvi ) Matches for lighting (including Bengal matches.)  
(xxxvii ) Mattress es and pillows.  
(xxxviii ) Offal.  
(xxxix ) Oil-cloth.  
(xl) Oil other than petrole um (either by mechanical power o r by hand power or ghani driven by 
bullock or any other animal).  
(xli) Pharmaceutical or medical products.  
(xlii) Rubber or rubber goods.  
(xliii) Paints.  
(xliv) Paper or cardboard.  
(xlv) Pickers from hides.  
(xlvi) Pitch.  
(xlvii) Plastic goods.  
(xlviii ) Pottery by hand power.  
(xlix) Pottery by mechanical or any power other than hand power.  
(l) Sanitary -ware or china -ware.  
(li) Soap.  
(lii) Sugar.  
(liii) Sweetmeat and confectionery goods.  
(liv) Tallow.  
(lv) Tar.  
(lvi) Varnishes.  
(lvii) Wooden furniture, boxes, barrels, khokas, or other articles of wood or of plywood or of 
sandalwood.  
PART II  
ARTICLES WHICH MAY NOT BE STORED IN ANY PREMISES WITHOUT A LICENCE  
1. Asafoetida.  
2. Ashes.  
3. Bamboos.  
4. Bidi leaves.  169 5. Blasting powder.  
6. Blood.  
7. Bones, bone meal or bone powder.  
8. Camphor.  
9. Carbide of calcium.  
10. Cardboard.  
11. Celluloid or celluloid goods.  
12. Charcoal.  
13. Chemicals, liquid.  
14. Chemicals, non -liquid.  
15. Chillies.  
16. Chlorate mixture.  
17. Cinematograph films -non-inflammable or a acetate or safety base.  
18. Cloth in pressed bales or boras.  
19. Cloth or clothes of cotton, wool, silk, art silk, etc.  
20. Coal.  
21. Coconut fibre.  
22. Coke.  
23. Compound gas, such as oxygen gas, hydrogen gas, nitrogen gas, carbon dioxide gas, sulphur 
dioxide gas, chlorine gas, acetylene gas, etc.  
24. Copra.  
25. Cotton including Kahok, surgical cotton and silky cotton.  
26. Cotton refuse or waste or cotto n yarn refuse or waste.  
27. Cotton seed.  
28. Detonators.  
29. Dry leaves.  
30. Dynamite.  
31. Explosive paint such as nitro -cellulose paint, lacquer paint, enamel paint, etc.  
32. Fat.  
33. Felt.  
34. Fins.  
35. Firewood.  
36. Fireworks.  
37. Fish (dried).  
38. Flax.  
39. Fulminate.  
40. Fulminate of mercury.  
41. Fulminate of silver.  170 42. Gelatine.  
43. Gelignite.  
44. Grass.  
45. Gun -cotton.  
46. Gunpowder.  
47. Gunny bags.  
48. Hair.  
49. Hay or fodder.  
50. Hemp.  
51. Hessian cloth (gunny -bag cloth).  
52. Hides (dried).  
53. Hides (raw).  
54. Hoofs.  
55. Horns.  
56. Incense or esas.  
57. Jute.  
58. Khokas, boxes, barrels, furniture, or any other article of wood.  
59. Lacquer.  
60. Leather.  
61. Matches for lighting (including Bengal matches).  
62. Methylated spirit, denatured spirit or French polish.  
63. Nitro -cellulose.  
64. Nitro -compound.  
65. Nitro -glycerine.  
66. Nitro -mixture.  
67. Offal.  
68. Oil, other than petroleum.  
69. Oilseeds including almonds, but excluding cotton seeds.  
70. Old paper or waste paper including old newspapers, periodicals, magazines, etc.  
71. Packing stuff (paper cuttings, husk, saw dust, etc.).  
72. Paints.  
73. Paper other than old paper in pressed bales or loose or in reams.  
74. Petroleum, other than dangerous petroleum, as defined in the Petroleum Act, 1934.  
75. Phosphorus.  
76. Plastic or plastic goods.  
77. Plywood.  
78. Rags, including small pieces or cuttings of cloth, hessian cloth, gunny -bag cloth, silk, art silk or 
woollen cloth.  171 79. Rosin or dammar Batter otherwise known as Ral.  
80. Safety fuses, fog signa ls, cartridges, etc.  
81. Saltpetre.  
82. Sandalwood.  
83. Silk waste, or silk yarn waste, art silk waste, or art silk yarn waste.  
84. Sisal fibre.  
85. Skins (raw or dried).  
86. Straw.  
87. Sulphur.  
88. Tallow.  
89. Tar, pitch, dammar or bitumen.  
90. Tarpauline . 
91. Thinner  
92. Timber.  
93. Turpentine.  
94. Varnish.  
95. Wool (raw).  
96. Yarn other than waste yarn.  
  172 THE  TWEL FTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 461 ] 
PENALTIES  
Explanation .—The entries in the second column of the following table headed  “Subject ” are not 
intended as definitions of the offences prescribed   in the provisions mentioned in the first column or even 
as abstracts of those  provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to the subject ther eof. 
  
Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 128,                  
sub-sections ( 1) & 
(2). Failure to give notice of transfer o r 
devolution of land or building . Rs. 50 ... 
Section 128                          
sub-section ( 3). Failure to produce instrument of 
transfer . Rs. 50 ... 
Section 129  Failure to give notice of erection of 
new building, etc.  Rs. 50 ... 
Section 130  Failure to give notice of demolition 
or removal of building . Rs. 50 ... 
Section 131  Failure to comply with requisition to 
furnish information, etc.  Rs. 50   
Section 135,                    
sub-section ( 2). Wilful delay or obstruction of 
valuers . Rs. 50 ... 
Section 143  Prohibition of advertisement without 
permission . Rs. 200 Rs. 50 
Section 168  Failure to give notice of vacant land 
or building . Rs. 50  Rs. 5  
Section 172,                
sub-section ( 2). Non-compliance with the requisition 
of attendance before the 
Commissioner . Rs. 50 ... 
Section 175  Failure to disclose liability . Rs. 100 ... 
1*                             *                               *                                    *                           * 
Section 305,                      
sub-section ( 3). Construction of building within the 
regular line of street without 
permission . Rs. 1,000  Rs. 100 
Section 307  Failure to comply with requisition to 
set back buildings to regular line 
of street . Rs. 200 Rs. 50 
Section 310 . Failure to comply with requisition to 
set forward buildings to regular 
line of street . Rs. 200 Rs. 10 
                                                 
1. All entries with respect to sections 214 to 273 omitted by Act 67 of 1993, s. 135 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  173 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 313,                   
sub-section ( 5). Utilising, selling or otherwise 
dealing with any land or laying 
out a private street otherwise 
than in conformity with orders 
of the Standing Committee . 1[Rigorous         
imprisonment which may 
extend to three years] . 2*** 
Section 314,                   
sub-section ( 1), 
clauses ( a) and ( b). Failure to comply with requisition to 
show cause for alteration of 
street or for appearance before 
the Commissioner . Rs. 50 Rs. 5 
Section 315,                  
sub-section ( 1). Failure to comply with requisition 
on owner of private street or 
owne r of adjoining land or 
building  to level, etc., such 
street . Rs. 100 Rs. 10 
Section 317,                  
sub-section ( 1). Prohibition of projections upon 
streets, etc.  Rs. 200  
Section 317,                    
sub-section ( 2). Failure to comply with requisition to 
remove projections from streets . Rs. 200  
Section 318,                       
sub-section ( 2). Failure to comply with requisition to 
remove a verandah, balcony, 
etc., put up in accordance with 
section 317 ( 1). Rs. 200  
Section 319  Failure to comply with requisition to 
have ground floor doors, etc., so 
altered as not to open outwards.  Rs. 50  
Section 320,                  
sub-section ( 1). Erection, etc., of structures of 
fixtures which cause obstruction 
in streets . Rs. 200 Rs. 10 
Section 321  Deposit, etc., of things in streets . Rs. 100  
Section 323,                   
sub-sections ( 1) 
& (2). Tethering of animals and milking of 
cattle in public streets . Rs. 100 Rs. 5 
Section 324,                   
sub-section ( 4). Unlawful removal of bar or shoring 
timber, etc., or removal or 
extinction of light . Rs. 50  
Section 325,                 
sub-section ( 1). Streets not to be opened or broken 
up and building materials not to 
be deposited thereon without 
permission . Rs. 200 Rs. 10 
Section 327,                  
sub-section ( 2). Name of street and number of house 
not to be destroyed or defaced, 
etc. Rs. 50  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 13, for “Rs. 500” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
2. The word and figures “Rs. 25” omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  174 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 328,                    
sub-section ( 1). Failure to comply with requisition to 
repair, protect or enclose a 
dangerous place . Rs. 100 25 
Section 330,               
sub-section ( 1). Removal, etc., of lamps . Rs. 100  
Section 330,               
sub-section ( 2). Wilfully and negligently 
extinguishing lights in public 
streets , etc. Rs. 50  
Section 332  Erection of a building without the 
sanction of the Commissioner . 1[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both .] 2*** 
Section 333,                 
sub-section ( 1). Failure to give notice of intention to 
erect a building . 3[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months, or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]   
Section 334,                
sub-section  (1). Failure to give notice of intention to 
make additions, etc., to building . 3[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months, or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]   
Section 337,                 
sub-section ( 4). Commencement of work without 
notice, etc.  Rs. 10,000  Rs. 500 
Section 339  Failure to comply with requisition to 
round off buildings at corners of 
streets . Rs. 100 Rs. 5 
Section 340,                
sub-section ( 1). Erection of buildings on new streets 
without leveling . Rs. 1,000   
Section 340,                 
sub-section ( 2). Erection of buildings or execution of 
work within regular line of 
street or in contravention of any 
scheme or plan . Rs. 1,000   
Section 342  Use of inflammable materials 
without permission . Rs. 100  
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1984, s. 13, for “Rs. 1,000 ” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
2. The word and figures “Rs. 50” omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
3. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for “Rs. 100” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1984).  175 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 343  Failure to demolish buildings erected 
without sanction  1[or erection of 
buildings in contravention of 
order] . 2[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months, or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]  3*** 
Section 344  Erection of buildings in 
contravention of conditions of 
sanction, etc.  2[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]   
Section 345  Failure to carry out alterations . 4[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]   
Section 346,                   
sub-sections ( 1) 
& (2). Non-compliance with provision as 
to completion certificates, 
occupation or use, etc., without 
permission . Rs. 200  Rs. 10 
Section 347  Non-compliance with restrictions on 
user of buildings . 4[Simple imprisonment 
which may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5,000 or with both.]  5*** 
Section 348,                    
sub-sections  (1) 
& (2). Failure to comply with requisition to 
remove structures which are in 
ruins or likely to fall . Rs. 500  Rs. 20 
Section 349,                  
sub-section ( 1). Failure to comply with requisition to 
vacate buildings in dangerous 
condition, etc.  Rs. 200  
Section 353  Failure to provide for collection, 
removal and deposit of refuse and 
provision of receptacles . Rs. 50  
Section 354  Failure to collect and remove filth 
and polluted matter . Rs. 50  
Section 355,                  
sub-section ( 2). Scavenger ’s duties in certain cases 
not to be discharged by any 
person without permission . Rs. 25  
Section 356  Failure to comply with requisition 
for removal of rubbish, etc., from 
premises used as market, etc.  Rs. 100  
                                                 
1. Added by Act 42 of 1961, s. 23 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1961).  
2. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid.,  for “Rs. 1,000” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
3. The word and figures “Rs. 25” omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid.,  for “Rs. 500” (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).   
5. The word and figures “Rs. 25” omitted by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -12-1985).  176 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 357,                 
sub-section ( 1). Keeping rubbish and filth for 
more than twenty -four hours, etc.  Rs. 50 Rs. 10 
Section 357,                
sub-section ( 2). Allowing filth to flow in streets . Rs. 50  
Section 357,                 
sub-section ( 3). Depositing rubbish or filth, etc., in 
street, etc.  Rs. 50  
Section 360,                
sub-section ( 1). Latrines and urinals not to be 
constructed without permission 
or in contravention of terms 
prescribed . Rs. 200  
Section 361,              
sub-section ( 1). Failure to provide buildings newly 
erected or re-erected with latrine, 
urinal and other accommodation . Rs. 500  
Section 361,                
sub-section ( 3). Failure to provide residential 
buildings composed of separate 
tenements with latrine, bathing 
or washing place for servants on 
the ground floor . Rs. 500  
Section 362  Failure to provide latrines for 
premises used by large number 
of people and to keep them clean 
and in proper order . Rs. 100 Rs. 20 
Section 363  Failure to comply with requisition to 
provide latrines for market, 
cattle shed, cart stand, etc., and 
to keep them clean and in proper 
order . Rs. 100 Rs. 20 
Section 364,               
clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) & ( d). Failure to comply with requisition to 
enforce provision of latrine or 
urinal accommodation, etc.  Rs. 100 Rs. 10 
Section 365,                  
sub-section ( 2). Failure to comply with requisition 
for removal of congested 
buildings . Rs. 1,000   
Section 366  Failure to comply with requisition to 
improve buildings unfit for 
human habitation . Rs. 1,000   
Section 368,                     
sub-sections ( 1), 
(2), (3) & ( 4). Failure to comply with order of 
demolition of buildings unfit for 
human habitation . Rs. 1,000   
Section 369  Failure to comply with requisition of 
the Commissioner to remove 
insanitary huts and sheds, etc.  Rs. 100 Rs. 15 
Section 370,                   
sub-section ( 1). Prohibition against washing by 
washerman . Rs. 25  177 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 371  Failure to give information of 
dangerous disease . Rs. 100  
Section 373  Failure to comply with requisition to 
cleanse and disinfect buildings 
or articles . Rs. 50  
Section 374  Failure to comply with requisition to 
destroy infectious huts or sheds . Rs. 50  
Section 375  Washing of clothing, bedding, etc., at 
any place not notified by the 
Commissioner . Rs. 25  
Section 377,                
sub-section ( 1). Sending infected clothes to 
washerman or laundry . Rs. 25  
Section 377,              
sub-section ( 2). Failure to furnish address of 
washerman or laundry to which 
clothes have been sent . Rs. 25  
Section 378,                 
sub-sections( 1), 
(2) and ( 3). Use of Public conveyances by 
persons suffering from  a 
dangerous disease, etc.  Rs. 50  
Section 380  Failure to disinfect buildings before 
letting the same . Rs. 100  
Section 381  Disposal of infected articles without 
disinfection . Rs. 50  
Section 382  Making or selling of food, etc., or 
washing of clothes by infected 
persons . Rs. 50  
Section 383  Sale of food or drink in 
contravention of restriction or 
prohibition of the Commissioner . Rs. 50  
Section 384  Removal or use of water from wells 
and tanks in contravention of 
prohibition of commissioner . Rs. 50  
Section 385  Exposure of persons to risk of 
infection by the presence or 
conduct of a person suffering 
from a dangerous disease, etc.  Rs. 100  
Section 386  Removal of infectious corpses in 
contravention of the provisions 
of the section . Rs. 50  
Section 387,                   
sub-sections  (1) 
& (2). Absence of sweepers, etc., from duty 
without notice . Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month .  
Section 388  A sweeper employed for doing house 
scavenging not to discontinue 
work without notice . Rs. 10  178 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 389  Failure to supply information by 
persons in charge of burning or 
burial grounds . Rs. 50  
Section 390  Use of new burning or burial ground 
without permission . Rs. 50  
Section 391,                   
sub-section ( 1). Failure to comply with requisition to 
close a burning or burial ground . Rs. 50  
Section 391,                   
sub-section ( 2). Burning or burial of corpses in a 
burning or burial ground after it 
has been closed . Rs. 50  
Section 392  Removal of corpses by other than 
prescribed routes . Rs. 25  
Section 393,                  
sub-section ( 1), 
clause ( b). Failure to give notice for removal of 
carcasses of dead animals . Rs. 10  
Section 396,                    
sub-sections ( 1) 
& (2). Failure to give information of births 
and deaths . Rs. 50  
Section 397,                    
sub-sections  (1), 
(2) & ( 3). Commission of nuisances . Rs. 50  
Section 398  Failure to comply with requisition 
for removal or abatement of 
nuisance  Rs. 500 Rs. 25 
Section 399,                 
sub-section ( 4). Dogs not to be at large in a steet 
without being secured by a chain 
lead. Rs. 50  
Section 399,                  
sub-section ( 5). Ferocious dogs at large without 
being muzzled, etc.  Rs. 100  
Section 400  Stacking inflammable material in 
contravention of prohibition . Rs. 50  
Section 401  Setting a naked light . Rs. 50  
Section 402  Discharging fireworks, firearms, etc., 
likely to cause danger . Rs. 50  
Section 403  Failure to comply with requisition to 
render buildings, wells, etc., 
safe. Rs. 50  
Section 404  Failure to comply with requisition to 
enclose land used for improper 
purposes . Rs. 50  
Section 406,                
sub-section ( 1). Sale in municipal markets without 
permission . Rs. 200  
Section 407,                
sub-sections ( 1) 
& (2). Use of places as private markets 
without a licence and use of 
places other than a municipal 
slaughter house as slaughter 
houses . Rs. 500 Rs. 25 179 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 407,               
sub-section ( 2) 
Proviso ( a). Non-compliance with conditions 
imposed by Commissioner . Rs. 50  
Section 409  Keeping market open without 
licence, etc.  Rs. 2,000   
Section 410  Sale in unlicensed market . Rs. 50  
Section 411  Carrying on business or trade near a 
market . Rs. 50  
Section 414  Failure of person in charge of 
markets to expel lepers and 
disturbers from the market . Rs. 50  
Section 415  Carrying on butcher ’s, fish -monger's 
or poulterer’s trade without 
licence etc.  Rs. 100 Rs. 10 
Section 416  Establishment of factory, etc., 
without permission . Rs. 5,000  Rs. 500 
Section 417  Certain things not to be kept and 
certain trades and operations not 
to be carried on without a 
licence . Rs. 1,000  Rs. 100 
Section 418,             
sub-section ( 3). Keeping, abandonment or tethering 
of animals, etc.  Rs. 100  
Section 419,                   
sub-section ( 5). Use of premises in contravention of 
declaration . Rs. 500  
Section 420 Hawking articles for sale without a 
licence, etc.  Rs. 100  
Section 421  Keeping a lodging house, eating 
house, tea shop, etc., without 
licence or contrary to licence . Rs. 100 Rs. 15  
Section 422  Keeping open theatre, circus or other 
place of public amusement 
without licence or contrary to 
terms of licence . Rs. 500 Rs. 50 
Section 430,                   
sub-section ( 5). Failure to produce licence or written 
permission . Rs. 50 Rs. 5 
Section 431  Preventing the commissioner or any 
person authorised in this behalf 
from exercising his powers of 
entry, etc.  Rs. 50  
Section 432  Preventing the Commissioner or any 
person authorised in this behalf 
from exercising his power of 
entry upon any adjoining land . Rs. 50  180 Section, sub-section, 
clause or proviso  Subject  Fine or imprisonment 
which may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may 
be imposed  
Section 437  Obstruction or molestation in 
execution of work . Rs. 200  
Section 444,                  
sub-section ( 4). Failure to comply with requisition to 
state the name and  address of 
owners of premises . Rs. 50  
Section 456,                
sub-section ( 3). Failure of occupier of land or 
building to afford owner 
facilities for complying with 
provisions of the Act etc., after 
eight days from issue of order by 
district judge . Rs. 200 Rs. 50 
Section 495  Obstruction of Mayor or any 
municipal authority, etc.  Rs. 200  
Section 496  Removal of any mark set up for 
indicating level, etc.  Rs. 100  
Section 497  Removal etc., of notice exhibited by 
or under orders of the 
Corporation, Commissioner, etc.  Rs. 50  
Section 498  Unlawful removal of earth, sand or 
other material or deposit of any 
matter or making of any 
encroachment from any land 
vested in the Corporation.  Rs. 50  
 
  181  
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 516 ] 
ENACTMENT S CEASING TO HAVE EFFECT IN DELHI 
1. The Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as in force in Delhi immediately before the commencement of the 
Act. 
2. The provisions of the City of Bombay Corporation Act, 1888, as in force in Delhi immediately before 
the commencement  of this Act.  
3. The provisions of the United Provinces Municipalities Act, 1916, as in force in Delhi immediately 
before the commencement of this Act.  
4. The Punjab District Board s Act, 1883, as in force in the Union territory of Delhi immediately before 
the commencement of this Act.  
  182 1[THE FOURTEENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 3A ] 
THE NUMBER, NAMES AND AREAS O F VARIOUS ZONES  
 
Sl.   No. Name  Area of the Zone*/Number and name of the 
municipal ward  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. City 1 Minto Road  
  2 Darya Ganj  
  66 Shardhanand Bazar  
  67 Dariba  
  68 Maliwara  
  69 Ballimaran  
  70 Farash Khana  
  71 Ajmeri Gate  
  72 Kucha Pati Ram  
  73 Lal Darwaza  
  74 Matia Mahal  
  75 Sui Walan  
2. Central  3 Nizamuddin  
  4 Jang Pura  
  5 Sewa Nagar  
  6 Kotla Mubarakpur  
  7 Lajpat Nagar  
  8 Amar Colony  
  9 Okhla  
  11 Kalkaji  
3. South  10 Kailash  
  12 Malviya Nagar  
  13 Hauz Khas  
  14 Munirka  
  15 Mohammad Pur  
  16 R.K. Puram  
  44 Mehrauli  
  45 Madangir  
  46 Tughlakabad  
   
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 67 of 1993, s. 136 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  183 Sl.   No. Name  Area of the Zone*/Number and name of the 
municipal ward  
(1) (2) (3) 
4. Karol Bagh  17 Rajender Nagar  
  18 Narayana  
  92 Motia Khan  
  93 Tibbia College  
  94 Rahgarpura  
  95 Dev Nagar  
  96 East Patel Nagar  
  97 West Patel Nagar  
  98 Sat Nagar  
  99 Anand Parvat  
  100 Baljit Nagar  
5. Sadar Pahar Ganj  76 Paharganj  
  77 Dariba Pan  
  78 Ram Nagar  
  79 Qadam Sharif  
  80 Basti Julahan  
  81 Kasab Pura  
  82 Deputy Ganj  
  83 Teliwara  
  84 Arya Pura  
  86 Pratap Nagar  
  90 Sarai Rohilla  
  91 Manakpura  
6. West  Zone  19 Nangal Raya  
  20 Ashok Nagar  
  21 Tilak Nagar  
  22 Tagore Garden  
  23 Subhash Nagar  
  24 Rajouri Garden  
  25 Ramesh Nagar  
  26 Moti Nagar  
  39 Madi Pur  
  40 Vishnu Garden  
   184 Sl.   No.  Name  Area of the Zone*/Number and name of the 
municipal ward  
(1) (2) (3) 
7. Civil Lines  32 Wazirabad  
  59 Mori Gate  
  60 Civil Lines  
  61 Timar Pur  
  62 Kingsway Camp  
  63 Model Town  
  64 Vijay Nagar  
  65 Jawahar Nagar  
  85 Sohan Ganj  
  87 Shakti Nagar  
8. Shahdara—South  47 Geeta Colony  
  48 Lakshmi Nagar  
  49 Gandhi Nagar  
  50 Dharampura  
  51 Krishna Nagar  
  52 Patparganj  
  53 Vishwas Nagar  
  54 Shahdara  
9. Shahdara— North  55 Rohtas Nagar  
  56 Naveen Shahdara  
  57 Ghonda  
  58 Usmanpur  
10. Rural Narela  33 Alipur  
  34 Narela  
  35 Bawana  
  36 Kanjhawala  
11. Rural Najafgarh  37 Nangloi  
  38 Najafgarh  
  41 Isapur  
  42 Palam  
  43 Mahipalpur  
12. Rohini  27 Shakur Basti  
  28 Badli  185 Sl.   No.  Name  Area of the Zone*/Number and name of the 
municipal ward  
(1) (2) (3) 
  29 Rampura  
  30 Onkar Nagar  
  31 Wazir Pur  
  88 Shastri Nagar  
  89 Karam Pura  
NOTE: *The area is indicated in terms of the extent of the municipal wards as they existed on the date 
of the commencement of the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1993.  186 THE FIFTEENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 52 ] 
POWER S AND FUNCTIONS OF THE WARDS  COMMITTEE  
(1) Sanction estimates and plans for municipal works to be carried out within the Zone costing up  to 
rupees one crore, other than works taken up and execu ted for Delhi as a whole or those covering more 
than one Zone, provided that specific provision exists therefor in the budget sanctioned by the 
Corporation.  
(2) Call for any report, return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics from the Commissioner, 
connected with matter pertaining to the municipal administration in the Zone.  
(3) Scrutinize monthly statements of receipts and disbursements and of the progress reports in the 
collection of revenue in the Zone.  
(4) Consider and make recommen dations on the proposals regarding estimates of revenue and 
expenditure pertaining to the Zone under different heads of account of the budget before being forwarded 
to the Commissioner.  
(5) Report or advice upon any matter which the Corporation may refer t o it under the Act.  
(6) Deal with such other matters as may be delegated by the Corporation to the Wards Committee.  
(7) In general exercise all such municipal powers and functions of the Corporation as are to be 
performed exclusively in the Zone concerned other than those relating to Delhi as a whole  or involving 
two or more Zones.]  
 
--------------------------The Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION AMENDMENT) ACT, 1957  
_________ __ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. Transitional provisions respecting recognised associations in certain cases.  
  2 
 THE FORWARD CONTRACTS (REGULATION AMENDMENT ) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1957 
[17th September , 195 7.]  
An Act further to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Amendment Act, 1957.  
2.[Power of recognised association to make rules respecting grouping of members, restricting voting 
rights, etc., in special cases ].―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960  (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and 
First Schedule (w.e.f. 26-12-1966 ). 
3. Transitional provisions respecting recogni sed associations in certain cases .―Where any 
recogni sed association which has been granted an extension of time for holding its annual general 
meeting under the proviso to clause  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 166 of the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) , is desirous of making or amending rules in relation to  the mat ters referred to in clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 9A of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952  (74 of 1952) , and 
reconstituting its governing body in accordance with such rules, and the Central Government, on an 
application made to it by the recogni sed association, is satisfied that it would not be possible for the 
association so to reconstitute its governing body within the extended time granted  to it, the Central 
Government may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) , extend the time within which the said annual general meeting shall be held by a further 
period not exceeding six months.  
 
--------------------------The Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE INTER -STATE CORPORATIONS ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 38 OF 1957  
[20th September, 1957 .] 
An Act to provide for the reorgani sation of certain corporations functioning in two or more 
States by vir tue of sec tion 109 of the State s Reorganisation  Act, 1956, and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Inter -State Corporations Act, 1957.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “inter-State corporation ” means any body corporate constituted under any 
of the Acts specified in the Schedule and functioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , 1[or of any other enactment relating to re organisation of 
States.]  
3. Power of State Governments to frame schemes .—If it appears to the Government of a State in 
any part of which an inter -State corporation is functioning that the inter -State corporation should be 
reconstituted and reorganised as o ne or more inter -State corporations or that it should be dissolved, the 
State Government may frame a scheme for such reconstitution and reorganisation or such dissolution, as 
the case may be, including proposals regarding the transfer of the assets, rights  and liabilities of the    
inter-State corporation to any other corporations or State Governments and the transfer or re -employment 
of employees of the inter -State corporation and forward the scheme to the Central Government.  
4. Reorganisation of certain i nter-State corporations .—(1) On receipt of a scheme forwarded to it 
under section 3, the Central Government may, after consulting the State Governments concerned, approve 
the scheme with or without modifications and give effect to the scheme so approved by  making such 
order as it thinks fit.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the dissolution of the inter -State corporation;  
(b) the reconstitution and reorganisation  in any manner whatsoever of the inter -State corporation 
including the constitution, where necessary, of new corporations;  
(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted corporation or new corporation shall function 
and operate;  
(d) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of the inter -State 
corporation (including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to any other 
corporations or State Governments and the terms and conditions of such transfer;  
(e) the substitution of any such transferee for the inter -State corporation, or the addition of any 
such transferee, as a party to any legal proceeding to which the inter -State corporation is a party; and 
the transfer of any proceedings pending before the inter -State corporation to any such transferee;  
(f) the transfer or re -employment of any employees of the inter -State corporation to, or by , any 
such transferee and subject to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation                  
Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , 1[or of any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States] the terms and 
conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re -employment;  
(g) the adaptations or modifications of the Act under which the inter-State corporation was 
constituted, whether by way of repeal or amendment , as may be necessary or expedient to give effect 
to the approved scheme;  
(h) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as may be necessary to give effect 
to the a pproved scheme.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  2 
 (3) Where an order is made under this section transferring the assets, rights and liabilities of any   
inter-State corporation, then, by virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the inter -State 
corporation shall vest in , and be the assets, rights and liabilities of, the transferee.  
(4) Every order made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and the Act under 
which the inter -State corporation was constituted shall have effect subject to the provision s of the order 
and the adaptations and modifications made thereby until altered, repealed or amended by the competent 
Legislature of a State.  
1[(5) Every order made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made , before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modif ication 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.]  
5. Power of Central Government to add to the Schedule .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the Schedule any Act under which a body corporate 
constituted for a State is functioning in two or more States by virtue of section 109 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , 2[or of any other enactment relating to  reorganisation of States] 
and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the 
said Act therein.  
  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 1960, s. 75 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1960).  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See sections 2  and 5)  
1. The Bombay  Medical Practitioners Act, 1938 (Bom. XXVI of 1938).  
2. The Bombay Secondary School Certificate Examination Act , 1948 (Bom. XLIX  of 1948).  
3. The Bombay Housing Board Act, 1948 (Bom. LXIX  of 1948).  
4. The Bombay Khar Lands Act, 1948 (Bom. LXXII  of 1948).  
5. The Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 (Bom. XXIX  of 1950).  
6. The Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953 (Bom. XL of 1953).  
7. The Bombay Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Act, 1954 (Bom. XIV of 1954).  
8. The Bombay Village Industries Act, 1954 (Bom. XLI of 1954).  
9. The Hyderabad Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors ’ Registration Act, 1951 (Hyd. XIX of 1951).  
10. The Hyderabad Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 1955 (Hyd. XII of 1955)  
11. The Madhya Pradesh Bhudan Yagna Act, 1953 (M.  P. XV of 1953).   
--------------------------The Legislative Councils Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCILS ACT, 1957  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions . 
3. [Omitted .] 
4. Increase in the strength of the Bihar Legislative Council.  
5. Increase in the strength of the Bombay Legislative Council.  
6. Increase in the strength of the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Council.  
7. Increase in the strength of the Madras Legislative Council.  
8. Increase in the strength of the Mysore Legislative Council.  
9. Increase in the strength of the Punjab Legislative Council.  
10. Increase  in the strength of the Uttar Pradesh Legislative Council.  
11. Increase in the strength of the West Bengal Legislative Council.  
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed ]. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
 
  2 
 THE LEG ISLATIVE COUNCILS ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1957  
 [18th September , 1957.]  
An Act to provide for the creation of a Legislative Council for the State of Andhra Pradesh and 
the increasing of the strength of the Legislative Councils of the States having such Councils 
and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Legislative Councils Act, 1957.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) each of the words and expressions defined in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  
(43 of 1950), but not defined in this Act, shall have t he same meaning as in that Act;  
(b) “sitting member ” means a person who immediately before the commencement  of this Act is a 
member of a Legislative Council.  
3. [Creation of a Legislative Council for Andhra Pradesh .] Omitted by the Andhra Pradesh 
Legislative Council (Abolition ) Act, 1985  (34 of 1985 ), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-6-1985 ). 
4. Increase in the strength of  the Bihar Legislative Council .―(1) The total number of seats in the 
Legislative Council of Bihar shall be increased fro m 72 to 96 and of those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 sha ll be 34, 8 and 8 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by members of the Legislative Assembly of Bihar 
in accordance with the pro visions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 34; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Bihar in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that clause shall be 12.  
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is 
made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed by the First Schedule.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, el ections shal l be held to fill — 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council constituencies by the said Orde rs as 
modified by this Act; and  
(b) the additional seats to be filled by the persons referred to in  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), 
as if those seats had become vacant.  
(4) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
6th May, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of Bihar shall, after 
consultation with the Electio n Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the 
terms of office of the members to be elected to fill the additiona l seats under sub -section ( 3). 
5. Increase in the strength of the Bombay Legislative Council .―(1) The total numb er of seats in 
the Legislative Council of Bombay shall be increa sed to 108 and of those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shal l be 36, 9 and 9,  respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Bombay in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 42; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by t he Governor of Bombay in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -clause (e) of that clause shall be 12.  
(2) As from the commencement of this Act, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bombay) 
Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, ha ve effect subject to the modifications directed 3 
 by the Second Schedule and in the said Order as so modified, any reference to the State of Bombay shall 
be construed as a reference to that State as formed by section 8 of the States Reorgan isation Act, 1956  
(37 of 1956).  
(3) As from  the commencement of this Act ― 
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement any council constituency specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be deemed to 
have been elected to  the said Council by the council constituency specified against that constituency 
in column 2 of the said Table if immediately before such commencement, he is an elector for an 
assembly constituency in the St ate of Bombay:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Bombay City (Graduates) . .. Greater Bombay (Graduates).  
Ahmedabad City (Graduates) . .  Gujarat (Graduates).  
Northern Division (Graduates) . .   
Poona City (Graduates) . . .  Maharashtra (Graduates).  
Southern Division (Graduates) .  
Bombay City (Teachers) . . .   
Greater Bombay -cum-Maharashtra 
(Teachers).  Poona City (Teachers) . . .  
Central Division (Teachers) . .  
Southern Division (Teachers) . .  
Ahmedabad City (Teachers) . .  Gujarat (Teachers).  
Northern Division (Teachers) . .  
Bombay City (Local Authorities) .  Greater Bombay -cum-Maharashtra West 
(Local Authorities).  
Ahmedabad City (Local Authorities)   
Gujarat North (Local Authorities).  Ahm edabad District (Local Authori ties).  
Mehsana -cum-BanasKantha (Local 
Authorities).  
Baroda -cum-Amreli  (Local Autho rities).   
Gujarat South (Local Authorities).  Broach -cum-PanchMahals (Local 
Authorities).  
Kaira (Local Authorities) . .  
Surat (Local Authorities) . .  
East Khandesh (Local Authorities).   
Maharashtra North(Local Authorities) . Nasik (Local Authorities) . .  
Ahmednagar -cum-West Khandesh (Local 
Authorities) . .  
  4 
 1 2 
Poona City (Local Authorities). .   
Maharashtra South (Local Authorities).  
 Poona (Local Authorities) . .  
(Sholapur (Local Authorities) . .  
North Satara  (Local Authorities) .  
Kolaba -cum-Thana (Local Autho rities). .  
Mahara shtra North (Local Authorities);  Ratnagiri -cum-Kanara (Local Authorities) .. 
Kolhapur -cum-South Satara (Local 
Authorities).  
(b) every sitting member of the said Council elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of the former State of Bombay and every sitting member of the said Council chosen in pursuance of 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 34 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), shall 
be deemed to ha ve been duly elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the present State 
of Bombay if immediately before such commencement he is an elector for an assembly const ituency 
in the State of Bombay.  
(4) Every sitting elected member of the said Counci l who is not deemed to have been elected thereto 
by virtue of clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) shall, as from the commencement of this Act, cease 
to be a member of the said Council.  
(5) As soon as may be after such commencement, elections shall be held to fill such of the seats 
allotted to the several Council constituencies by the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Bombay) 
Order, 1951, as modified by this Act and such of the seats to be filled by persons referred to in  
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) as are then vacant, as if thos e seats had then become vacant.  
(6) The said Council shall be deemed to have been first constituted on the date on which the 
Legislative Council of the former State o f Bombay was first constituted.  
(7) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
24th April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of Bombay shall, 
after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such p rovisions as he thinks fit in regard 
to the terms of office of the sitting members chosen in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 34 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), and of the members to be elected under 
sub-section ( 5) of this sect ion. 
(8) Section 34 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall be amended, and shall be deemed always 
to ha ve been amended, as follows: ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 2), for t he words, brackets and figures „ Until the said Council has been 
reconstit uted in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) of this section and 
summoned to meet for the first time ‟, the words „Until otherwise provide d by law' shall be 
substituted;  
(b) sub -sections (3), (4) and ( 5) shall be omitted.  
(9) In this section, the expression „the former State of Bombay ‟ means the State of Bombay as it 
existed immediately before  the 1st day of November, 1956.  
6. Increase in the strength of the Madhya Pradesh Legis lative Council .―(1) The total number of 
seats in the Legislative Council for the State of Madhya Pradesh to be constituted under section 33 of the 
States Reorg anisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956 ), shall be increased from 72 as fixed by sub -section ( 2) of 
that section to 90.  
(2) The said section  shall be amended as follows: ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 2),― 5 
 (i) for the figures “72”, the figures “90” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause ( a), for the figures and word “24, 6 and 6 ”, the figures and word “31, 8 and 8 ” 
shall be substituted;  
(iii) in clause ( b), for the figures “24”, the figures “31” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “this Act ”, the words and figures “the Legislative Councils 
Act, 1957 ” shall be substituted; and  
(c) in sub -section (4),― 
(i) for the words “the appointed day ”, the words “such commencement ” shall be substituted; 
and 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted.  
7. Increase in the strength of the Madras Legislative Co uncil .―(1) The total number of seats in 
the Legislative Council of Madras shall be increased from 50 to 63 and of those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 sha ll be 21, 6 and 6 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Madras in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 21; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Madras in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -clause  (e) of that clause shall be 9.  
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is 
made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed by the Third Schedule.  
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, ― 
(a) elections shall be held to fill — 
(i) the additional seats allotted to the local authorities ‟ constituencies and the teachers ‟ 
constituency by the said Ord er as modified by this Act; and  
(ii) the additional seats, to be filled by the persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), 
as if those seats had become vacant;  
(b) one person shall be nominated by the Governor of Madras to fill the additional seat under 
clause (c) of the said sub -sectio n. 
(4) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
20th April, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of Madras shall, 
after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order, such provisions as he thinks fit in regard 
to the terms of office of the members to be elected under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) and of the member 
to be nominated under clause ( b) of that sub -section.  
8. Increase in the strengt h of the Mysore Legislative Council .―(1) The total number of seats in 
the Legislative Council of Mysore shall be increased to 63 and of  those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 shall b e 21, 6 and 6 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Mysore in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 21; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Mysore in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that  clause shall be 9.  
(2) As from the commencement of this Act, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Mysore) 
Order, 1951,  shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed 
by the Fourth Schedule, and in the said Order as so modified, a reference to the State of Mysore shall be 6 
 construed as a reference to that State as formed by se ction 7 of the States Reorgani sation Act, 1956  
(37 of 1956.).  
(3) As from the commencement of this Act, ― 
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement a council constituency specified in column 1 of the Tab le below shall be deemed to 
have been elected to the said Council by the council constituency specified against that constituency 
in column 2 of the said Table: ― 
TABLE  
1 2 
Mysore (Graduates) constituency . Mysore South (Graduates) consti tuency.  
Mysore (Teachers) constituency . Mysore South (Teachers) consti tuency.  
Kolar (Local Authorities) consti tuency.   
Mysore South East (Local Author ities) 
constituency.  Tumkur (Local Authorities) con stituency.  
Bangalore (Local Authorities ) constituency.  
Hassan (Local Authorities) consti tuency.   
Mysore  South (Local Authorities)  
constituency.  Mandya (Local Authorities) con stituency.  
Mysore (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Chickmagalur (Local Authorities) constituency.   
Mysore South West (Local Authorities)  
constituency.  Shimoga (Local Authorities) con stituency.  
Chitaldrug -cum-Bellary (Local Auth orities) 
constituency . 
(b) every sitting member of the said Council elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of the former State of Mysore, every sitting member of the said Council chosen in pursuance of 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 36 of the States Reorg anisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956 ), and 
the sitting member of the said Council specified by the Chairman of the Legislative Council of 
Madras under sub -rule ( 7) of rule 4 of the States Reorganisation (Elections to Provisional State 
Legislatures) Rules, 1956, shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly of t he present State of Mysore; and  
(c) every sit ting member of the said Council nominated by the Rajpramukh of the former State of 
Mysore shall be deemed to have been nominated to the said Council by the Governor of the pre sent 
State of Mysore.  
(4) The three members who, immediately before the 1st Novem ber, 1956, were members of the 
Legislative Council of Bombay and became on that date members of the Legislative Council of Mysore 
by virtue of sub -rule ( 7) of rule 4 of the States Reorganisation (Elections to Provisional State 
Legislatures) Rules, 1956, sh all be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Council of Mysore by 
the Mysore North West (L ocal Authorities) constituency.  
(5) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, elections shall be held to fill such of the 
seats allotted to the s everal council constituencies by the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Mysore) 
Order, 1951, as modified by this Act and such of the seats to be filled by persons referred to in clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) as are then vacant, as if thos e seats had t hen become vacant.  
(6) As soon as may be after such commencement, the vacancies in the seats allotted under clause ( c) 
of sub -section ( 1) shall be filled by nomination by the  Governor.  
(7) The said Council shall be deemed to have been first constituted on the date on which the 
Legislative Council of the former State o f Mysore was first constituted.  7 
 (8) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the s aid Council may retire on the 
1[13th May, 1958], and on the expiration of every second year thereafter, the Governor of Mysore shall, 
after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard 
to the terms of office of the sitting members chosen in pursuance of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 36 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), and of the members to be elected and 
nominated under sub -sectio ns (5) and ( 6) of this section.  
(9) Section 36 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), shall be amended, and shall be  
deemed always to h ave been amended, as follows: ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 2) for the words, brackets and figures “Until the said Council has been 
reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of this section and 
summoned to meet f or the first time ”, the words “Until otherwise provided by law ” shall be 
substituted; and  
(b) sub -section s (3) and ( 4) shall be omitted.  
(10) In this section, the expression „the former State of Mysore ‟ means the State of Mysore as it 
existed immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956.  
9. Increase in the strength of the Punjab Legislative Council .―(1) The total number of seats in the 
Legislative Council of Punjab shall be increased to 51 and of tho se seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 sha ll be 17, 4 and 4 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Punjab in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 18; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Punjab in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -clause ( e) of that cl ause shall be 8.  
(2) As from the commencement of this Act, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Punjab) 
Order, 1951, shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed 
by the Fifth Schedule, and in the sa id Order as so modified, any reference to the State of Punjab shall be 
construed as a reference to that State as formed by section 11 of the States Reorgan isation Act, 1956  
(37 of 1956).  
(3) As from the commencement of this Act, ― 
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement any local authorities ‟ constituency specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the said Council by the local authorities ‟ constituency specified 
against that constituency i n column 2 of the said Table: ― 
TABLE  
1 2 
Ambala -cum-Karnal (Local Autho rities) 
constituency.  Punjab South (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Gurgaon -cum-Rohtak -cum-Hissar -cum-Simla 
(Local Authorites) constituency.  Punjab South (Local Authorites) constituency.  
Hoshiarpur -cum-Kangra -cum-Gurdaspur  
(Local Authorities) constituency  Punjab North (Local Authorities)  constituency.  
Jullundur -cum-Ferozepur -cum-Amritsar -cum-
Ludhiana (Local Authorities) constitu ency.  Punjab North (Local Authorities)  constituency ; 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “26th April, 1958” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  8 
 (b) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement the graduates ‟ constituency or the teachers ‟ constituency shall be deemed to have 
been elected to the said Council by that constituency as altere d by virtue of sub -section ( 2); 
(c) every sitting member of the said Council elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of the former State of Punj ab and every sitting member of the said Council elected under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 37 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), shall be deemed to 
have been duly elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the prese nt State of Punjab.  
(4) As soon as may be after such commencement, el ections shall be held to fill — 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council constituencies by the Delimitation of 
Council Constituencies (Punjab) Order,  1951, as modified by t his Act;  
(b) the additional seats to be filled by persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1),  
as if those seats had become v acant.  
(5) The said Council shall be deemed to have been first constituted on the date on which the 
Legislative Council of the former State o f Punjab was first constituted.  
(6) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
26th April 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter the Governor of Punjab shall,  after 
consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard to the 
terms of office of the sitting members elected under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 37 of the 
States Reorg anisation Act, 1956 (37 of  1956 ), and of the members to be elected under s ub-section ( 4) of 
this section.  
(7) Section 37 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), shall be amended, and shall be 
deemed always to h ave been amended, as follows: ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 2), for the words, brackets and figures “Until the said Council has been 
reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of this section and of any 
other law for the time being in force and has been summoned to meet for the first  time”, the words 
“Until otherwise provided by law ” shall be substituted;  
(b) sub -section s (3) and ( 4) shall be omitted.  
(8) In this section the expression “the former State of Punjab ” means the State of Punjab as it existed 
immediately before  the 1st day of November, 1956.  
10. Increase in the strength of the Uttar Prade sh Legislative Council .―(1) The total number of 
seats in the Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh shall be increased from  72 to 108 and of those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 171 sha ll be 39, 9 and 9 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
Uttar Pradesh in acc ordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of the said clause shall be 39; and  
(c) the number to be filled by persons nominated by the Governor of Uttar Pradesh in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -clause (e) of that clause shall be 12.  
(2) The Deli mitation of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951, shall, until other 
provision is made by law, have effect subject to the modifications directed by the Sixth Schedule.  
(3) As from  the commencement of this Act — 
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement a graduates ‟ constituency or a teachers ‟ constituency the extent of which is altered by 
virtue of sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by t hat constituency 
as so altered;   9 
 (b) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement any local authorities ‟ constituency specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the said Council by the loca l authorities ‟constituency specified 
against that constituency i n column 2 of the said Table: — 
TABLE  
1 2 
Uttar Pradesh North -West (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Meerut (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Uttar Pradesh North -East (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Rohilkhand (Local Authorities) constituency . 
Uttar Pradesh West (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Agra (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Uttar Pradesh Central (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Lucknow (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Uttar Pradesh South (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Allahabad (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Uttar Pradesh East (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  Varanasi (Local Authorities) constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after such commencement, el ections sha ll be held to fill — 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council constituencies by the said Ord er as modified 
by this Act; and  
(b) the additional seats to be filled by persons referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1),  
as if those seats had become vacant.  
(5) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
5th May, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafterthe Governor of Uttar Pradesh shall, 
after consultati on with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard 
to the terms of office of the members to be  elected under sub -section ( 4). 
11. Increase in the strength of the W est Bengal Legislative Council .—(1) The  total number of 
seats in the Legislative Council of West Bengal shall be increased fro m 51 to 75 and of those seats — 
(a) the numbers to be filled by persons elected by the electorates referred to in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c) of clause ( 3) of article 17 1 sha ll be 27, 6 and 6 respectively;  
(b) the number to be filled by persons elected by the members of the Legislative Assembly of 
West Bengal in accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( d) of t he said clause shall be 27; and  
(c) the number to be fille d by persons nominated by the Governor of West Bengal in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -clause  (e) of that clause shall be 9.  
(2) The Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) Order, 1951, shall, until other 
provision is made by law, have  effect subject to the modifications directed  by the Seventh Schedule.  
(3) As from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement the Calcutta (Graduates) constituency and every  such member representing the 
Calcutta (Teachers) constituency, the extent of which is altered by virtue of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the said Council respectively by the Calcutta (Graduates) 
constituency and the Calcutta (Tea chers) constituency as so altered;  
(b) every sitting member of the said Council representing immediately before such 
commencement any of the council constituencies specified in column 1 of the Table below shall be 10 
 deemed to have been elected to the said Co uncil by the council constituency specified against that 
constituency i n column 2 of the said Table: — 
TABLE  
1 2 
West Bengal South (Graduates) constituency.  West Bengal (Graduates) constituency.  
West Bengal West (Graduates) consti tuency.  West Bengal (Graduates) constituency.  
West Bengal North (Graduates) constituency.  West Bengal (Graduates) constituency.  
Burdwan Division (Teachers) constituency.  West Bengal (Teachers) constituency.  
Presidency Division South (Teachers) constituency.  West Bengal (Teachers) constituency.  
Presidency Division North (Teachers) constituency.  West Bengal (Teachers) constituency.  
Darjeeling (Local Authorities) constituency.  West Bengal North (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  
West Bengal North (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  West Bengal North (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  
Nadia -Murshidabad (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  West Bengal East (Local Authorities) constituency.  
Calcutta -24-Parganas (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  West Bengal South (Local Autho rities) 
constituency.  
Hoogly -Howrah (Local Authorities) constituency.  West Bengal Central (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  
Burdwan Division North (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  West Bengal West (Local Authorities) 
constituency.  
(4) As soon as may be after such commencement, el ections shall be held to fill — 
(a) the additional seats allotted to the several council constituencies by the said Ord er as modified 
by this Act; and  
(b) the additional seats to be filled by persons referred to in  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), 
as if those seats had become vacant.  
(5) In order that, as nearly as may be, one -third of the members of the said Council may retire on the 
4th June, 1958, and on the expiration of every second year thereafter the Governor of West Bengal shall, 
after consultation with the Election Commission, make by order such provisions as he thinks fit in regard 
to the terms of office of the members  elected under sub -section ( 4). 
12.[Amendment of Act 43 of 1950 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and  Amending Act,  1960 (58 of 1960),  
s. 2 and First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
13.[Amendment of Act 43 of 1951] .—Rep. by s.  2 and First Schedule, ibid . (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
  11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 4 ( 2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  
(BIHAR ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table, — 
(a) in the third column relating to graduates ‟ constituencies ‟ for the figures “2”, “2”, “1” and “1”, 
the figures “3”, “2”, “2” and “1” shall respectively be substituted;  
(b) in the third column relating to teachers ‟ constituencies, for the figures “1”, “1”, “2”, and “2”, 
the figures “2”, “1”, “3” and “2” shall respectively be substituted ; 
(c) in the third column relating to local authorities ‟ constituencies, for the figures “6”, “6”, “6” 
and “6”, the figures “8”, “8”, “9” and “9” shall respectively be substituted.  
________________  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 5 ( 2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONS TITUENCIES  
(BOMBAY ) ORDER , 1951  
For the Table appended to the said Order, the following Table  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“TABLE  
Name of constituency  Extent of constituency  No. of 
seats  
Graduates ’ Constituencies  
Greater Bombay (Gra duates ) Greater Bombay.  2 
Gujarat (Graduates)  Kutch, Halar, Sorath, Gohilwad, Madhya Saurashtra, 
Zalawad, Amreli, Ahmedabad ,Mehsana, Banaskantha, 
Sabarkantha, Kaira, PanchMahals, Baroda, Bro ach and 
Surat districts .  2 
Maharashtra (Graduates)  Thana, Kolaba, Ratnagiri, Kolhapur, South Satara, North 
Satara, Sholapur, Poona, Ahmednagar, Nasik, Dangs , 
West Khandesh, East Khandesh, Aurangabad, Parbhani, 
Bhir, Osmanabad and Nanded districts . 2 
Vidarbha (Graduates)  Buldana,  Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, War dha, Nagpur, 
Bhandar a and Chanda districts .  3 
Teachers ’ Constituencies  
Gujarat (Teachers)  Kutch, Halar, Sorath, Goh ilwad, Madhya Saurashtra, 
Zalawad, Amreli, Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Banaskantha, 
Sabarkantha, Kaira, PanchMahals, Baroda, Broach and 
Surat districts . . .  2 
Greater Bombay -cum-
Maharashtra (Teachers).  Greate r Bombay, Thana, Kolaba, Ratna giri, Kolhapur, 
South Satara, North Satara, Sholapur, Poona, 
Ahmednagar, Nasik, Dangs, West Khandesh and East 
Khandesh districts . 4 
  12 
 Name of constituency  Extent of constituency  No. of 
seats  
Vidarbha (Teachers)  Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha , Nagpur, 
Bhandara, Chanda, Nanded, Osmanabad, Bhir, Pa rbhani 
and Aurangabad districts .  3 
Local Authorities’ Constituencies  
Saurashtra (Local Authorities).  Halar, Sorath, Gohilwad, Madhya Saurashtr a, Zalawad 
and Amreli districts.  5 
Gujarat North ( LocalAuthorities ) Ahmedabad, Mehsana, Banaskantha, Sabarkantha and 
Kutch districts . 4 
Gujarat South  (Local Authorities)  Surat, Broach, Baroda, Kai ra and PanchMahals districts.  5 
Greater Bombay -cum- 
Mahar ashtra West (Local 
Authorities)  Greater Bombay, Thana, Kolaba, Ra tnagiri and Kolhapur 
districts.  4 
Mahara shtra South (Local 
Authorities)  Poona; North Satara, South Satara and Sholapur districts.  5 
Mahara shtra North (Local 
Authorities)  Ahmednagar, Nasik, Dangs, West Khand esh and East 
Khandesh districts.  5 
Vidarbha (Local Authorities)  Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal , Wardha, Nagpur, 
Bhandara and Chanda districts . 5 
Marathwada (Local Authorities)  Aurangabad, Bhir, Parbhani, Nanded and Osmanabad 
districts.  3 
________________  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[Seesection 7 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONSIN THE  DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONS TITUENCIES  (MADRAS ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table, — 
(a) in the third column relating to the teachers ‟ constituency, for the figure “4”, the figure “6” 
shall be substituted;  
(b) in the third column relating to the local authorities ‟ constituencies, for the figures “4”, “4”, 
“4” and “4”, the figures “5”, “5”, “6” and “5” shall respectively be  substituted.  
 
  13 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 8 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONSIN THE  DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  (MYSORE ) ORDER , 1951  
For the Table appended to the said Order, the following Table shall be substituted, namely: — 
“TABLE  
Name of constituency  Extent of constituency  No. of 
seats  
Graduates’ Constituencies  
Mysore North (Graduates)  Bidar, Gulbarga, Raichur, Dharwar, Bijapur, Belgaum, 
North Kanara and Bellary districts .  2 
Mysore South (Graduates)  Chitaldrug, Tumkur, Mandya, Mysore, Hassan, 
Chikmagalur, Shimoga, Bangalore, Kolar, South Kanara 
and Coorg districts . 4 
Teachers ’ Constituencies  
Mysore North (Teachers)  Bidar, Gulbarga, Raichur, Dharwar, Bijapur, Belgaum, 
North Kanara, Bellary districts .  2 
Mysore South (Teachers)  Chitaldrug, Tumkur, Mandya, Mysore, Hassan, 
Chikmagalur, Shimoga, Bangalore, Kolar, South Kana ra 
and Coorgdistricts .  4 
Local Authorities ’ Constituencies  
Mysore North West 
(LocalAuthorities).  Belgaum, North Kanara, Dha rwar and Bijapur districts . 6 
Mysore North East 
(LocalAuthorities ). Bidar, Gulbarga, Raichur and Bellary districts.  3 
Mysore South West  
(LocalAuthorities).  Chitaldrug, South Kanara, Shimoga  and 
Chikmagalur districts .  4 
Mysore South 
(LocalAuthorities).  Hassan, Mandya, Coor g and Mysore districts.  4 
Mysore South East 
(LocalAuthorities).  Tumkur, Bangalore and Kolar districts.  4”. 
_________ ____  
THE FIFTH S CHEDULE  
[See section 9 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  (PUNJAB ) ORDER , 1951  
In the Table, — 
(a) in the third column relating to graduates ‟ constituency, for the figure “3”, the figure “4” shall 
be substituted;  
(b) in the third column relating to teachers ‟ constituency, for the figure “3”, the figure “4” shall 
be substituted;  14 
 (c) for the entries under the heading “Local Authorities ‟ Constituencies ”, the following entries 
shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Punjab No rth (Local Authorities).  Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Kangra, Hoshiarpur, 
Kapurthala, Jullundur, Ludhiana a nd Ferozepur 
districts.  8 
Punjab Central (LocalAuthorities).  Patiala, Bhatinda and Sangrur districts . 3 
Punjab South (LocalAuthorities).  Simla, Ambala, Karnal, Rohtak, Gurgaon, 
Mohindergarh  and Hissar districts.  6”. 
_________  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 10 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENC IES (UTTAR  PRADESH ) ORDER , 1951  
For the Table appended to the Order, the following Table shall be substituted, namely: — 
“TABLE  
Name of constituency  Extent of constituency  No. of seats  
Graduates’ Constituencies  
Uttar Pradesh West (Graduates)  Meerut, Agra, Jhansi and Allahabad Divisions  5 
Uttar Pradesh East (Graduates)  Kumaon, Rohilkhand, Lucknow, Faizabad, 
Gorakhpu r and Varanasi Divisions.  4 
Teachers' Constituencies  
Uttar Pradesh West (Teachers)  Meerut, Agra, Jhansi and Allahabad Divisions . 4 
Uttar Pradesh East (Teachers)  Kumaon, Rohilkhand, Lucknow, Faizabad, 
Gorakhpur and Varanasi Divisions . 5 
Local Authorities ’ Constituencies  
Meerut (Local Authorities)  Meerut Division  6 
Agra (Local Authorities)  Agra Division  5 
Allahabad (Local Autho rities)  Allahabad and Jhansi Divisions  6 
Varanasi (Local Authorities)  Vara nasi and Gorakhpur Divisions  6 
Lucknow (Local Autho rities)  Lucknow and Faizabad Divisions  8 
RohilkhandLocal Autho rities).  Rohilkhand and Kumaon Divisions  8”. 
 
  15 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 11 (2)] 
MODIFICATIONS IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUE NCIES  (WEST BENGAL ) ORDER , 1951  
For the Table appended to the said Order, the following Table shall be substituted, namely: — 
“TABLE  
Name of constituency  Extent of constituency  No. of seats  
Graduates’ Constituencies  
Calcutta (Graduates)  Calcutta as defined in clause ( 11) of section 5 of the 
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 (West Bengal Act 
XXXIII of 1951), together with the Fort William, and 
that part of Hastings North of the South edge of Clyde 
Row and St rand Road to the  river bank.  3 
West Bengal (Graduates)  Burdwan Division; and Presidency Division [excluding 
Calcutta as defined in clause ( 11) of section 5 of the 
Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 (West Bengal Act 
XXXIII of 1951), together with the Fort William, and 
the part of Hastings North of the South edge of Clyde 
Row and Stra nd Road to the river bank].  3 
Teachers ’ Constituencies  
Calcutta (Teachers)  24-Parganas district; and Calcutta as defined in clause 
(11) of section 5 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 
(West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1951), together with the 
Fort William, and that part of Hastings North of the 
South edge of Clyde Row an d Strand Road to the river 
bank . 3 
West Bengal (Teachers)  Burdwan  Division; and Presidency Division [excluding 
24-Parganas district and Calcutta as defined in clause 
(11) of section 5 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 
(West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1951), together with the 
Fort William and that part of Hastings North of the 
South edge of Clyde Row and Strand Road to the river 
bank] . 3 
Local Authorities’ Constituencies  
West Bengal North 
(LocalAuthorities).  Darjeeling, Jalpaiguri and Cooch -Behar district s 3 
West Bengal East 
(LocalAuthorities ). West Dinajpur, Malda, Murshidabad and Nadia districts.  5 
West Bengal West 
(LocalAuthorities ). Burdwan Division (excluding Howrah and Hooghly 
districts).  7 
West Bengal 
Central(Local 
Authorities).  Howrah and Hooghly districts .  5 
West Bengal South 
LocalAuthorities ). 24-Parganas districts; and Calcutta asdefined in clause 
(11) of section 5 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 
(West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1951), together with the 
Fort William and that part of Hastings North of the 
South edge of Clyde Row a nd Strand Road to  the river 
bank.  7” 
 
--------------------------The Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1956--------------------------
1 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1957  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. Validation of orders passed before commencement of Act altering remuneration, etc.  
7. [Repealed .] 
 
  2 THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1957  
[6th June , 1957.]  
An Act to amend the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short  title.—This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Act, 1956.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Validation of orders passed before commencement of Act altering remuneration, etc. —Any 
order altering the remuneration and the other terms and conditions of service of the employees referred to 
in sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of the principal Act made or purporting to have been made under that sub -
section before the commencement of this Act by the Central Government for any of the purposes 
speci fied in that sub -section as amended by this Act, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, be deemed to have been made under that sub -section as amended 
by this Act as if this Act were in force on the date on and from which the order was intended to take 
effect, and the order shall continue in force and have effect accordingly, unless and until superseded by 
anything done or action taken under the principal Act.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 5 rep. by Act 58 of 196 0, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 2 6-12-1960). 
2. Section  7 rep. by  s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 2 6-12-1960). 
--------------------------The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)  ACT, 19 57 
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency  of Union Control . 
3. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL RESTRICTIONS O N UNDERTAKING PROSPECTING AND MINING OPERATIONS  
4. Prospecting or mining operations to be under licence or lease . 
4A. Termination of prospecting licences or mining leases . 
5. Restrictions on the grant of prospecting licences or mining leases . 
6. Maximum area for which a prospecting licence or mining lease may be granted . 
7. Periods for which prospecting licences may be granted or renewed . 
8. Periods for which mining leases may be granted or renewed . 
8A. Period of grant of a mining lease for minerals other than coal, lignite and atomic minerals . 
9. Royalties in respect of mining leases . 
9A. Dead rent to be paid by the lessee . 
9B. District Mineral Foundation . 
9C. National Mineral Exploration Trust . 
CHAPTER  III 
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING, PROSPECTING LICENCES OR MINING LEASES IN RESPECT  
OF LAND IN WHICH THE MINERALS VEST IN THE GOVERNMENT  
10. Application for prospecting licence s or mining lease s. 
10A. Rights of existing concession holders and applicants . 
10B. Grant of mining lease in respect of notified minerals through auction . 
10C. Grant of non -exclusive reconnaissance permits . 
11. Grant of prospecting licence -cum-mining lease through auction in respect of minerals other than 
notified minerals . 
11A. Procedure in respect of coal or lignite . 
11B. P ower of Central Government to make rules for regulating atomic minerals specified under 
Part B of First Schedule . 
11C. Power of Central Government to amend First Schedule and Fourth Schedule . 
12. Registers of prospecting licences and mining leases . 
12A. Transfer of mineral concessions . 
  2 
 CHAPTER  IV 
RULES FOR  REGULATING THE GRANT OF PROSPECTING LICENCES AND MINING LEASES  
SECTIONS  
13. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of minerals . 
13A. Power of Centr al Government to make rules for grant of p rospecting licences or mining l eases 
in respect of territorial waters or continental shelf of India . 
14. [Sections 5 to 13] not to apply to minor minerals . 
15. Power of State Governments to make rules in respect of minor minerals . 
15A. Power of State Government to  collect funds for District Mineral Foundation in case of minor 
minerals . 
16. Power to modify mining leases granted before 25th October, 1949 . 
CHAPTER  V 
SPECIAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO UNDERTAKE  PROSPECTING O R  
MINING OPERATIONS IN CERTAIN CASES  
17. Special powers of Central Government to undertake prospecting or mining operations in certain 
lands . 
17A. Reservation of area s for purposes of conservation . 
 
CHAPTER  VI 
DEVELOPMENT OF MINERALS  
18. Mineral development.  
18A. Power to authorise  Geological Survey of India, etc., to make investigation . 
 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Prospecting licences and mining leases to be void if in contraven tion of Act. 
20. Act and rules to apply to all renewals of prospecting licences and mining leases . 
20A. Power of Central Government to issue directions . 
21. Penalties . 
22. Cognizance of offences . 
23. Offences by companies . 
23A. Compounding of offences . 
23B. Power to search . 
23C. Power of State Government to make rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and 
storage of minerals . 
24. Power of entry and inspection . 
24A. Rights and liabilities of a holder of prospecting licence or mining lease . 
25. Recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue . 
26. Delegation of powers . 
27. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
28. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament and certain rules to be approved by 
Parliament . 
29. Existing rules to continue . 
30. Power of revision by Central Government . 
30A. Special provisions relating to mining leases for coal granted before 25th October, 1949 . 
  3 
 SECTIONS  
30B. Constitution of Special Courts . 
30C. Special Courts to have powers of Court of Session . 
31. Relaxation of rules in special cases . 
32. [Repealed ]. 
33. Validation of certain acts and indemnity . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
  4 
 THE MINES AND MINERALS ( DEVELOPMENT  AND REGULATION ) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 67 OF 1957  
[28th December , 1957. ]  
An Act to provide for the 1[development and regulation of mines and minerals] under the 
control of the Union.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals 
2[(Development and Regulation )] Act, 1957.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as t o expe diency of Union Control .―It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the 
public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development 
of minerals to the extent hereinafter provided.  
3. Definitions .―In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, ― 
4[(a) “leased area” means the area  specified in the mining lease within which mining operations 
can be undertaken and includes the non -mineralised area required and approved for the activities 
falling under the definition of mine as referred to in clause  (i); 
(aa) “minerals” includes all m inerals except mineral oils; ] 
 (b) “mineral oils ” includes natural gas and petroleum;  
(c) “mining lease ” means a lease granted for the purpose of undertaking mining operations, and 
includes a sub -lease granted for such purpose;  
(d) “mining operations ” means any operations undertaken for the purpose of winning any 
mineral;  
(e) “minor minerals ” means building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand 
used for prescribed purposes, and any other mineral which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a mino r mineral;  
5[(ea) “notified minerals ” means any mineral specified in the Fourth Schedule;]  
(f)”prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “prospecting licence ” means a licence  granted for the purpose of und ertaking prospecting 
operations;  
4[(ga) “prospecting licence -cum-mining lease” means a two stage concession granted for the 
purpose of undertaking prospecting operations followed by mining operations;]  
(h) “prospecting  operations ” means any operations undertaken for the purpose of exploring, 
locating o r proving mineral deposit ; 6***  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 2, for “ regulation of mines and the development of minerals” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “(Regulation and Development)” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. 1st June, 1958, vide notification No. G.S.R. 432, dated 29th May, 1958, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 2016 , s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
6. The word “and” omitted by  Act 38 of 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  5 
 1[(ha) “reconnaissance operations ” means any operations undertaken for preliminary prospecting 
of a mineral through regional, aerial, geophysical or geochemical surveys and geological mapping, 
but does not include pitting, trenching, drilling (except drilling of boreholes on a grid specifi ed from 
time to time by the Central Government) or sub -surface excavation;  
(hb) “reconnaissance permit ” means a permit granted for the purpose of undertaking 
reconnaissance operations;  2***] 
3[(hc) “Special Court” means a Court of Session designated as Special Court under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 30B; and]  
(i) the expressions, “mine ” and “owner ”, have the meaning assigned to them in the Mines Act, 
1952  (35 of 1952) . 
CHAPTER  II 
GENERAL RESTRICTIONS O N UNDERTAKING PROSPECTING AND MINING OPERATIONS  
4. Prospecting or mining operation s to be under licence or lease .―(1) 4[No person shall 
undertake any reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations in any area, except under and in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of a reconnaissance permit or of a prospecting licence or, as 
the case may be, of a mining lease, gran ted under this Act and the rules made thereunder]:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall affect any prospecting or mining operat ions 
undertaken in any area in accordance with terms and conditions of a prospecting licence or mining lease 
grant ed before the commencement of this Act which is  in force at such commencement:  
 5[Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any prospecting operations 
undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, the Indian Bureau of Mines, 6[the Atomic  Minerals 
Directorate for Exploration and Research]  of the Department of Atomic Energy of the Central 
Government, the Directorates of Mining and Geology of any State Government (by whatever name 
called), and the Mineral Exploration Corporation Limited., a Government company within the meaning 
of 7[clause ( 45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), and any such entity that may be 
notified for this purpose by the Central Government ]:] 
8[Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall apply  to any mining lease (whether called 
mining lease mining concession or by any other name) in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act in the Union territory  of Goa , Daman and Diu.]  
9[(1A) No person shall transport or store or cause to be transported or stored any mineral otherwise 
than in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.]  
(2) 10[No reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease ] shall be granted otherwise than 
in accordance with the provi sions of thi s Act and the rules  made thereunder.  
 5[(3) Any State Government may, after prior consultation with the Central Government and in 
accordance with the rule made under section 18, 11[undertake reconnaissance, prospecting or mining 
operations with respect to any mineral specified in the First Schedule in any area within that State which 
is not already held under any reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease].]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. The word “and” omitted by Act 10 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
5. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 5, for “the Atomic Minerals Division” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 3, for “ section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
8. Ins. by Act 16 of 1987, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
9. Ins. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
10. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “No prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
11. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for c ertain words (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  6 
  1[4A.Termination of prospec ting licences or mining leases .―(1) Where the Central Government, 
after consultation with the State Government , is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of 
regulation of mines and mineral development, preservation of nat ural environment, control of floods, 
prevention of pollution, or to avoid danger to public health or communications or to ensure safety of 
buildings, monuments or other structures or for conservation of mineral resources or for maintaining 
safety in the mi nes or for such other purposes, as the Central Government may deem fit, it may request 
the State Government to make a premature termination of a prospecting licence or mining lease in 
respect of any mineral other than a minor mineral in any area or part th ereof, and, on receipt of such 
request, the State Government shall make an order making a premature termination of such prospecting 
licence or mining lease with respect to the area or any part thereof.  
(2) Where the State Government 2*** is of opinion that  it is expedient in the interest of regulation of 
mines and mineral development, preservation of natural environment, control of floods, prevention of 
pollution or to avoid danger to public health or communication s or to ensure safety of buildings, 
monumen ts or other structures or for such other purposes, as the State Government may deem fit, it may, 
by an order, in respect of any minor mineral, make premature termination of prospecting licence or 
mining lease with respect to the area or any part thereof co vered by such licence or lease.  
3[*   *   *  *   *] 
(3) No order making a premature termination of a prospecting licence or mining lease shall be, made 
except after giving the holder of the licence or lease a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(4) Where the holder of a mining lease fails to undertake mining operations for a period of 4[two 
years] after the date of execution of the lease or having commenced mining operations, has discontinued 
the same for a period of  4[two years], the lease shall lap se on the expiry of the period of  4[two years] 
from the date of execution of the lease or, as the case may be, disconti nuance of the mining operations:  
5[Provided that the State Government may, on an application made by the holder of such lease before 
it lapses and on being satisfied that it will not be possible for the holder of the lease to undertake mining 
operations or to continue such operations for reasons beyond his control, make an order, within a period 
of three months from the date of receiving o f such application, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed, to the effect that such lease shall not lapse:  
Provided further that such lease shall lapse on failure to undertake mining operations or inability to 
continue the same before the end of a  period of six months from the date of the order of the State 
Government:  
Provided also that the State Government may, on an application made by the holder of a lease 
submitted within a period of six months from the date of its lapse and on being satisfied  that such non -
commencement or discontinuance was due to reasons beyond the control of the holder of the lease, 
revive the lease within a period of three months from the date of receiving the application from such 
prospective or retrospective date as it th inks fit but not earlier than the date of lapse of the lease:  
Provided also that no lease shall be revived under the third proviso for more than twice during the 
entire period of the lease.]]  
 6[5. Restrictions on the grant of prospec ting licences or minin g leases .―7[(1) A State 
Government shall not grant a 8[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease] to any person 
unless such person―  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 3, for section 4A (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
2. The words “, after consultation with the Central Government ,” omitted by Act 25 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
3. The p roviso omitted by Act 38 of 1999, s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 2, for “one year” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 4, for the provisos (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
6. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 4, for section 5 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
7. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 7, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  7 
 (a) is an Indian national, or company as defined in  1[clause ( 20) of section 2 of the Companies 
Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)]; and  
(b) satisfies such conditions as may be prescribed:  
2[Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule, 
no reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted except wit h the 
previous approval of the Central Government.]  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be deemed to be an Indian 
national, ― 
(a) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, only if all the members of the firm or 
members of the association are citizens of India; and  
(b) in the case of an individual, only if he is a citizen of India.]  
 (2) No mining lease shall be granted  by the State Governme nt unless it is satisfied that ― 
3[(a) there is evidence to show the existence of mineral contents in the area for which the 
application for a mining lease has been made in accordance with such parameters as may be 
prescribed for this purpose by the Central Government;]  
(b) there is  a mining plan duly approved by the Central Government, or by the State 
Government, in respect of such category of mines as may be specified by the Central Government, 
for the development of mineral deposits in the area concerned: ] 
4[Provided that a mining lease may be granted upon the filing of a mining plan in accordance 
with a system established by the State Government for preparation, certification, and monitoring of 
such plan, with the approval of the Central Government.]  
6. Maximum area for which a prospecting licence  or mining lease may be granted .―5[(1) No 
person shall acquire 6*** in respect of any mineral or prescribed group of associated minera ls 7[in a 
State]― 
(a) one or more prospecting licences  covering a total area of more than tw enty-five square 
kilometres; or  
7[(aa) one or more reconnaissance permit covering a total area  of ten thousand square 
kilometre s: 
Provided that the area granted under a single reconnaissance permit shall not exceed five 
thousand square kilometers; or]  
(b) one or more mining leases covering a total area of m ore than ten square kilometres:  
8[Provided that if the Central Government is of the opinion that in the interest of the 
development of any mineral or industry, it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, increase the aforesaid area limits in respect of prospec ting licence or mining lease, in so far 
as it pertains to any particular mineral, or to any specified category of deposits of such mineral, or to 
any particular mineral located in any particular area.]]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 5, for “sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ” (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e .f. 12 -9-1972).  
6. The word s “in any one State” omitted by Act 37 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
7. Ins. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 8 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 6, for the proviso (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  8 
 1[(c) any reconnaissance permit, mining lease or pr ospecting licence in respect of any area which 
is not compact or contiguous:  
Provided that if the State Government is of opinion that in the interests of the development 
of any mineral, it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writin g, permit any 
person to acquire a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in relation to any 
area which is not compact or contiguous.]  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person acquiring by, or in the name of, another person a 
2[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease ] which is intended for himself shall be 
deemed to be acquiring it himself.  
3[(3) For the purposes of determining the total area referred to in sub -section ( 1), the area held under 
a 2[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease] by a person as a member of a co -
operative society, company or other corporation or a Hindu undivided family or a partner of a firm, shall 
be deducted from the area referred to in sub -section ( 1) so that the sum total of the area held by such 
person, under a  2[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease], whether as such member 
or partner, or individually, may not, in any case, exceed the total area specified in sub -section ( 1).] 
4[7. Periods for which prospecting licences may be granted or renewed .―(1) The period for 
which 5[a reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence] may be granted shall not exceed three years.  
(2) A prospecting licence  shall, if the State Government is satisfied that a longer period is required to 
enable the licensee to complete prospecting operations be renewed for such period or periods as that 
Government may specify:  
Provided that the total period for which a prospec ting licence is granted does not exceed five years:  
Provided further that no prospecting licence granted in respect of 6[a mineral included in Part A and 
Part B to] the First Schedule shall be renewed except with the previous approval of the Central 
Govern ment.]  
7[8. Periods for which mining leases may be granted or renewed .―(1) The provisions of this 
section shall apply to minerals specified in Part A of the First Schedule.  
(2) The maximum period for which a mining lease may be granted shall not exceed thirty years:  
Provided that the minimum period for which any such mining lease may be granted shall not be less 
than twenty years.  
(3) A mining lease may be renewed for a period not exceeding twenty years with the previous 
approval of the Central Governmen t.] 
8[8A. Period of grant of a mining lease for minerals other than coal, lignite and atomic 
minerals .―(1) The provisions of this section shall apply to minerals other than those specified in Part A 
and Part B of the First Schedule.  
(2) On and from the date of the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  (10 of 2015) , all mining leases shall be granted for the period of fifty 
years.  
(3) All mining leases granted before the commencement of the Mines and Miner als (Development 
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  (10 of 2015) shall be deemed to have been granted for a period 
of fifty years.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 8,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
5. Subs. by  Act 38 of 1999, s. 9, for “a prospecting licence” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “a mineral included in” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 7, for section 8 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  9 
 (4) On the expiry of the lease period, the lease shall be put up for auction as per the procedure 
specified in this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 2), (3) and sub -section ( 4), the period of 
lease granted before the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  (10 of 2015) , where mineral is used for  captive purpose, shall be 
extended and be deemed to have been extended up to a period ending on the 31st March, 2030 with 
effect from the date of expiry of the period of renewal last made or till the completion of renewal period, 
if any, or a period of fi fty years from the date of grant of such lease, whichever is later, subject to the 
condition that all the terms and conditions of the lease have been complied with.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 2), (3) and sub -section ( 4), the pe riod of 
lease granted before the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  (10 of 2015) , where mineral is used for other than captive purpose, 
shall be extended and be deemed to have been extended up to  a period ending on the 31st March, 2020 
with effect from the date of expiry of the period of renewal last made or till the completion of renewal 
period, if any, or a period of fifty years from the date of grant of such lease, whichever is later, subject t o 
the condition that all the terms and conditions of the lease have been complied with.  
(7) Any holder of a lease granted, where mineral is used for captive purpose, shall have the right of 
first refusal at the time of auction held for such lease after the  expiry of the lease period.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the period of mining leases, including 
existing mining leases, of Government companies or corporations shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
(9) The provisions of this section, notwithstanding anything contained therein, shall not apply to a 
mining lease granted before the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015  (10 of 2015) , for which renewal  has been rejected, or which has been 
determined, or lapsed.]  
 9. Royalti es in respect of mining leases .―(1) The holder of a mining lease granted before the  
commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of lease or in  any 
law in force at such commencement,  pay royalty in respect of any 1[mineral removed or consumed by 
him or by his agent , manager, employee, contractor or sub -lessee] from the leased area after such 
commencement, at the rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule in respect of that mineral.  
(2) The holder of a mining lease g ranted on or after the commence ment of this Act shall pay royalty 
in respect of any 1[mineral remove d or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee, contractor 
or sub-lessee] from the leased area at the rate for the time being specified in the Second Schedule in 
respect of that mineral.  
2[(2A) The holder of a mining lease, whether granted before or after the commencement of the Mines 
and Minerals (Regulation and D evelopment) Amendment Act, 1972 (56 of 1972 ) shall not be liable to 
pay any royalty in respect of any coal consumed by a workman engaged in a colliery provided that such 
consumption by the workman does not exceed o ne-third of a tonne per month.]  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral 
with effect from such date as may be  specified in the notification:  
3[Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any 
mineral mo re than once dur ing any period of 4[three years ].]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 4, for “mineral removed by him” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 8, for “four years” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987 ). 10 
 1[9A. Dead rent to be paid by the lessee .―(1) The holder of a mining lease, whether granted 
before  or after the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 1972, shall notwithstanding anything contained in the instrument of lease or in any 
other law for the lime being in force, pay to the State Government, every y ear, dead rent at such rate, as 
may be specified, for the time being, in the Third Schedule, for all the areas included in the instrument of 
lease:  
Provided that where the holder of such mining lease becomes liable, under section 9, to pay royalty 
for any mineral removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager , employee, contractor or sub -
lessee from the leased area, he shall be liable to pay either such royalty, or the dead rent in respect of that 
area, whichever is greater.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Third Schedule 
so as to enhance or reduce the rate at which the dead rent shall be payable in respect of any area covered 
by a mining lease and such enhancement or reduction shall take effect from suc h date as may be 
specified in the notification:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate of the dead rent in respect of any 
such area more than once during any period of  2[three years].]  
3[9B. District Mineral Foundation .―(1) In any  district affected by mining related operations, the 
State Government shall, by notification, establish a trust, as a non -profit body, to be called the District 
Mineral Foundation.  
(2) The object of the District Mineral Foundation shall be to work for the interest and benefit of 
persons, and areas affected by mining related operations in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
(3) The composition and functions of the District Mineral Foundation shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Sta te Government.  
(4) The State Government while making rules under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall be guided by the 
provisions contained in article 244 read with Fifth and Sixth Schedules to the Constitution relating to 
administration of the Scheduled Areas a nd Tribal Areas and the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension 
to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (40 of 1996) and the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007).  
(5) The holder of a mining l ease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease granted on or after the 
date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2015, shall, in addition to the royalty, pay to the District Mineral Foundation of the distric t in which the 
mining operations are carried on, an amount which is equivalent to such percentage of the royalty paid in 
terms of the Second Schedule, not exceeding one -third of such royalty, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(6) The holder o f a mining lease granted before the date of commencement of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall, in addition to the royalty, pay to 
the District Mineral Foundation of the district in which the mining operations ar e carried on, an amount 
not exceeding the royalty paid in terms of the Second Schedule in such manner and subject to the 
categorisation of the mining leases and the amounts payable by the various categories of lease holders, as 
may be prescribed by the Cen tral Government . 
9C. National Mineral Exploration Trust .―(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish a Trust, as a non -profit body, to be called the National Mineral Exploration Trust.  
(2) The object of the Trust shall be to use the funds accrued to the Trust for the purposes of regional 
and detailed exploration in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 5 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 9, for “four years” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 9 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  11 
 (3) The composition and functions of the Trust shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) The holder of a mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease shall pay to the Trust, a 
sum equivalent to two per cent. of the royalty paid in terms of the Second Schedule, in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.]  
CHAPTER  III 
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING, PROSPECTING LICENCES OR MINING LEASES, IN RESPECT OF LAND IN WHICH 
THE MINERALS VEST IN THE GOVERNMENT  
10. Application for prospecting licence s or mining lease s.―(1) An application for  1[a 
reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease] in respect of any land in which the minerals 
vest in the Government shall be made to the State Government concerned in the prescribed form and 
shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee.  
(2) Where an application is received under sub -section (1), there shall be sent to the applicant an 
acknowledgment of its receipt within the prescribed time and in the prescribed form.  
(3) On receipt of an application under this section, the State Government may, having regard to the 
provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder, grant or refuse to grant the  2[permit, licence or 
lease].  
3[10A. Rights of existing conc ession holders and applicants .―(1) All applications received prior 
to the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and  Regulation) Amendment 
Act, 2015, shall become ineligible.  
(2) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), the following shall remain eligible on and from the date of 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Re gulation) Amendment Act, 2015: ― 
(a) applications received under section 11A of this Act;  
(b) where before the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment Act, 2015 a reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence has been granted in respect of 
any land for any  mineral, the permit holder or the licensee shall have a right for obtaining a 
prospecting licence followed by a mining lease, or a mining lease, as the case may be, in respect of 
that mineral in that land, if the State Government is satisfied that the per mit holder or the lic ensee, as 
the case may be, ― 
(i) has undertaken reconnaissance operations or prospecting operations, as the case may be, 
to establish the existence of mineral contents in such land in accordance with such parameters as 
may be prescribed  by the Central Government;  
(ii) has not committed any breach of the terms and conditions of the reconnaissance permit 
or the prospecting licence;  
(iii) has not become ineligible under the provisions of this Act; and  
(iv) has not failed to apply for grant of prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may 
be, within a period of three months after the expiry of reconnaissance permit or prospecting 
licence, as the case may be, or within such further period not exceeding six months as may be 
extended by t he State Government;  
(c) where the Central Government has communicated previous approval as required under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 for grant of a mining lease, or if a letter of intent (by whatever name 
called) has been issued by the State Government  to grant a mining lease, before the commencement 
of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, the mining lease 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 11, for “a prospecting licence or a mining leas e” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “licence or lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 10 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  12 
 shall be granted subject to fulfil ment of the conditions of the previous approval or of the letter of 
intent with in a period of two years from the date of commencement of the said Act:  
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in the First Schedule, no prospecting 
licence or mining lease shall be granted under clause ( b) of this subsection except with the 
previous approval of the  Central Government.  
10B. Grant of mining lease in respect of noti fied minerals through auction. ―(1) The provisions 
of this section shall not be applicable to cases covered by section 10A or section 17A or to minerals 
specified in Part  A or Part B of the First Schedule or to land in respect of which the minerals do not vest 
in the Government.  
(2) Where there is inadequate evidence to show the existence of mineral contents of any notified 
mineral in respect of any area, a State Governmen t may, after obtaining the previous approval of the 
Central Government, grant a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease for the said notified mineral in such 
area in accordance with the procedure laid down in section 11.  
(3) In areas where the existence of mineral contents of any notified mineral is established in the 
manner prescribed by the Central Government, the State Government shall notify such areas for grant of 
mining leases for such notified mineral, the terms and conditions subject to which such mi ning leases 
shall be granted, and any other relevant conditions, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) For the purpose of granting a mining lease in respect of any notified mineral in such notified 
area, the State Government sh all select, through auction by a method of competitive bidding, including 
e-auction, an applicant who fulfils the eligibility conditions as specified in this Act.  
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe the terms and conditions, and procedure, subject t o 
which the auction shall be conducted, including the bidding parameters for the selection, which may 
include a share in the production of the mineral, or any payment linked to the royalty payable, or any 
other relevant parameter, or any combination or mod ification of them.  
(6) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 5), the Central Government shall, if it is of the 
opinion that it is necessary and expedient to do so, prescribe terms and conditions, procedure and 
bidding parameters in respect of  categories of minerals, size and area of mineral deposits and a State or 
States, subject to which the auction shall be conducted:  
Provided that the terms and conditions may include the reservation of any particular mine or mines 
for a particular end -use a nd subject to such condition which allow only such eligible end users to 
participate in the auction.  
(7) The State Government shall grant a mining lease to an applicant selected in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in this section in respect of such notified mineral in any notified area.  
10C. Grant of non -exclusive reconnaissance permits .―(1) Non -exclusive reconnaissance permits 
may be granted in respect of any notified mineral or non -notified mineral or a group of specified 
minerals, other than minerals specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule, subject to such terms 
and conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The holder of such non -exclusive reconnaissance permit shall not be entitled to make any claim 
for the gr ant of any prospecting licence -cum-mining lease or a mining lease.]  
1[11. Grant of prospecting licence -cum-mining lease through auction in respect of minerals  
other than notified minerals .―(1) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to cases  
covered by section 10A or section 17A or to minerals specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule 
or to land in respect of which minerals do not vest in the Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 11, for section 11 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  13 
 (2) In areas where there is evidence to show the existence of mineral contents as required by  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5, the State Government shall grant a mining lease for minerals 
other than notified minerals following the procedure laid down in section 10B.  
(3) In areas where there is inadequate evidence to show the existence of mineral contents as required 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5, the State Government shall grant a prospecting licence -
cum-mining lease for minerals other than notified minerals in accordance with the procedure laid down 
in this section.  
(4) The State Government shall notify the areas in which prospecting licence -cum-mining leases 
shall be granted for any minerals other than notified minerals, the terms and conditions subject to which 
such prospecting licence -cum-mining lease s shall be granted, and any other relevant conditions, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(5) For the purpose of granting prospecting licence -cum-mining leases, the State Government shall 
select, through auction by method of com petitive bidding, including e -auction, an applicant who fulfils 
the eligibility conditions as specified in this Act.  
(6) The Central Government shall prescribe the terms and conditions, and procedure, subject to 
which the auction shall be conducted, includ ing the bidding parameters for the selection, which may 
include a share in the production of the mineral, or any payment linked to the royalty payable, or any 
other relevant parameter, or any combination or modification of them.  
(7) Without prejudice to th e generality of sub -section ( 6), the Central Government shall, if it is of the 
opinion that it is necessary and expedient to do so, prescribe terms and conditions, procedure and 
bidding parameters in respect of categories of minerals, size and area of mine ral deposits and a State or 
States, subject to which the auction shall be conducted.  
(8) The State Government shall grant a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease to an applicant 
selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in this section.  
(9) The ho lder of a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease shall be required to complete, within the 
period laid down in section 7, the prospecting operations satisfactorily as specified in the notice inviting 
applications.  
(10) A holder of a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, who completes the prospecting operation 
as laid down in sub -section ( 9) and establishes the existence of mineral contents in the area in conformity 
with such parameters as may be prescribed for this purpose by the Central Government, sha ll be required 
to apply for a mining lease for such area and shall have the right to get the mining lease and thereafter 
undertake mining operations in accordance with the provisions of this Act.]  
1[11A.  Procedure in respect of coal or lignite .―The Central  Government may, for the purpose of 
granting reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of an area containing coal 
or lignite, select, through auction by competitive bidding on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed, a co mpany engaged in, ― 
(i) production of iron and steel;  
(ii) generation of power;  
(iii) washing of coal obtained from a mine; or  
(iv) such other end use as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify,  
and the State Government shall grant such reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in 
respect of coal or lignite to such company as selected through auction by competitive bidding under this 
section:  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f.  13-2-2012 ). 14 
 Provided that the auction by competitiv e bidding shall not be applicable to an ar ea containing coal or 
lignite, ― 
(a) where such area is considered for allocation to a Government company or corporation for 
mining or such other specified end use;  
(b) where  such area is considered for allocation to a company or corporation that has been 
awarded a power project on the basis of competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power 
Projects).  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “company ” means a company as defined in section 3 
of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) and includes a foreign company within the meani ng of section 
591 of that Act.]  
1[11B. Power of Central Government to make rules for regulating atomic minerals specified 
under P art B of First Schedule .―The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for regulating the grant of mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minerals 
specified in Part B of the First Schedule and for purpose s connected therewith, and the State Government 
shall grant a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any such mineral in 
accordance with such rules.  
11C. Power of Central Government to amend First Schedule and Fourth Sched ule.―The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First Schedule and the 
Fourth Schedule so as to add or delete any mineral as may be specified in the notification.]  
12. Registers of prospect ing licences and mining leases .―(1) The State Government shall cause to 
be mai ntained in the prescribed form ― 
(a) a register of applications for prospecting licences;  
(b) a register of prospecting license es; 
2[(c) a register of applications for mining leases;  
(d) a register of mining le ssees; 
(e) a register of applications for reconnaissance permits; and  
(f) a register of reconnaissance permits,]  
in each of which shall be entered such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every such register shall be open to inspection by any person on payment of such fee as the State 
Government may fix.  
3[12A. Tr ansfer of mineral concessions .―(1) The provisions of this section shall not apply to 
minerals specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule.  
(2) A holder of a mining lease or a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease granted in accordance with 
the procedure laid down in section 10B or section 11 may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, transfer his mining lease or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, as the case may be, in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to any person eligible to hold such 
mining lease or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease in accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
the rules made thereunder.  
(3) If the State Government does not convey its previous approval for transfer of such mining lease 
or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, as the case may be, within a period of ninety days from the 
date of receiving such notice, it shall be construed that the State Government has no objection to such 
transfer:   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 12 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 13, for clauses ( c) and ( d) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 13 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  15 
 Provided that the holder of the original mining lease or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease shall 
intimate to the State Government the consideration payable by the successor -in-interest for the transfer, 
including the consideration in respect of the prospecting operations already undertaken and the reports 
and data generated during the operations.  
(4) No such transfer of a mining lease or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, referred  to in  
sub-section ( 2), shall take place if the State Government, within the notice period and for reasons to be 
communicated in writing, disapproves the transfer on the ground that the transferee is not eligible as per 
the provisions of this Act:  
Provide d that no such transfer of a mining lease or of a prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, shall 
be made in contravention of any condition subject to which the mining lease or the prospecting licence -
cum-mining lease was granted.  
(5) All transfers effected  under this section shall be subject to the condition that the transferee has 
accepted all the conditions and liabilities under any law for the time being in force which the transferor 
was subject to in respect of such a mining lease or prospecting licence -cum-mining lease, as the case 
may be.  
(6) The transfer of mineral concessions shall be allowed only for concessions which are granted 
through auction.]  
1[Provided that where a mining lease has been granted o therwise than through auction and  where 
mineral from such mining lease is being used for captive purpose, such mining lease may be permitted to 
be transferred subject to compliance of such terms and conditions and payment of such amount or 
transfer charges as may be prescribed.  
Explanatio n.―For the purposes of this proviso, the expression “used for captive purpose” shall 
mean the use of the entire quantity of mineral extracted from the mining lease in a manufacturing unit 
owned by the lessee.]  
CHAPTER  IV 
RULES FOR REGULATING THE ( GRANT OF PROSPECTING LICENCES AND MINING LEASES  
13. Power of Central Government to make rules in respect of minerals .―(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for regulating the grant 
of 2[reconnaissance permits, prospecting licences and mining leases] in respect of minerals and for 
purposes connected therewith.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he fo llowing matters, namely: ― 
(a) the person by whom, and the manner in which, applications for  3[reconnaissance permits, 
prospecting  licences or mining leases] in respect of land in which the minerals vest in the 
Government may be made  and the fees to be paid  therefor ; 
(b) the time within which, and the form in which, acknowledgement of the receipt of any such 
application may  be sent;  
(c) the matters which may be considered where applications in respect of the same land are 
received on the  same day;  
4[(d) the terms and conditions of auction by competitive bidding for selection of the company 
under section 11A;]  
 (e) the authority by which  2[reconnaissance permits, prospecting licences or mining leases] in 
respect of land  in which the minerals vest in the Gover nment may be granted;  
(f) the procedure for obtaining  5[a reconnaissance permit, a prospecting licence or a mining 
lease] in respect  of any land in which the minerals vest in a person other than the Government and 
the terms on which, and  the conditions sub ject to which, such  6[a permit, licence or lease] may be 
granted or renewed;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 14, for “prospecting licences and mining leases” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “prospecting licences or mining leases” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Ins.  by Act 34 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f.  13-2-2012) ). 
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 14, for “a prospecting licence or a mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
6. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “a licence or lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  16 
 (g) the terms on which, and the conditions subject to which, may other  1[reconnaissance permit, 
prospecting  licence or mining lease] may be granted or renewed;  
(h) the facilities to be afforded by holders of mining leases to persons deputed by the 
Government for the  purpose of undertaking research or training in matters relating to mining 
operations;  
2[(i) the fixing and collection of fees for  3[recona aissance permits, prospecting licences or 
mining leases]  surface rent, security deposit, fines, other fees or charges and the time within which 
and the manner in  which the dead rent or royalty shall be payable;]  
(j) the manner in which rights of third parties may be protected (whether by payment of 
compensation or  otherwise) in cases where any such party may be prejudicially affected by reason of 
any 4[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations];  
5[(jj) parameters of existence of mineral contents under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 
5;] 
(k) the grouping of associated minerals for the purposes of section 6;  
(l) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which,  6[a reconnaissance, permit, a 
prospecting  licence or a mining lease] may be transferred;  
(m) the construct ion, maintenance and use of roads, power transmission lines, tramways, 
railways, aerial  ropeways, pipelines and the making of passages for water for mining purposes on 
any land comprised in  a mining lease;  
(n) the form of registers to be maintained under t his Act;  
7*  *   *   *   * 
(p) the reports and statements to be submitted by holders of  8[reconnaissance permits or 
prospecting  licences] or owners of mines and the authority to which such reports and statements 
shall be submitted;  
(q) the period within which applications for revision of any order passed by a State Government 
or other  authority in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act, may be made  9[the fees to 
be paid  therefore and the documents which shall accompany such applications] and  the manner in 
which such  applications shall be disposed of;  and 
9[(qq) the manner in which rehabilitation of flora and other vegetation, such as trees, shrubs and 
the like destroyed by reason of any prospecting or mining operations shall be made in the same area 
or in any other area selected by the Central Government (whether by way of reimbursement of the 
cost of rehabilitation or otherwise) by the person holding the prospec ting licence or mining lease;] 
10*** 
11[(qqa) the amount of payment to be made to the District Mineral Foundation under  
sub-sections ( 5) and ( 6) of section 9B;  
(qqb) the manner of usage of funds accrued to the National Mineral Exploration Trust under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 9C;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 14, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f . 18-12-1999).  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 11, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 14, for “prospecting licences or mining leases” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “prospecting or mining operations” (w.e.f . 18-12-1999).  
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s.14, for “a prospecting licence or a mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
7. Omitted by Act 37 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 14, for “prospecting licences” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
9. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
10. The word “and” omitted by Act 10 of 2015, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
11. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  17 
 (qqc) the composition and functions of the National Mi neral Exploration Trust under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 9C;  
(qqd) the manner of payment of amount to the National Mineral Exploration Trust under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 9C;  
(qqe) the terms and conditions subject to which mining leases shall be granted under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 10B;  
(qqf) the terms and conditions, and procedure, subject to which the auction shall be conducted 
including the bidding parameters for the select ion under sub -section ( 5) of section 10B;  
(qqg) the time limits for various stages in processing applications for grant of mining lease or 
prospecting licence -cum-mining lease under sections 10B, 11, 11A, 11B, and section 17A, and their 
renewals;  
(qqh) the  terms and conditions for grant of non -exclusive reconnaissance permits under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 10C;  
(qqi) the terms and conditions for grant of prospecting licence -cum-mining leases under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 11;  
(qqj) the terms and conditions, and procedure, including the bidding parameters for the selection 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 11;  
1[(qqja) the terms and conditions and amount or transfer charges under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 6) of section 12A;]  
 (qqk) the amount to be payable by a Government company or corporation, or a joint venture for 
grant of mining lease under sub -section ( 2C) of section 17A; and]  
(r) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
2[13A. Power of Central Government to mak e rules for the grant of p rospecting licences or 
mining l eases in respect of territorial waters  or continental shelf of India .―(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the grant of prospecting licences 
or mining leases in respect of any minerals underlying the ocean within the territorial waters or the 
continental shelf of India.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the conditions, limitations and restrictions subject to which such prospecting licences o r 
mining leases may be granted;  
(b) regulation of exploration and exploitation of minerals within the territorial waters or the 
continental shelf of India ; 
(c) ensuring that such exploration or exploitation does no t interfere with navigation and  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
14. 3[Sections 5 to 13 ] not to apply to minor minerals .―The provisions of 3[section s 5 to 13] 
(inclusive) shall not apply to 4[quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions] in respect of 
minor minerals.  
15. Power of State Governments to make rule s in respect of minor minerals .―(1) The State 
Government may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, make rule s for, regulating the grant of 5[quarry 
leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions] in respect of minor minerals and fo r purposes 
connected therewith.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2016, s. 4 ( w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 6 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 12, for “sections 4 to 13” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
4. Subs. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 7, for “prospecting licences and mining leases” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
5. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “prospecting licence and mining leases” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  18 
 1[(1A) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the person by whom and the manner in which, applications for quarry leases, mining leases 
or other mineral concessions may be made and  the fees to be paid therefor ; 
(b) the time within which, and the form in which, acknowledgement of the receipt of any  such 
applications may be sent;  
(c) the matters which  may be considered where appli cations in respect of the same land ar e 
received within the same day;  
(d) the terms on which, and the conditions subject to which and the authority by which quarry 
leases, mining leases or other mineral concess ions may be granted or renewed;  
(e) the procedure for obtaining quarry leases, mining lease s or other mineral concessions;  
(f) the facilities to be afforded by holders of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral 
concessions to persons deputed  by the Government for the purpose of undertakin g research  or 
training in matters  relating to mining operations;  
(g) the fixing and collection of rent, royalty, fees, dead rent, fines or other charges and the time 
within which and the manner i n which these shall be payable;  
(h) the manner in which right s of third parties may be protected (whether by way of payment of 
compensation or otherwise) in cases where any such party is prejudicially affected by reason of any 
prospecting or  mining operations;  
(i) the manner in which rehabilitation of flora and other vegetation such as trees, shrubs and the 
like destroyed by reason of any quarrying or mining operations shall be made in the same area or in 
any other area selected by the State Government (whether by way of reimbursement of the cost of 
rehabilitatio n or otherwise) by the person holding  the quarrying or mining lease;  
(j) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which, a quarry lease, min ing lease or other 
mineral con cessi on may be transferred;  
(k) the construction, maintenance and use of road s power transmission lines, tramways, railways, 
serial rope ways, pipelines and the making of passage for water for mining purposes on any land 
comprised in a quarry or mining lease or other mineral concession;  
(l) the form of registers t o be maintained un der this Act;  
(m) the reports and statements to be submitted by holders of quarry or mining leases or other 
mineral concessions and the authority to which such reports and statements shall be submitted;  
(n) the period within which and the manner in which and the authority to which applications for 
revision of any order passed by any authority under these rules may be made, the fees to be paid 
therefore, and the powers of the revisional auth ority; and  
(o) any other matter which is  to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
(2) Until rules  are made under sub -section ( 1), any rules made by a state Gover nment regulating the 
grant of 2[quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions] in respect of minor minerals whic h 
are in force immediately before the commencement of th ese Act shall continue in force.  
3[(3) The holder of a mining lease or any other mineral concession granted under any rule made 
under sub -section ( 1) shall pay  4[royalty or dead rent, whichever is more] in respect of minor minerals 
removed or consumed by him or by his agent, manager, employee, contractor or sub -lessee at the rate 
prescribed for the time being in the rules framed by the State Government in respect of minor minerals:   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 8, for “prospecting licence and mining leases” (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
4. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 13, for “royalty” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  19 
 Provided that th e State Government shall not enhance the rate of  1[royalty or dead rent] in respect of 
any minor mineral for more than once during any period of  2[three] years.]  
3[(4) Without prejudice to sub -sections ( 1), (2) and sub -section ( 3), the State Government may, by 
notification, make rules for regulating the provisions of this Act f or the following, namely:―  
(a) the manner in which the District Mineral Foundation shall work for the interest and benefit 
of persons and areas affected by mining under sub -section  (2) of section 9B;  
(b) the composition and functions of the District Mineral Foundation under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 9B; and  
(c) the amount of payment to be made to the District Mineral Foundation by concession holders 
of minor minerals under section 15A.]  
4[15A. Power of State Government to collect funds for District Mineral Foundation in case of 
minor minerals .―The State Government m ay prescribe the payment by all holders of concessions 
related to minor minerals of amounts to the District Mineral Foundation of the district in which the 
mining operations are carried on.]  
16. Power to modify mining leases granted before 25th October, 1949 .―5[(1) (a) All mining 
leases granted before the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) 
Amendment Act, 1972  (56 of 1972)  6[if in force at the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Amend ment Act, 1994  (25 of 1994) , shall be brought in conformity with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder within two years from the date of the 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1994], or 
such further time as the Central Government may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf.  
(b) Where the rights under any mining lease, granted by the proprietor of an estate or tenure before 
the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1972  
(56 of 1972) , have vested, on or after the 25th day of October, 1949, in the State Government in 
pursuance of the provisions of any Act of any Provincial or State Legislature which provides for the 
acquisition of estate s or tenures or provides for agrarian reform, such mining lease shall be brought into 
conformity with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder within  7[two years from the 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) A mendment Act, 1994  (25 of 
1994) ], or within such further time as the Central Government may, by general or special order, specify 
in this behalf.]  
8[(1A) Where any action is taken under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) to bring the period 
of any  lease in conformity with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, then 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 8, the period of such lease shall continue to operate for a 
period of two years from the date of bringing such lease in c onformity with the provisions of this Act.]  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose 
of giving effect to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and in particular such rules shall provide — 
(a) for giving  previous notice of the modification or alteration proposed to be made in any 
existing mining lease to the lessee and wher e the less or is not the Centr al Government, also to the 
lessor and for affording him an opportunity of showing cause against the propo sal; 
(b) for the payment of compensation to the lessee in respect of the reduction of any area covered 
by the existing mining lease; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 13, for “royalty” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “four” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 2-1-2015).  
4. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 9, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “six months from the comme ncement of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)  
Amendment Act, 1972” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
8. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  20 
 (c) for  the principles on which, the manner in which, and the authority by which, the said 
compensation shall be determined.  
CHAPTER  V 
SPECIAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO  
UNDERTAKE  PROSPECTING OR MINING OPERATIONS IN CERTAIN CASES  
17. Special powers of Central Government to undertake prospecting or mining operations in 
certain lands .―(1) The provisions of this section shall apply  1*** in respect of land in which the 
minerals vest in the Government of a State  2[or any other person].  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government, after consultation with 
the State Government, may undertake s 3[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations] in any area 
not already held under any  4[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease] and where it 
proposes to do so, it shall, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette ― 
(a) specify the boundaries of such area;  
(b) state whether  3[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations] will be carried out in the 
area; and  
(c) specify  the mineral or minerals in respect of which such operations will be carried out.  
(3) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 2), the Central Government 
undertakes  3[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations] in any area, the Central Government 
shall be liable to pay  5[reconnaissance permit fee or prospecting fee] royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as 
the case may be, at the same rate at which it would have been payable under this Act, if such  
3[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations] had been undertaken by a private person under a  
4[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease].  
(4) The Central Government, with a view to enabling it to exercise the powers co nferred on it by 
sub-section (2) may, after consultation with the State Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that no  4[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease] shall be granted in 
respect of any land specified in the notification.  
6[17A. Reservation of area s for purposes of conservation .―(1) The Central Government, with a 
view to conserving any mineral and after consultation with the State Government, may reserve any area 
not already held under any prospecting licence  or mining lease and, where it proposes to do so, it shall, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in 
respect of which such area will be reserved.  
7[(1A) The Central Government may in consul tation with the State Government, reserve any area not 
already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining 
operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it, and where it 
proposes  to do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and 
the mineral or minerals in respect of which such area will be reserved.]  
(2) The State Government may, with the approval of the Central Government, reserv e any area not 
already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining 
operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it  8*** and where it 
proposes to do so, it shall, by notification  in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and 
the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved.  
                                                           
1. The word “only” omitted by Act 56 of 1972, s. 10 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-9-1972).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 15, for “prospecting or mining operations” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “prospecting fee” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
6. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 14 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
7. Ins. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 7 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
8. The words “or by the Central Government” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  21 
 1[(2A) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1A) or sub-section ( 2), the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, reserves any area for undertaking prospecting 
or mining operations, the State Government shall grant prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case 
may be, in respect of such area to such Government company or corporation:  
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule, the State 
Government shall grant the prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, only after obtaining 
the pre vious approval of the Central Government.  
(2B) Where the Government company or corporation is desirous of carrying out the prospecting 
operations or mining operations in a joint venture with other persons, the joint venture partner shall be 
selected throug h a competitive process, and such Government company or corporation shall hold more 
than seventy -four per cent. of the paid up share capital in such joint venture.  
(2C) A mining lease granted to a Government company or corporation, or a joint venture, refe rred to 
in sub -sections ( 2A) and ( 2B), shall be granted on payment of such amount as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.]  
(3) 2[Where in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1A) or sub -section ( 2) the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be,] undertakes prospecting or mining operations 
in any area in which the minerals vest in a priv ate person, it shall be liable to pay prospecting fee, 
royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as the case may be, from time to time at  the same rate at which it 
would have been payable under this Act if such prospecting or mining operations had been undertaken 
by a private person under prospecting licence or mining lease.]  
CHAPTER  VI 
DEVELOPMENT OF MINERALS  
18. Mineral development .―(1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to take all such steps 
as may be necessary   3[for the conservation and systematic development of minerals in India and for the 
protection of environment by preventing or controlling any pollution which may be caused by 
prospecting or mining operations] and  4[for such purposes] the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make such rules as it thinks fit.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, s uch rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the opening of new mines and the regulation of mining operations in any area;  
(b) the regulation of the excavation or collection of minerals from any mine;  
(c) the  measures to be taken by owners of mines for the purpose of beneficiation of ores, 
including the provision of suitable contrivances for such purpose;  
(d) the development of mineral resources in any area;  
(e) the notification of all new borings and shaft si nkings and the preservation of bore -hole 
records, and specimens of cores of alt new bore -holes;  
(f) the regulation of the arrangements for the storage of minerals and the stocks thereof that may 
be kept by any person;  
(g) the submission of samples of miner als from any mine by the owner thereof and the manner in 
which and the authority to which such samples sh all be submitted;  and the taking of samples of any 
minerals from any mine by the State Government or any other authority specified by it in that behalf ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 17 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 7, for “Where in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section (2) the State Government” 
(w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 15, for “for the conservation and development of minerals in India” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “for that purpose” (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  22 
 (h) the submission by owners of mines of such special or periodical returns and reports as may 
be specified, and the form in which and the authority to which such returns and reports shall be 
submitted;  
 1[(i) the regulation of prospecting operations;  
(j) the employment of qualified geologists or mining engineers to supervise prospecting or 
mining operations;  
(k) the disposal or discharge of waste slime or tailings arising from any mining or metallurgical 
operations carried out in a mine;  
(l) the manner i n which and the authority by which directions may be issued to the owners of 
any mine to do or refrain from doing certain things in the interest of conservation or systematic 
development of minerals or for the protection of environment by preventing or con trolling pollution 
which may be caused by prospecting or mining operations;  
(m) the maintenance and submission of such plans, registers or records as may be specified by 
the Government;  
(n) the submission of records or reports by persons carrying on prospe cting or mining operations 
regarding any research in mining or geology carried out by them;  
(o) the facilities to be afforded by person s carrying out prospecting or mining operations to 
persons authorised by the Central Government for the purpose of undert aking research or training in 
matters relating to mining or geology;  
(p) the procedure for and the manner of imposition of fines for the contravention of any of the 
rules framed under this section and the authority who may impose such fines; and  
(q) the au thority to which, the period within which, the form and the manner in which 
applications for revision of any order passed by any authority under this Act and the rules made 
thereunder may be made, the fee to be paid and the documents which should accompany  such 
applications.]  
(3) All rules made under this section shall be binding on the Government.  
2[18A. Power to authorise Geological Survey of India, etc., to make investigation .―(1) Where 
the Central Government is of opinion that for the conservation and development of minerals in India, it 
is necessary to collect as precise information as possible with regard to any mineral available in or under 
any land in relation to which any pr ospecting licence or mining lease has been granted, whether by the 
State Government or by any other person, the Central Government may authorise the Geological Survey 
of India, or such other authority or agency as it may specify in this behalf, to carry ou t such detailed 
investigation s for the purpose of obtaining such information as may be necessary:  
Provided that in the cases of prospecting licences or mining leases granted by a State Government, 
no such authorisation shall be made except after consultati on with the State Government.  
(2) On the issue of any authorisation under sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Geological 
Survey of India or the specified authority or agency, and its servants and workmen — 
(a) to enter upon such land,  
(b) to dig or bore into the sub -soil, 
(c) to do all other acts necessary to determine the extent of any mineral available in or under 
such land,  
(d) to set out boundaries of the land in which any mineral is expected to be found,  
(e) to mark such boundaries and l ine by placing marks,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 15 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 11 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  23 
 (f) where otherwise the survey cannot be completed on the boundaries and line marked, to cut 
down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle:  
Provided that no such authority or agency shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or 
garden attached to a dwelling -house (except with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously 
giving such occupier at least seven days' notice in writing of its intention to do so.  
(3) Whenever any action of the nat ure specified in sub -section ( 2) is to be taken, the Central 
Government shall, before or at the time when such action is taken, pay or tender payment for all 
necessary damage which is likely to be caused, and in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the  amount 
so paid or tendered or as to the person to whom it should be paid or tendered, the Central Government 
shall refer the dispute to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the land 
in question.  
(4) The fact that the re exists any such dispute as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall not be a bar to 
the taking of any action under sub -section ( 2). 
(5) After the completion of the investigation, the Geological Survey of India or the specified 
authority or agency by whic h the investigation was made shall submit to the Central Government a 
detailed report indicating therein the extent and nature of any mineral which lies deposited in or under 
the land.  
(6) The costs of the investigation made under this section shall be borne by the Central Government:  
Provided that where the State Government or other person in whom the minerals are vested or the 
holder of any prospecting licence or mining lease applies to the Central Government to furnish to it or 
him a copy of the repor t submitted under sub -section ( 5), that State Government or other person or the 
holder of a prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, shall bear such reasonable part of the 
costs of investigation as the Central Government may specify in this  behalf and shall, on payment of 
such part of the costs of investigation, be entitled to receive from the Central Government a true copy of 
the report submitted to it under sub -section ( 5).] 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Prospecting licences  and mining leases to be void if in contraven tion of Act.―Any 
1[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence  or mining lease] granted, renewed or acquired in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall be void and of no 
effect.  
Explanation .―Where a person has acquired more than one  1[reconnaissance permit, prospecting 
licence or mining lease]  2*** and the aggregate area covered by such  3[permits, licences or leases], as the 
case may be, exceeds the maximum area permissible under section 6, only that  1[reconnaissance permit, 
prospectin g licence or mining lease] the acquisition of which has resulted in such maximum area being 
exceeded shall be deemed to be void.  
20. Act and rules to apply to all renewals of prospecting licences and mining leases .―The 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall apply in relation to the renewal after the 
commencement of this Act of any prospecting licence or mining lease granted before such 
commencement as they apply in relation to the renewal of a pro specting licence or mining lease granted 
after such commencement.  
4[20A. Power of Central G overnment to issue directions .―(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, the Central Government may issue such directions to the State Governments, as 
may be required for the conservation of mineral resources, or on any policy matter in the national 
interest, and for the scientific and sustainable development and exploitation of mineral resources.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 16, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” ( w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. The words “in any State” omitted by Act 25 of 1994, s. 8 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 16, for “licences or leases” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 18 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  24 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing powers, the Central 
Government may also issue directions in respect of the following matters, namely: ― 
(i) improvement in procedure for grant of mineral concessions and to ensure co -ordination 
among agencies entrusted with according statutor y clearances;  
(ii) maintenance of internet -based databases including development and operation of a mining 
tenement system;  
(iii) implementation and evaluation of sustainable development frameworks;  
(iv) reduction in waste generation and related waste mana gement practices and promotion of 
recycling of materials;  
(v) minimising and mitigating adverse environmental impacts particularly in respect of ground 
water, air, ambient noise and land;  
(vi) ensuring minimal ecological disturbance, in terms of bio -divers ity, flora, fauna and habitat;  
(vii) promoting restoration and reclamation activities so as to make optimal use of mined out 
land for the benefit of the local communities; and  
(viii) such  other matters as may be necessary for the purposes of implementation of this Act.]   
21. Penalties .―1[(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A) of 
section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine 
which may extend to five lakh rupees per hectare of the area.  
(2) Any rule made under any provision of this Act may provide that any contravention thereof shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may 
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with additional 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention continues 
after convic tion for the first such contravention.]  
(3) Where any person trespasses into any land in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 4, such trespasser may be served with an order of eviction by the State Government or any 
authority authorised in this behalf by that Government and the State Government or such authorised 
authority may, if necessary, obtain the help of the police to evict the trespasser from the land.  
 2[(4) Whenever any person raises, transports or causes to be raised or transported, without any 
lawful authority, any mineral from any land, and, for that purpose, uses any tool, equipment, vehicle or 
any other thing, such mineral tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing shall be liable to be seized by 
an officer or aut hority specially empowered in this behalf.  
(4A) Any mineral, tool, equipment, vehicle or any other thing seized under sub -section ( 4), shall be 
liable to be confiscated by an order of the court competent to take cognizance of the offence under  
sub-section  (1) and shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of such court.]  
(5) Whenever any person raises, without any lawful authority, any mineral from any land, the State 
Government may recover from such person the mineral so raised, or, where such  mineral has already 
been disposed of, the price thereof, and may also recover from such person, rent, royalty or tax, as the 
case may be, for the period during which the land was occupied by such person without any lawful 
authority.  
 3[(6) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an 
offence under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.]  
22. Cognizance of offences .―No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act or any rules made thereunder except upon complaint in writing made by a person authorised in this 
behalf by the Central Government or the State Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 19, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 17, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 16 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  25 
 23. Offences by companies .―(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act or any rules 
made thereunder is a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge 
of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, sha ll be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was comm itted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .―For the pur poses of this section, ― 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
1[23A. Compounding of offences .―(1) Any offence punishable under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the person 
authorised under section 22 to make a complaint to the court with respect to that offence, on pa yment to 
that person, for credit to the Government, of such sum as that person may specify:  
Provided that in the case of an offence punishable with fine only, no such sum shall exceed the 
maximum amount of fine which may be imposed for that offence.  
(2) Wh ere an offence is compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further proceeding, as 
the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so compounded, and the 
offender, if in custody, shall be released forthwith.]  
2[23B. Power to search .―If any gazetted officer of the Central or a State Government authorised by 
the Central Government  3[or a State Government, as the case may be,] in this behalf by genera! or 
special order has reason to believe that any mineral has been rais ed in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or rules made thereunder or any document or thing in relation to such mineral is secreted in any 
place  3[or vehicle], he may search for such mineral, document or thing and the provisions of section 100 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply to every such search.]  
4[23C. Power of State Government to make rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation 
and storage of minerals .―(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals and for the purposes connected 
therewith.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or  any of the following matters, n amely: ― 
(a) establishment of check -posts for checking of minerals under transit;  
(b) establishment of weigh -bridges to measure the quantity of mineral being transported;  
(c) regulation of mineral being transported from the a rea granted under a prospecting licence or a 
mining lease or a quarrying licence or a permit, in whatever name the permission to excavate 
minerals, has been given;  
(d) inspection, checking and search of minerals at the place of excavation or storage or dur ing 
transit;  
(e) maintenance of registers and forms for the purposes of these rules;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 13 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
2. Ins. by A ct 25 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
3. Ins. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Ins. by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  26 
 (f) the period within which and the authority to which applications for revision of any order 
passed by any authority be preferred under any rule made under this section and the fees to be paid 
therefor  and powers of such authority for disposing of such applications; and  
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed for the purpose of prevention 
of illegal mining, transportation and storage of mineral s. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 30, the Central Government shall have no power 
to revise any order passed by a State Government or any of its authorised officers or any authority under 
the rules made under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2).] 
24. Power of entry and inspection .―(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the position of the 
working, actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine or for any other purpose connected with 
this Act or the rules made thereunder, any person authorised  by the  1[Central Government or a State 
Government] in this behalf, by general  2*** order, may ― 
(a) enter and inspect any mine;  
(b) survey and take measurements in any such mine;  
(c) weigh, measure or take measurements of the stocks of minerals lying at any mine;  
(d) examine any document, book, register, or record in the possession or power of any person 
having the control of, or connected with, any mine and place marks of identification thereon, and 
take extracts from or make copies of such document, boo k, register or record;  
(e) order the production of any such document, book, register, record, as is referred to in  
clause ( d); and  
(f) examine any person having the control of, or connected with, any mine.  
(2) Every person authorised by the  1[Central Government or a State Government] under  
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code, and every person to whom an order or summons is issued by virtue of the powers conferred 
by clause ( e) or clause ( f) of that sub -section shall be legally bound to comply with such order or 
summons, as the case may be.  
3[24A. Rights and liabilities of a holder of prospecting licence or mining lease .―(1) On the issue 
of a 4[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence  or mining l ease] under this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, it shall be lawful for the  5[holder of such permit, licence or lease], his agents or his servants 
or workmen to enter the lands over which  6[such per mit, lease or licence had been granted] at all times 
during its currency and carry out all such  7[reconnaissance, prospecting or mining operations] as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no person shall enter into any building or upon an enclosed court or garden attached to 
a dwelling -house (except with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such 
occupier at least seven days ’ notice in writing of his intention to do so.  
(2) The holder of a  4[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence  or mining lease] referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) shall be liable to pay compensation in such manner as may be prescribed to the occupier 
of the surface of the land granted under  8[such permit, licence or lease] for any loss or damage which is 
likely to ar ise or has arisen from or in consequence of the  9[reconnaissance, mining or prospecting 
operations].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 20, for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
2. The words “or special” omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 1986, s. 17 (w.e.f. 10 -2-1987).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 21, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “hol der of such licence or lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “such lease or licence had been granted” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
7. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “prospecting or mining operations” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
8. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “such licence or lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
9. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “mining or prospecting operations” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  27 
 (3) The amount of compensation payable under sub -section ( 2) shall be determined by the State 
Government in the manner prescribed.]  
25. Recovery of certain  sums as arrears of land revenue .―1[(1)] Any rent, royally, tax, fee or 
other sum due to the Government under this Act or the rules made thereunder or under the terms and 
conditions of any  2[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence  or mining lease] may, on a certificate of 
such officer as may be specified by the State Government in this behalf by general or special order, be 
recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
 3[(2) Any rent, royalty, tax, fee or other sum du e to the Government either under this Act or any rule 
made thereunder or under the terms and conditions of any  2[reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence 
or mining lease] may, on a certificate of such officer as may be specified by the State Government i n this 
behalf by general or special order, be recovered in the same manner as if it were an arrear of land 
revenue and every such sum which becomes due to the Government after the commencement of the 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendmen t Act, 1972  (56 of 1972) , together with 
the interest due thereon shall be a first charge on the assets of the holder of the  2[reconnaissance permit, 
prospecting licence or mining lease], as the case may be.]  
26. Delegation of powers .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification i n the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act may, in relation to such matters and 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notif ication be exercisable also by ― 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government; or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government , as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, direct that any power 
exercisable by it under this Act may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified in the notification, be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the 
State  Government as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) Any rules made by the Central Government under this Act may confer powers and impose duties 
or authorise the conferring of powers and imposition of duties upon any State Government or any officer 
or authority subordinate thereto.  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
28. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament and certain rules to be approved by 
Parliament .―4[(1) Every rule and every notification made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliam ent while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both 
Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or notification.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the rule making power vested in the Central Government, 
no rules made with reference to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16 shall come into force until 
they have been approved, whether with or without modifications, by each House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Section 25 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 56 of 1972, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 22, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 56 of 1972, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -9-1972).  28 
  1[(3) Every rule and every notification made b y the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists one House, before that House.]  
29. Existing rules to con tinue .―All rules made or purporting to have been made under the Mines 
and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948  (53 of 1948) , shall, in  so far as they relate to 
matters for which provision is made in this Act and are not inconsistent therewith, be deemed to have 
been made under this Act as if this Act had been in force on the date on which such rules were made and 
shall continue in force unless and until they are superseded by any rules made under this Act.  
2[30. Power of r evision by Central Gove rnment .―The Central Government may, of its own 
motion or on an application made within the prescrib ed time by an aggrieved party, ― 
(a) revise any order made by a State Government or other authority in exercise of the powers 
conferred on it by or under this  Act with respect to any mineral other than a minor mineral; or  
(b) where no such order has been made by the State Government or other authority in exercise of 
the powers conferred on it by or under this Act with respect to any mineral other than a minor 
mineral within the time prescribed therefore, pass such order as it may think fit and appropriate in 
the circumstances:  
Provided that in cases covered by clause ( b) the Central Government shall, before passing any 
order under this clause, give an opportunit y of being heard or to represent in the matter.]  
3[30A. Special provisions relating to mining leases for coal granted before 25th October, 
1949.―Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 
and sub -section (1) of section 16 shall not apply to or in relation to mining leases granted before the 25th 
day of October, 1949, in respect of coal, but the Central Government, if it is satisfied that it is expedient 
so to do, may, by notification in the Official Gazett e, direct that all or any of the said provisions 
(including any rules made under sections 13 and 18) shall apply to or in relation to such leases subject to 
such exceptions and modifications, if any, as may be specified in that or in any subsequent notific ation.]  
4[30B. Constitution of  Special Courts .―(1) The State Government may, for the purposes of 
providing speedy trial of offences for contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 1A) of section 4, constitute, by notification, as ma ny Special Courts as may be necessary for 
such area or areas, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a Judge who shall be appointed by the State Government with 
the concurrence of the High Court.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of a Special Court unless he is or has 
been a District and Sessions Judge.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Special Court may prefer an appeal to the High Court 
within a period of sixty da ys from the date of such order.  
30C. Special Courts to ha ve powers of Court of Session .―Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply to the proceedings before the Special 
Court and for the purpose of the provisions of this Act, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court 
of Session and shall have all powers of a Court of Session and the person conducting a prosecution 
before the Special Court shall be deemed to be a public prosecutor.]  
31. Relaxation o f rules in special cases .―The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that in 
the interests of mineral development it is necessary so to do, by order in writing and for reasons to be 
recorded, authorise in any case the grant, renewal or transfer of any  5[reconnaissance permit, prospecting 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 10 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
2. Subs.  by Act 10 of 2015, s. 20, for section 30 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 1958, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -5-1958).  
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 21 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
5. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 23, for “prospecting licence or mining lease” (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  29 
 licence or mining lease], or the working of any mine for the purpose of searching for or winning any 
mineral, on terms and conditions different from those laid down in the rules made under section 13.  
32. [Amendments to Act 53 of 1948 ].―Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), 
s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
33. Validation of certain acts and indemnity .―All acts of executive authority done, proceedings 
taken and sentences passed under  the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948  (53 
of 1948 ), with respect to the regulation of mines and the development of minerals during the period 
commencing on the 26th day of January, 1950, and ending with the date of commencement of this Act 
by the Government or by any officer of the Government or by any other authority, in the belief or 
purported belief that the acts, proceedings o f sentences were being done, taken or passed under the said 
Act, shall be as valid and operative as if t hey had been done, taken or passed in accordance with law, and 
no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or continued against any person whatsoever, on the 
ground that any such acts, proceedings or sentences were not done, taken or passed in ac cordance with 
law. 
  30 
  1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4( 3), 5(1), 7(2) and  2[8(1), 8A( 1), 10A, 10B( 1), 10C( 1), 11( 1), 11B, 11C, 12A( 1), and 
17A( 2A)]] 
SPECIFIED MINERALS  
PART A  
Hydro carbons/energy minerals  
1. Coal and lignite . 
PART B  
Atomic minerals  
1. Beryl and other beryllium -bearing minerals.  
2. Lithium -bearing minerals.  
3. Minerals of the “rare earths ” group containing Uranium and Thorium.  
4. Niobium -bearing minerals.  
5. Phosphorites and other phosphatic ores containing Uranium.  
6. Pitchblende and ot her Uranium ores.  
3[7. Titanium bearing minerals and ores (ilmenite, rutile and leucoxene).]  
8. Tantallium -bearing minerals.  
9. Uraniferous allanite, monazite and other thorium minerals.  
10. Uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after extraction of copper and gold, ilmentie and 
other titanium ores.  
4[11. Zirconium -bearing minerals and ores including Zircon.]  
PART C  
Metallic and non -metallic minerals  
1. Asbestos.  
2. Bauxite.  
3. Chrome ore.  
4. Copper ore.  
5. Gold.  
6. Iron ore.  
7. Lead.  
5*** 
9. Manganese ore.  
10. Precious stones.  
11. Zinc.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1994, s. 12, for the First Schedule (w.e.f. 25 -1-1994).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 22, for “8( 2)” (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1999, s. 24, for item 7 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
4. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for item 11 (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  
5. Omitted by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -12-1999).  31 
  1[SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 9)  
RATES OF ROYALTY IN RESPECT OF MINERALS AT ITEMS 1 TO 9, 11 TO 40 AND 42 TO 55  
1. Apatite and Rock Phosphate:  
(i) Apatite   
Five per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
(ii) Rock Phosphate  
(a) Above 25% P2O5  
(b) Upto 25% P2O5  Twelve and half per cent. of average sale price on ad 
valorem  basis.  
Six per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
2. Asbestos:  
(i) Chrysotile   
Eight Hundred and Eighty rupees per tonne.  
(ii) Amphibole  Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
3. Barytes:  Six and half per cent. of average sale price on ad 
valorem  basis.  
4. Bauxite and Laterite:  (a) Metallurgical Grade:  
Zero point six zero per cent. of London Metal Exchange 
Aluminium metal price chargeable on the contained 
aluminium metal in ore produced for those dispatched 
for use in alumina and aluminium metal extraction.  
  (b) Non Metallurgical G rade:  
Twenty five per cent. of average sale price on  
ad valorem  basis for those dispatched for use other than 
alumina and aluminium metal extraction.  
5. Brown Ilmenite 
(Leucoxene), Ilmenite, Rutile 
and Zircon:  
6. Cadmium:  Two per cent. of average sale pr ice on ad valorem  basis.  
 
Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
7. Calcite:  Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
8. China clay or Kaolin: 
(including ball clay and white 
shale, white clay)  
(i) Crude   
 
Eight per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
(ii) Processed  (including 
washed)  Twelve per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
9. Clay others:  Twenty rupees per tonne.  
10. Coal (including Lignite):  * 
11. Chromite:  Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
12. Columbite -tantalite:  Ten per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by noti fication No. G.S.R. 630(E), for the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 1-9-2014).  32 
 13. Copper:  Four point six two per cent. of London Metal Exchange 
Copper metal price chargeable on the containe d copper 
metal in ore produced.  
14. Diamond:  Eleven point five per cent. of average sale price on  
ad valorem  basis.  
15. Dolomite:  Seventy -five rupees per tonne.  
16. Dunite:  Thirty rupees per tonne.  
17. Felspar:  Fifteen per cent. of  average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
18. Fire Clay:  
(including plastic, pipe, 
lithomargic and natural 
pozzolanic clay)  Twelve per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
19. Fluorspar:  
(also called fluorite)  Eight per cent. of average sale p rice on ad valorem  basis.  
20. Garnet:  
(i) Abrasive   
Four per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
(ii) Gem  Ten per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
21. Gold:  
(i) Primary   
Four per cent. of  London Bullion Market Association 
Price (commonly referred to as London Price) chargeable 
on the gold metal in ore produced.  
(ii) By -product gold  Three point three per cent. of London Bullion Market 
Association Price (commonly referred to as London 
Price ) chargeable on the by -product gold metal actually 
produced.  
22. Graphite:  
(i) With 80 per cent. or more 
fixed carbon   
Two hundred and twenty -five rupees per tonne.  
(ii) With 40 per cent. or more 
fixed carbon but less than 80 
per cent. fixed carbon  One hundred and fifty rupees per tonne.  
(iii) With 20 per cent. or more 
fixed carbon but less than 40 
per cent. fixed carbon  Sixty -five rupees per tonne.  
(iv) With less than 20 per cent. 
fixed carbon  Twenty -five rupees per tonne.  
23. Gypsum:  Twenty per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
24. Iron Ore:  
(CLO, Lumps, fines and 
concentrates all grades)  Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
  33 
 25. Lead:  (a) Eight point five per cent. of  London Metal Exchange 
Lead metal price chargeable on the contained lead metal 
in ore produced.  
  (b) Fourteen point five per cent. of London Metal 
Exchange Lead metal price chargeable on the contained 
lead metal in the concentrate produced.  
26. Limeston e: 
(i) L. D. Grade (less than 1.5 
per cent. silica content)   
Ninety rupees per tonne.  
(ii) Others  Eighty rupees per tonne.  
27. Lime kankar:  Eighty rupees per tonne.  
28. Limeshell:  Eighty rupees per tonne.  
29. Magnesite:  Three per cent. of  average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
30. Manganese Ore:  
(i) Ore of all grade   
Five per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
(ii) Concentrates  One point seven per cent. of average sale price on  
ad valorem  basis.  
31. Marl:  Sixty rupees pe r tonne.  
32. Crude Mica, waste mica 
and scrap mica:  Four per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
33. Monazite:  One hundred and twenty -five rupees per tonne.  
34. Nickel:  Zero point one two per cent. of  London Metal Exchange 
Nickel metal price chargeable on the contained nickel 
metal in ore produced.  
35. Ochre:  Twenty -four rupees per tonne.  
36. Pyrites:  Two per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
37. Pyrophyllite:  Twenty per cent. of  average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
38. Quartz:  Fifteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
39. Ruby:  Ten per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
40. Sand (others):  Twenty rupees per tonne.  
41. Sand for stowing:  ** 
42. Shale:  Sixty rupees per tonne.  
43. Silica sand and moulding 
sand and  Quartzite:  Ten per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
44. Sillimanite:  Two point five per cent. of average sale price on  
ad valorem  basis.  
  34 
 45. Silver:  
(i) By-product   
Seven per cent. of London Metal Exchange Price 
chargeable on by -product silver metal actually produced.  
(ii) Primary Silver  Five per cent. of London Metal Exchange Silver Metal 
Price chargeable on the contained silver metal in ore 
produced.  
46. Slate:  Forty -five rupees per tonne.  
47. Talc, Steatite and 
Soapstone:  Eighteen per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
48. Tin:  Seven point five per cent. of London Metal Exchange 
Tin metal price chargeable on the contained tin metal in 
ore produced.  
49. Tungsten:  Twenty rupees per unit per cent. of contained WO 3 per 
tonne of ore and on pro rata basis.  
50. Uranium:  Two per cent. of annual compensation amount received 
by M/s. Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., to be 
apportioned among the  States on the basis of data 
provided by Department of Atomic Energy.  
51. Vanadium:  Twenty per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
52. Vermiculite:  Five per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
53. Wollastonite:  Fifteen per cent . of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
54. Zinc:  (a) Nine point five per cent. of London Metal Exchange 
Zinc metal price on ad valorem  basis chargeable on 
contained zinc metal in ore produced.  
  (b) Ten per cent. of London Metal Exchange Zinc metal  
price on ad valorem  basis chargeable on contained zinc 
metal in concentrate produced.  
55. All other minerals not 
herein before specified (Agate, 
Corundum, Diaspore, Felsite, 
Fuschite -Quartzite, Jasper, 
Kyanite, Perlite, Pyroxenite, 
Rock Salt, Selenite , etc.) Twelve per cent. of average sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
Notes :― 
1. * Rates of royalty in respect of item No. 10 relating to Coal (including Lignite) as revised vide 
notification number G.S.R. 349(E), dated the 10th May, 2012 read with corrigendum G.S.R. 525(E), 
dated the 14th June, 2012 of the Government of India in the Ministry of Coal shall remain in force until 
revised through a separate notification by the Minist ry of Coal.  
2. ** Rates of royalty in respect of item No. 41 relating to Sand for stowing revised vide notification 
number G.S.R. 214(E), dated the 11th April, 1997, will remain in force until revised through a separate 
notification by the Ministry of Coal .] 
 
  35 
 1[THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 9A)  
Rates of Dead Rent  
1. Rates of dead rent applicable to the leases granted for low value minerals are as under:  
RATES OF DEAD RENT IN RUPEES PER HECTARE PER ANNUM  
From 2nd Year of Lease    3rd and 4th Year of Lease       5th Year onwards  
400 1000  2000  
2. Two times the rate specified at paragraph 1 above in case of lease granted for medium value minerals.  
3. Three times the rate specified at paragraph 1 above in case of lease granted for high value minerals.  
4. Four times the rate specified at paragraph 1 above in case of lease granted for precious metals and 
stones.  
Note:  
1. For the purpose of th is notification: ― 
(a) “precious metals and stones ” means gold, silver, diamond, ruby, sapphire and emerald;  
(b) “high value minerals ” means semi -precious stones (agate, gem garnet), corundum, copper, lead, 
zinc, and asbestos (chrysotile variety);  
(c) “medium value minerals ” means chromite, manganese ore, kyanite, sillimanite, vermiculite, 
magnesite, wollastonite, perlite, diaspore, apatite, rock phosphate, fluorite (fluorspar), barytes, and iron 
ore; 
(d) “low value minerals ” means the minerals other than precious metals and stones, high value 
minerals and medium value minerals.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R.631(E), for “Third Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2014).  36 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( ea) of section 3]  
Notified Minerals  
1. Bauxite.  
2. Iron ore.  
3. Limestone.  
4. Manganese ore.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2015, s. 23 (w.e.f. 12 -1-2015).  
--------------------------The Naga Hills-Tuensang Area Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE NAGA HILLS -TUENSANG AREA ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1957  
[29th November, 1957 .] 
An Act to provide for the formation of the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area of Assam as an 
administrative unit.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area     
Act, 1957.  
(2) It shall come into force on such  date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Formation of Naga Hills -Tuensang Area .—As from the commencement of this Act, there shall 
be formed a new administrative unit in the State of Assam by the name of Naga Hill s-Tuensang Area 
comprising the tribal areas which at such commencement were known as the Naga Hills District and 
Tuensang Frontier Division of the North East Frontier Agency.  
3. Amendment of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution .—In the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution, in paragraph 20, — 
(a) after sub -paragraph ( 2A), the following sub -paragraph shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(2B) The Naga Hills -Tuensang Area shall comprise the areas which at the commencement of 
this Constitution were known as the Naga Hill s District and the Naga Tribal Area. ”; 
(b) in sub -paragraph ( 3), after the words “Administrative area ”, the brackets and words “(other 
than the Naga Hills -Tuensang Area) ” shall be inserted;  
(c) in Part A of the Table, item 4 shall be omitted; and  
(d) in Pa rt B of the Table, for item 2, the following item shall be substituted, namely: — 
“2. The Naga Hills -Tuensang Area. ”. 
4. Amendment of the Del imitation Order .—In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1956, — 
(a) in the First Schedule, in the entry in column 3 against serial No.  37, the words “Naga Hills ”, 
shall be omitted; and  
(b) in the Second Schedule, in the Part relating to Assam, the heading “Naga Hills District ” and 
all entries against serial Nos.  16, 17 and 18 shall be omitted.  
5. [Amendment of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending 
Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
6. Provision as to the sitting member of Parliament .—Notwithstanding the alteration in the extent 
of the Autonomous Districts Parliamentary constituency in Assam effected by section 4, the sitting 
member of the House of the People representing that constituency shall be deemed to have been elected to 
the Hou se of the People by that constituency as so altered.  
7. Territorial extent of laws not to be affected .—The provisions of section 2 shall not be deemed to 
have effected any change in the areas to which any law in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act extends or applies, and territorial references in any such law to the Naga Hills District, the 
Naga Tribal Area or the Tuensang Frontier Division shall, until otherwise provided by a competent 
legislature or other competent authority, continue to  have the same meaning.  
Explanation. —In this section, law means any law, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having the force of law in India or any part thereof.  
                                                           
1. 1st December, 1957 , vide notification No. S.R. O. 3843 , dated 30th November , 195 7, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,       
Part II, sec. 3 . 
--------------------------The Navy Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE NAVY ACT, 1957  
______ 
ARR ANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Persons subject to naval law.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Fundamental rights to apply to persons subject to naval law with modifications.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NAVAL  FORCES  
5. Power of Central Government to raise and maintain naval forces.  
CHAPTER III  
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  RELATING TO DISCIPLINE IN CERTAIN CASES  
6. Provision respecting discipline of persons under engagement to serve Central Governmen t. 
7. Relations between the members of the Navy, Army and Air Force acting together.  
8. Provision respecting discipline of master of merchant vessel under convoy.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMMISSIONS, APPOINTMENTS AND ENROLMENTS  
  9. Eligibility for appointment or enrolment.  
10. Commissions and appointments.  
11. Enrolment.  
12. Validity of enrolment.  
13. Oath of allegiance.  
CHAPTER V  
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE  
14. Liability for service of officers and sailors.  
15. Tenure of service of officers and sailors.  
16. Discharge o n expiry of engagement.  
17. Provisions as to discharge . 
18. Saving of powers of dismissal by naval tribunals.  
19. Restrictions respecting right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc.  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
SERVICE  PRIVILEGES  
SECTIONS  
20. Immunity from attachment.  
21. Immunity from arrest for debt.  
22. Immunity of persons attending court -martial or disciplinary court from arrest.  
23. Remedy of aggrieved persons.  
24. Priority of hearing of cases concerning persons in the naval service.  
25. Right of the Chief of the Naval Staff or commanding officers to obtain copies of judgments or 
orders made by a criminal court.  
26. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO PAY, PENSION, ETC., AND MAINTENANCE OF FAMILIES  
27. Deducti ons from pay, etc., not to be made unless authorized.  
28. Deductions from pay and allowances of officers.  
29. Deductions from pay and allowances of sailors.  
30. Deductions awarded by naval tribunals.  
31. Liability for maintenance of wife and children.  
32. Limit of certain deductions.  
33. Remission of deductions.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ARTICLES OF WAR  
34. Misconduct by officers or persons in command.  
35. Misconduct by persons other than those in command.  
36. Delaying or discouraging action or service commanded.  
37. Pe nalty for disobedience in action.  
38. Penalty for spying.  
39. Correspondence, etc., with the enemy.  
40. Improper communication with the enemy.  
41. Deserting post and neglect of duty.  
42. Mutiny defined.  
43. Punishment for mutiny.  
44. Persons on board ships  or aircraft seducing naval personnel from allegiance.  
45. Striking superior officers.  3 
 SECTIONS  
46. Ill -treating subordinates.  
47. Disobedience and insubordination.  
48. Quarrelling, fighting and disorderly behavior.  
49. Desertion.  
50. Inducing person to de sert. 
51. Breaking out of ship and absence without leave.   
52. Drunkenness.  
53. Uncleanness or indecent acts.  
54. Cruelty and conduct unbecoming the character of an officer.  
55. Losing ship or aircraft.  
56. Offences by officers in charge of convoy.  
57. Taking unauthorised goods on board ship.  
58. Offences in respect of property.  
59. Arson.  
60. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.  
61. Malingering, etc.  
62. Penalty for endeavouring to stir up disturbance on account of unwholesomeness of victuals or 
other just grounds.  
63. Offences in respect of papers relating to prize.  
64. Offences in respect of price.  
65. Offences in respect of persons on board a prize ship.  
66. Unlawful taking o f ransoming a prize.  
67. Breaking bulk on board a prize sh ip. 
68. Violation of the Act, regulations and orders.  
69. Offences in relation to Court -martial.  
70. Fraudulent entry.  
71. Escape from custody.  
72. Failure to assist in detention of offenders.  
73. Penalty for failure to attend by members of reserve forces when called up.  
74. Offences against good order and naval discipline.  4 
 SECTIONS  
75. Attempts.  
76. Abetment of offences.  
77. Civil offences.  
78. Jurisdiction as to place and offences.  
79. Jurisdiction as to time.  
80. Trial after a person ceases to be subject  to naval law.  
CHAPTER IX  
PROVISIONS AS TO PUNISHMENTS  
81. Punishments.  
82. Provisions as to award of punishment . 
CHAPTER X  
ARREST  
83. Power to issue warrants of arrest.  
84. Arrest without warrant.  
85. Procedure and conditions of naval custody.  
86. Investigation after arrest.  
87. Duty to receive or keep in custody.  
88. Procedure before trial.  
89. Provost -marshals.  
CHAPTER XI  
CHARGE  
90. Joinder of charges.  
91. Acts amounting to different offences.  
92. Joinder of accused person  
CHAPTER XII  
AUTHORITIES HAVING POWER TO AWARD PUNISHMENTS  
93. Power of court -martial and commanding officers to try offences.  
94. Power of Central Government, Chief of the Naval Staff and other officers to impose forfeiture of 
time or seniority.  
95. Disciplinary Courts when may be constituted.  5 
 SECTIONS  
96. Constitution and procedure of disciplinary courts.  
97. Constitution of courts -martial.  
CHAPTER XIII  
PROCEDURE  
Procedure of courts -martial  
 98. Where courts -martial to be held.  
 99. Trial judge advocate.  
100. Courts -martial to be public.  
101. Commencement of proceedings.  
102. Objections to members.  
103. Further objections.  
104. Administering oath or affirmation.  
105. Arraignment.  
106. Opening of prosecution case . 
107. Calling of prosecution witness not in the original list.  
108. Swearing of interpreter and shorthand -writer.  
109. Objection to interpreter or shorthand -writer.  
110. Swearing of witnesses.  
111. Plea of no case and defence of accused.  
112. Adjournment to view.  
113. Summing up by the trial judge advocate.  
114. Duties of  the trial judge advocate.  
115. Duties of the court.  
116. Retirement to consider finding.  
117. Announcement of the finding.  
118. Drawing up of the finding.  
119. Evidence of character and previous convictions.  
120. Consideration of the sentence.  
121. Announ cement of the sentence.  
122. Adjournment.  6 
 123. Provisions relating to dissolution of court s-martial.  
SECTIONS  
124. Ascertaining the opinion of the court.  
125. Finding that the offence was committed with intent involving less degree of punishment.  
126. Alte rnative findings.  
127. Finding lesser offence proved on charge of greater offence.  
128. Transmission of proceedings to the Judge Advocate  General of the Navy.  
129. Right of accused to copy of proceedings and sentence.  
Rules as to evidence  
130. Application of the Evidence Act.  
131. Accused competent witness for defence.  
132. Judicial notice.  
133. Presumption as to certain documents.  
134. Summoning of witnesses.  
135. Commissions for examination of witnesses.  
136. Examination of witnesses on commission.  
137. P ower to summon and examine material witnesses.  
Compensation to aggrieved persons out of fine  
138. Power of court to pay compensation out of fine.  
Power of court s-martial respecting contempt, etc  
139. Summary punishment for contempt of court person subject to naval law.  
140. Summary punishment for contempt of court by person not subject to naval law.  
141. Powers of court -martial when certain offences are committed by persons not subject to                 
naval law.  
142. Powers of courts martial and discipli nary courts in relation to proceedings under this Act.  
Lunacy  of accused  
143. Accused found insane during trial.  
144. Lunacy of the accused at the time of offence.  
Disposal of property  
145. Disposal of property pending trial.  
146. Disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.  7 
  
CHAPTER XIV  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES  
SECTIONS  
147. Form of sentence of death.  
148. Interim custody until execution of sentence of death.  
149. Execution of sentences of death.  
150. Place of imprisonment and detention.  
151. Commencement of sentence.  
152. Imprisonment of offender already under sentence.  
153. Change of place of confinement.  
154. Discharge or removal of prisoners.  
155. Time of detention in naval custody.  
156. Removal of insane prisoners.  
157. Naval prisons and naval detention quarters.  
158. Execution of sentence of fine.  
159. Power to make regulations in respect of naval prisons and detention quarters.  
CHAPTER XV  
JUDICAIL  REVIEW OF COURTS -MARTIAL PROCEEDINGS  
160. Judicial review by the Judge Advocate General  of the Navy.  
161. Consideration by the Chief of the Naval Staff.  
CHAPTER XVI  
MODIFICATIONS  OF FINDINGS  AND SENTENCES,  PARDONS  AND COMMUTATION                                    
REMISSION  AND SUSPENSION  OF SENTENCES  
162. Petitions to the Central Government or Chief of the Naval Staff against findings or sentences.  
163. Powers of Central Government and the Chief of the Naval Staff in respect of findings and 
sentences.  
164. Suspension of sentences.  
CHAPTER XVII  
OFFENCES  IN RELATION  TO COURT S-MARTIAL , DISCIPLINARY  COURTS AND  PRISONS  
165. Offences by persons not subject to naval law in relation to courts -martial and disciplinary court s. 
166. Penalties for aiding escape or attempt to escape of prisoners and for breach of prison regulations.  
167. Penalty as  regards gaolers, etc.  8 
  
CHAPTER XVIII  
JUDGE  ADVOCATE  GENERAL OF THE NAVY AND OFFICERS  OF HIS DEPARTMENT  
SECTIONS  
168. Appointment of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy  and his subordinate officers.  
169. Functions of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy.  
170. Discharge of functions of the Judge Advo cate General of the Navy in his  absence.  
CHAPTER XIX  
DISPOSAL  OF THE P RIVATE  PROPERTY OF  PERSONS  DECEASED , MISSING , ETC.  
171. Disposal of property of deceased sailors.  
172. Disposal of property of deceased  officers.  
173. Decision of questions as to ship and service debts and other debts in ship or quarters.  
174. Nature of the powers of commanding officer or Committee of Adjustment.  
175. Powers of Central Government to hand over estate of deceased persons to  the Administrator -
General.  
176. Disposal of surplus by prescribed persons.  
177. Disposal of effects not converted into money.  
178. Termination of liability of commanding officer, Committee, prescribed person and the Central 
Government.  
179. Saving of rights of representative.  
180. Application of sections 171 to 179 to persons of unsound mind.  
181. Appointment of Standing Committee of Adjustment in certain cases.  
182. Exercise of powers by other persons.  
183. Forfeiture of effects for absence without le ave. 
CHAPTER XX  
REGULATIONS  
184. Power to make regulations.  
184A. Power to make regulations with retrospective effect.  
185. Regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER XXI  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
186. Repeals.  
187. Provisions as to existing n aval forces,  appointments, etc.  
CHAPTER XXII  
TRANSITORY  PROVISIONS  
188. Power of officers of the Royal Navy.  
  9 
 THE NAVY ACT , 1957  
ACT NO. 62 OF 1957  
[27th December,  1957 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Government of the Indian Navy.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Navy Act, 1957.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Persons subject to naval law. —(1) The following persons shall be subject to naval law   wherever 
they may be, namely: — 
(a) every person belonging to the Indian Navy during the time that he is liable for service under 
this Act;  
(b) every person belonging to the Indian Naval Reserve Forces when he is — 
(i) on active service; or  
(ii) in or on any property of the naval service including naval establishments, ships and other 
vessels, aircraft, vehicles and armouries; or  
(iii) called up for training or undergoing training in pursuance of regulations made under this 
Act, until he is duly released from his training; or  
(iv) called up into actual service in the Indian Navy in pursuance of regulations made under 
this Act, until he is duly released therefrom; or  
(v) in uniform;  
(c) members of the regular Army and the Air Force when embarked on board any ship or aircraft 
of the Indian Navy, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed;  
(d) ever y person not otherwise subject to naval law, who enters into an engagement with the 
Central Government under section 6;  
(e) every person belonging to any auxiliary forces raised under this Act, to such extent and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescr ibed; and  
(f) every person who, although he would not otherwise be subject to naval law, is by any other 
Act or during active service by regulations made under this Act in this behalf made subject to naval 
law, to such extent and subject to such conditions  as may be prescribed.  
(2) The following persons shall be deemed to be perso ns subject to naval law, namely :— 
(a) every person ordered to be received, or being a passenger, on board any ship or aircraft of the 
Indian Navy, to such extent and subject to suc h conditions as may be prescribed;  
(b) every person sentenced under this Act to imprisonment or detention, during the term of his 
sentence, notwithstanding that he is discharged or dismissed with or without disgrace from naval 
service or would otherwise bu t for this provision cease to be subject to naval law.  
                                                           
1. 1st January, 1958, vide notification S.R.O. 11(E), dated 31 st December, 1957, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , 1958,              
Part II, s. 4( ii). 
 10 
 3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “active service ” means service or duty — 
(a) during the period of operation of a Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause ( 1) of 
article 352 of the Constitution; or  
(b) during any period declared by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette as a period of active service with reference to any area in which any person or class of 
persons subject to naval law may be serving;  
(2) “Chief of the Naval Staff means the flag officer appointed by the President as Chief of the 
Naval Staff or in his absence on leave or otherwise an officer appointed by the Central Government to 
officiate as such or in the absence of suc h officiating appointment the officer on whom the command 
devolves in accordance with regulations made under this Act;  
(3) “civil offence ” means an offence triable by a Court of ordinary criminal jurisdiction in India;  
(4) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under the 
Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1894) , or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(5) “commissioned officer ” means a person holding a commission from the President in India n 
Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Forces;  
(6) “Court -martial ” means a Court -martial constituted under this Act;  
(7) “enemy ” includes all armed rebels, armed mutineers, armed rioters and pirates and any person 
in arms against whom it is the duty of any per son subject to naval law to act;  
(8) “flag officer ” means an officer of the rank of Admiral of the Fleet, Admiral, Vice -Admiral or 
Rear -Admiral;  
(9) “Indian Naval Reserve Forces ” means the naval reserve forces raised and maintained by the 
Central Governmen t; 
(10) “Indian Navy ” means the regular naval forces raised and maintained by the Central 
Government;  
(11) “Indian wa ters”, for the purposes of sections 31, 97 and 99, means the seas extending from 
the shores of India to such limits as may be prescribed;  
(12) “naval custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a person in the prescribed manner or in 
accordance with the usages of the naval service, and includes military or air force custody;  
1[(12A) “naval establishment ” means an establishment belonging to, o r under the control of, the 
Indian Navy whether within or without India;]  
(13) “naval offence ” means any of the offences under sections 34 to 76;  
(14) “naval service ” means the naval organisation of India;  
(15) “naval tribunal ” means a Court -martial constituted under section 97 and includes a 
disciplinary Court constituted under section 96, a commanding officer or other officer or authority 
exercising powers of punishment under this Act;  
2[(16) “Officer ” means a commissioned off icer and includes — 
(a) a subordinate officer other than a petty officer;  
(b) a commissioned officer re -employed as such; ] 
3[(17) “petty officer ” means a sailor rated as such and includes a chief petty officer and a master 
chief petty officer;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 2. for clause ( 16) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  
3. Subs . by Act 53 of 1974, s. 3, for clause ( 17) (w.e.f. 16 -12-197).  11 
 (18) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(19) “provost -marshal ” means a person appointed as such under section 89 and includes any of 
his deputies or assistants or any other person lawfully exercising authority under him or on his b ehalf;  
(20) 1[“sailor ”] means a person in the naval service other than an officer;  
(21) “ship”, except in the expression “on board a ship ”, includes an establishment of the Indian 
Navy commissioned as a ship in accordance with the custom of the navy;  
(22) “subject to naval law ” means liable to be arrested and tried under this Act for any offence;  
(23) “subordinate officer ” means a person appointed as an acting sub -lieutenant, a midshipman or 
a cadet in any branch of the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reser ve Forces, but does not include a 
cadet whilst under training in a joint service institution;  
(24) “superior officer ”, when used in relation to a person subject to naval law, means any officer 
or petty officer who is senior to that person under regulations  made under this Act and any officer or 
petty officer, who though not so senior to that person, is entitled under this Act or the regulations 
made thereunder to give a command to that person, and includes, when such person is serving under 
prescribed condi tions, an officer, junior commissioned officer, warrant officer, noncommissioned 
officer of the regular Army or the Air Force of higher relative rank to that person or entitled under 
this Act or the regulations made thereunder to give a command to that per son; 
(25) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code . 
4. Fundamental rights to apply to persons subject to naval law with modifications. —The rights 
conferred by Part III of the Constitution in their application to persons subject to naval law shall be 
restricted or abrogated to the extent provided in th is Act. 
CHAPTER II  
THE NAVAL  FORCES  
5. Power of Central Government to raise and maintain naval forces. —The Central Government 
may raise and maintain a regular naval force and also reserve and auxiliary naval forces.  
CHAPTER II I 
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  RELATING  TO DISCIPLINE  IN CERTAIN  CASES  
6. Provision respecting discipline of p ersons under engagement to serve Central      
Government. —(1) If any person not otherwise subject to naval law enters into an engagement with the 
Central Government to serve, — 
(a) in a particular ship; or  
(b) in such particular ship or in such ships as the  Central Government, the Chief of the Naval 
Staff, or the prescribed officer may, from time to time, determine;  
and agrees to become subject to naval law upon entering into the engagement, that person shall, so long as 
the engagement remains in force and notwithstanding that for the time being he may not be serving in any 
ship, be subject to naval law.  
(2) The Centr al Government may, by order, direct that, subject to such exceptions as may in particular 
cases be made by or on behalf of the Chief of the Naval Staff, persons of any such class as may be 
specified in the order shall, while being subject to naval law by v irtue of this section, be deemed to be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974). 
 12 
 officers, petty officers or other 1[sailors], as the case may be, for the purposes of this Act or of such 
provisions of this Act as may be so specified.  
7. Relations between the members of the Navy, Army and Air Force  acting together. —(1) When 
members of the regular Army and the Air Force or of either of these forces are serving with members of 
the Indian Navy or Indian Naval Reserve Forces under prescribed conditions, then those members of the 
regular Army or the Air Force shall exercise such command, if any, and be subject to such discipline as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to authorise the exercise of powers of punishment by 
members of the regular Army or the Air Force over members  of the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval 
Reserve Forces, except as provided in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 93 1[or in such cases and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed].  
8. Provision respecting discipline of master of merchant vess el under convoy. —(1) Every master 
or other person for the time being in command of any merchant or other vessel comprised in a convoy 
under the command of an officer of the Indian Navy shall obey, in all matters relating to the navigation or 
security of th e convoy, any directions which may be given by such officer, and shall take such 
precautions for avoiding the enemy as may be required by any such directions.  
(2) If any such directions are not obeyed, any such officer or any person acting under his orders  may 
compel obedience by force of arms without being liable for any injury or loss of life or any danger to or 
loss of property resulting therefrom.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMMISSIONS, APPOINTMENTS AND ENROLMENTS  
9. Eligibility for appointment or enrolment. —(1) No person who is not a citizen of India shall be 
eligible for appointment or enrolment in the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Forces except with 
the consent of the Central Government .  
Provided that nothing in this section shall render a person inelig ible for appointment or enrolment in 
the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Forces on the ground that he is a subject of Nepal.  
(2) No woman shall be eligible for appointment or enrolment in the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval 
Reserve Forces except in  such department, branch or other body forming part thereof or attached thereto 
and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf.  
10. Commissions and appointments. —(1) Officers ot her than subordinate officers shall be 
appointed by commission granted by the President.  
(2) The grant of the commission shall be notified in the Official Gazette and such notification s hall be 
conclusive proof of the grant of such commission.  
(3) Subordin ate officers shall be appointed in such manner and shall hold such rank as may be 
prescribed.  
11. Enrolment. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the terms and conditions of service of 
2[sailors], the person authorised to enrol for service as 2[sailors] and the manner and procedure of such 
enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) No person shall be enrolled as a 2[sailor] in the Indian Navy for a period exceeding 3[twenty years] 
in the first instance : 
                                                           
1.  Ins by Act 53 of 1974, s. 4 (w.e.f. 16-12-1974). 
2. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid.,  for “seaman” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 34 of 1987, s. 2, for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 9 -9-1987). 
 13 
 Provided that in the case of a mino r the said period of  1[twenty years] shall be reckoned from the date 
on which he attains the age of seventeen.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force ,— 
(a) the enrolment of any person under this Act shall be binding on him both during his minority 
and after he attains majority;  
(b) neither the parent or guardian of a minor duly enrolled under this Act nor any other person 
shall be entitled to claim custody of the said minor as against the Central Government or  any of its 
officers or other persons set over him.  
12. Validity of enrolment. —Where a person after his enrolment has for a period of three months 
from the date of such enrolment been in receipt of pay as a  2[sailor], he shall be deemed to have been duly 
enrolled and shall not thereafter be entitled to claim his discharge on the ground of any irregularity or 
illegality in his engagement or any other ground whatsoever; and if within the said three months such 
person claims his discharge , no such irregularit y or illegality or other ground shall, until such person is 
discharged in pursuance of his claim, affect his position as a  2[sailor] in the naval service or invalidate any 
proceedings, act or thing taken or done prior to his discharge.  
13. Oath of allegian ce.—Every officer and every  2[sailor] shall, as soon as may be, after appointment 
or enrolment make and subscribe before the commanding officer of the ship to which he belongs, or the 
prescribed officer an oath or affirmation in the  following form, that is  to say :— 
“I.........................do          swear in the name of God  
                                                     Solemnly affirm         that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
Constitution of India as by law established and that I will, as in duty bound, honestly and faithfully 
serve in the naval service and go wherever ordered by sea, land or air, and that I will observe and 
obey all commands of the President and the commands of any superior officer set over me, even to 
the peril o f my life .”. 
CHAPTER V  
CONDITIONS  OF SERVICE  
14. Liability for service of officers and sailors. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub section ( 4), 
officers and 2[sailors] shall be liable to serve in the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Forces, as 
the case may be, until they are duly discharged, dismissed, dismissed with disgrace, retired, permitted to 
resign, or released.  
(2) No officer shall be at liberty to resign his office except with the permission of the Central 
Government and no 2[sailor] shall  be at liberty to resign his post except with the permission of the 
prescribed officer.  
(3) The acceptance of any resignation shall be a matter within the discretion of the Central 
Government or the officer concerned, as the case may be.  
(4) Officers retir ed or permitted to resign shall be liable to recall to naval service in an emergency in 
accordance with regulations made under this Act, and on such recall shall be liable to serve until they 
have been duly discharged , dismissed, dismissed with disgrace, r etired, permitted to resign, or released.  
15. Tenure of service of officers and sailors. —(1) Every Officer and  2[sailor] shall hold office 
during the pleasure of the President.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the regulations made thereunder, — 
(a) the Central Government may 3[dismiss or] discharge or retire from the naval service any 
officer or 2[sailor];  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1987, s. 2, for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 9 -9-1987). 
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, fo r “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
3.  Ins by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-197).  
 14 
 (b) the Chief of the Naval Staff or any prescribed officer may  1[dismiss or] discharge from the 
naval service any 2[sailor].  
16. Discharge on  expiry of engagement. —Subject to the provisions of section 18, a 2[sailor] shall be 
entitled to be discharged at the expiration of the term of service for which he is engaged unless — 
(a) such expiration occurs during active service in which case he shall be liable to continue to 
serve for such further period as may be required by the Chief of the Naval Staff; or  
(b) he is re -enrolled in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.  
17. Provisions as to discharge. —(1) A 2[sailor] entitled to be discharged under section 16 shall be 
discharged with all convenient speed and in any case within one month of his becoming so entitled:  
Provide d that where a  2[sailor] is serving overseas as the time he becomes entitled to be discharged he 
shall be returned to India for the purpose of being discharged with all convenient speed, and in any case 
within three months of his becoming so entitled:  
Prov ided further that where such enrolled person serving oversea does not desire to return to India, he 
may be discharged at the place where he is at the time.  
(2) Every 2[sailor] discharged shall be entitled to be conveyed free of cost from any place he may b e 
at the time to any place in India to which he may desire to go.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub -sections, an enrolled person shall remain 
liable to serve until he is duly discharged.  
(4) Every 2[sailor] who is dismissed, disch arged, retired, permitted to resign or released from service 
shall be furnished by the prescribed officer with a certificate in the language which is the mother tongue 
of such 2[sailor] and also in the English language setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  
(b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Indian Navy and the Indian Naval Reserve Forces.  
18. Saving of powers of dismissal by naval tribunals. —Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the 
award  by a naval tribunal of the punishment of dismissal with disgrace or dismissal from  the naval service 
under this Act.  
19. Restrictions respecting right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc. —(1) No person 
subject to naval law shall, without the expr ess sanction of the Central Government, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations, or  
(b) be a member of, or be ass ociated in any way with, any other society, institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Armed Forces of the Union or is not of a purely 
social, recreational or religious nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to w hether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall 
be final.  
(2) No person subject to naval law shall attend or address any meeting or t ake any part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(3) No person subject to naval law shall communicate with the press or pu blish or cause to be  
published any book, letter or other document having bearing on any naval, army or air force subject  or 
                                                           
1.  Ins by Act 53 of 1974, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
 15 
 containing any fact or opinion calculated to embarrass the relations between the Government and  the 
people or any section thereof or  between the Government and any foreign country, except with  the 
previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(4) No person subject to naval law shall whilst he is so subject practise any profession or carry on any 
occupation, trade or business without the  previous sanction of the Chief of the Naval staff.  
CHAPTER VI  
SERVICE PRIVILEGES  
20. Immunity from attachment. —The arms, clothes, equipments, accoutrements or necessaries of 
any person in the naval service, while subject to naval law, shall not be seized,  nor shall the pay and 
allowances or any part thereof of such person be attached under any process or direction issued by, or by 
the authority of, any court or public servant in respect of any claim, decree or order enforceable against 
him. 
21. Immunity fr om arrest for debt. —(1) No person in the naval service shall, so long as he is 
subject to naval law, be liable to be arrested for debt under any process or direction issued by, or by the 
authority of , any Court or public servant.  
(2) If any such person is arrested in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the court or 
public servant by whom or by whose authority such process or direction was issued shall on complaint by 
the person arrested or by his superior officer enquire into the case and if  satisfied that the arrest was made 
in contravention of sub -section ( 1), shall make an order for the immediate discharge of the person arrested 
and may award of the complainant the costs of the complaint to be recoverable in the same manner as if 
such costs were awarded to him by a decree against the person at whose instance such process or direction 
was issued.  
(3) No court -fee shall be payable on a complaint made under sub -section ( 2) for recovery of the costs 
that may be awarded under that sub -sectio n. 
22. Immunity of persons attending court -martial or disciplinary court from arrest. —(1) No 
President or other member of a court -martial or disciplinary court, no judge, advocate, no party to any 
proceeding before a court -martial or disciplinary court or no advocate or agent of such party, and no 
witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend a court -martial or disciplinary court shall , while 
proceeding to , attending or returning from , a court -martial or disciplinary court, be liable to arrest under 
any civil or revenue process.  
(2) If any such person is arrested under any such process, he may be discharged by order of the court -
martial or disciplinary court, as the case may be.  
23. Remedy of aggrieved persons. —(1) If an officer or  1[sailor]  thinks that  he has suffered any 
personal oppression, injustice or other  ill-treatment at the hands of any superior officer, he may make a 
complaint in  accordance with the regulations made under this Act.  
(2) The regulations referred  to in sub -section ( 1) shall provid e for the complaint to be forwarded to 
the Central Government for its consideration if the complaint is not satisfied with  the decision on his 
complaint.  
24. Priority of hearing of cases concerning persons in the naval service. —(1) On the presentation 
to any Civil or Revenue Court by or on behalf of any person in the naval service while subject to naval 
law of a certificate from the proper naval authority of leave of absence having been granted to or applied 
for by him for the purpose of prosecuting or def ending any suit or other proceeding in such court, the 
Court shall, on the application of such person, arrange, so far as may be possible, for the hearing and final 
disposal of such suit or other proceeding within the period of the leave so granted or appl ied for.  
(2) The certificate from the proper naval authority shall state the first and last day of the leave granted 
or applied for and set forth a description of the case with respect to which the leave has been granted or 
applied for, and shall be duly s igned and authenticated by such authority.  
(3) No fee shall be payable to the court in respect of the presentation of any such certificate, or in 
respect of any application by or on behalf of any such person for priority for the hearing of his case and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
 16 
 every such certificate duly signed and authenticated as aforesaid sha ll be conclusive evidence of the 
correctness of the contents thereof.  
(4) Where the court is unable to arrange for the hearing and final disposal of the suit or other 
proceeding within the p eriod of the leave granted or applied for as aforesaid, it shall record its reasons for 
having been unable to do so, and shall cause a copy thereof to be furnished to such person on his 
application, without any payment whatever by him in respect either of the application for such copy or of 
the copy itself.  
(5) Every criminal court before which a case is pending against a person in the naval service, shall, so 
far as may be possible, arrange for the early hearing and final disposal of such case.  
25. Right o f the Chief of the Naval Staff or commanding officers to obtain copies of judgments 
or orders made by a criminal court. —A criminal court before which any proceedings have been taken 
against a person in the naval service while subject to naval law shall, on  application by the Chief of the 
Naval Staff or the commanding officer of that person, grant copies of the judgment and final orders in the 
case free of cost and without delay.  
26. Saving of rights and privileges under other laws. —The rights and privileges  specified in the 
preceding sections of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other rights and 
privileges conferred on persons in the naval service while subject to naval law or on members of the 
regular Army, Navy and Air For ce generally by any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO PAY, PENSION, ETC., AND MAINTENANCE OF FAMILIES  
27. Deductions from pay, etc., not to be made unless authori sed.—No deductions other than those 
authorised by or under this or any other Act shall be made from the pay, pensions, gratuities, allowances 
and other benefits due to officers and 1[sailors] under any regulations for the time being in force.  
28. Deductions fro m pay and allowances of officers. —The following deductions may be made 
from the pay and allowances of an officer without recourse to trial by a naval tribunal, namely: — 
(1) all pay and allowances   for everyday of absence without leave unless an explanation is given 
to the satisfaction of the commanding officer for such absence and approved by the Chief of the 
Naval Staff:  
Provided that the officer is not dealt with by a na val tribunal for the said absence;  
(2) all pay and allowances for everyday while he is in civil or naval custody or under suspension 
from duty on a charge for an offence of which he is afterwards convicted by a competent naval 
tribunal or Criminal Court an d sentenced to imprisonment;  
(3) all pay and allowances for everyday while he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by 
the prescribed medical officer to have been caused by an act amounting to an offence punishable 
under this Act:  
Provided that s uch certificate is accepted by the Chief of the Naval Staff;  
(4) any sum required to make good the pay and allowances of any person subject to naval law 
which he has unlawfully retained or refused to pay;  
(5) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of Government property or 
property  belonging to a naval mess, band or institution which after due investigation appears to the 
Central Government, the Chief of the Naval Staff or the prescribed officer to have been occasioned by 
the wrongful  act or negligence on the part of the officer;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seaman” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
 17 
 (6) any sum required to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or legitimate or illegitimate 
children under the provisions of section 31;  
(7) any sum which  after due investigation appears to the prescribed officer to be due to a service 
mess or canteen . 
29. Deductions from pay and allowances of sailors. —The following deductions may be made from 
the pay and allowances of a 1[sailor] without recourse to trial by a naval tribunal, namely: — 
(1) all pay and allowances for everyday of absence without leave unless an explanation is given to 
the satisfaction of the commanding officer for such absence:  
Provided that the 1[sailor] is not dealt with by a naval tribunal for the said absence;  
(2) all pay and allowances for everyday he is in confinement on a charge for an offence of which 
he is afterwards convicted by a competent naval tribunal or Criminal Court;  
(3) all pay and allowances for everyday he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the 
prescribed medical officer to have been caused by an act amounting to an offence punishable under 
this Act:  
Provided that such certificate is accepted by the Chief of the Naval Staff or the prescribed officer;  
(4) any s um required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of any property which after 
due investigation appears to the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff or the prescribed 
officer to have been occasioned by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the 1[sailor];  
(5) any sum required to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or legitimate or illegitimate 
children under the provisions of section 31.  
30. Deductions awarded by naval tribunals. —Deductions may be made from the pay and 
allowan ces of an officer or  1[sailor] in respect of any sentence of fine, forfeiture or mulcts of pay and 
allowances awarded in pursuance of this Act by a naval tribunal.  
31. Liability for maintenance of wife and children. —(1) A person subject to naval law shall be 
liable to maintain his wife and his legitimate or illegitimate children to the same extent as if he were not 
so subject; but the execution or enforcement of any decree or order for maintenance passed or made 
against such person shall not be directed aga inst his person pay, arms, ammunition, equipment s, 
instruments or clothing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) where it appears to the satisfaction of the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff 
or the prescribed aut hority that a person subject to naval law has without reasonable cause deserted or 
left in destitute circumstances his wife or any legitimate child unable to maintain himself or has by 
reason of contracting a second marriage become liable to provide separa te maintenance to his first 
wife; or  
(b) where any decree or order is passed under any law against a person who is, or subsequently 
becomes, subject to naval law for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate children 
and a copy of the d ecree or order is sent to the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff or 
the prescribed authority;  
the Central Government, or the Chief of the Naval Staff or the prescribed authority may direct a portion 
of the pay of the person so subject to na val law to be deducted from such pay and appropriated in the 
prescribed manner towards the maintenance of his wife or children, but the amount deducted shall not 
exceed the amount fixed by the decree or order (if any) and shall not be at a higher rate than  the rate fixed 
by regulation made under this Act in this behalf:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seaman” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
 
 18 
 Provided that in the case of a decree or order for maintenance referred to in clause ( b) no deduction 
from pay shall be directed unless the Central Government, or the Chief of the Naval Staff or the 
prescribed authority is satisfied that the person against whom such decree or order has been passed or 
made, has had a reasonable opportunity of appearing, or has actually appeared either in person or through 
a duly appointed legal practitione r, to defend the case before the Court by which the decree or order was 
passed or made.  
(3) Where arrears of maintenance under a decree or order referred to in sub -section ( 2) have 
accumulated while the person against whom the decree or order has been made  is subject to naval law 
whether or not deductions in respect thereof have been made from his pay under this section, no step for 
the recovery of those arrears shall be taken in any Court after such person has ceased to be so subject 
unless the Court is sa tisfied that he has, since he ceased to be subject to naval law, the ability to pay the 
arrears or any part thereof and has failed to do so.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, where a proceeding for obtaining a decree 
or order for mai ntenance is started against a person subject to naval law, — 
(a) the court may send the process for service on that person to the commanding officer of the 
ship on which such person is serving or on the books of which he is borne; or  
(b) if, by reason of th e ship being at sea or otherwise, it is impracticable for the court to send the 
process to the commanding officer, the Court may, after not less than three weeks ‟ notice to the 
Central Government, send it to a Secretary to that Government for transmission to the commanding 
officer for service on that person:  
Provided that such service shall not be valid unless there is sent along with the process such sum of 
money as may be prescribed to enable that person to attend the hearing of the proceeding and to retu rn to 
his ship or quarters after such attendance.  
(5) If a decree or order is passed or made in the proceeding against the person on whom the process is 
served, the sum sent along with the process shall be awarded as costs of the proceeding against that 
person.  
(6) No process in any proceeding under this section shall be valid against a person subject to naval 
law if served on him after he is under orders for service at a foreign station or beyond Indian waters.  
(7) The production of a certificate of the receipt of the process purporting to be signed by such 
commanding officer as aforesaid shall be evidence that the process has been duly served , unless the 
contrary is proved.  
(8) Where by a decree or order a copy whereof has been sent to the Central Govern ment or the Chief 
of the Naval Staff or the prescribed authority under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), the person against whom 
the decree or order has been passed or made is directed to pay as costs any sum sent along with the 
process [referred to in the pr oviso to sub -section ( 4)], the Central Government may pay to the person 
entitled an amount in full satisfaction of that sum and the amount so paid by the Central Government shall 
be deemed to be a public demand recoverable from the person against whom the decree or order has been 
passed or made, and without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, may be recovered by deduction 
from his pay, in addition to the deductions authorised by sub -section ( 2). 
(9) Where any person subject to naval law has made an all otment of any part of his pay and 
allowances for the benefit of his wife, that allotment shall not be discontinued or reduced until the Central 
Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff or the prescribed authority is satisfied that the allotment 
should no  longer be made or should be reduced.  
(10) In this section, the expression “pay” includes all sums payable to a person subject to naval law in 
respect of his services other than allowances in lieu of lodgings, rations, provisions, clothing and 
travelling a llowances.  
32. Limit of certain deductions. —Except when the deductions are made under sub -sections ( 1), (2) 
and ( 4) of section 28 or sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 29, the total deductions from the pay and 19 
 allowances of an officer or 1[sailor] shall not exceeded in any one month one -half of his pay and 
allowances for that month.  
33. Remission of deductions. —(1) Any deduction from the pay and allowances authorised by or 
under this Act may be remitted by the Chief of the Naval Staff in his discretion.  
(2) Such deduction may also be remitted in such manner and to such extent and by such other 
authority as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ARTICLES OF  WAR 
2[34. Misconduct by officers or persons in command. —Every flag officer, captain or other person 
subject to naval law who, being in command of any ship, vessel or aircraft of the Indian Navy, or any 
naval establishment — 
(a) fails to use his utmost exertions to bring into action any such ship , vessel or aircraft which it is 
his duty to bring into action; or  
(b) surrenders any such ship, vessel or aircraft to the enemy when it is capable of being 
successfully defended or destroyed; or  
(c) fails to pursue the enemy whom it is his duty to pursue or to assist to the utmost of his ability 
any friend whom it is his d uty to assist; or  
(d) in the course of any action by or against the enemy improperly withdraws from the action or 
from his station or fails in his own person and according to his rank to encourage the persons under 
his command to fight courageously; or  
(e) surrenders any such naval establishment or any part of such an establishment to the enemy 
when it is capable of being successfully defended or when it is his du ty to cause it to be destroyed,  
shall, — 
(a) if such act is committed with intent to assist the enemy or from cowardice, be punished with 
death or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment  for a term  which may extend to seven years 
or  such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
35. Misconduct by persons other than those in command. —Every person subject to naval law 
who, not being in command of any naval establishment or any ship, vessel or aircraft of the Indian Navy, 
fails when ordered to prepare for action by or against the en emy, or during any such action, to use his 
utmost exertions to carry the lawful orders of his superior officers into execution shall, — 
(a) if such act is committed with intent to assist the enemy, be punished with death or such other 
punishment as is herei nafter mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years 
or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
36. Delaying or discouraging action or service commanded. —Every person subject to na val law 
who wilfully delays or discourages upon any pretext whatsoever, any action or service which has been 
commanded on the part of the Navy, regular Army, or Air Force or of any forces co operating therewith 
shall, — 
(a) if such act is committed with int ent to assist the enemy, be punished with death or such other 
punishment as is hereinafter mentioned; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sections 34 to 37 (w.e.f.  16-12-1974).  
 20 
 (b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or such 
other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
37. Penalty  for disobedience in action. —Every person subject to naval law who, being in the 
presence or vicinity of the enemy or having been ordered to be prepared for action by or against the 
enemy— 
(a) desert his post; or  
(b) sleeps upon his watch,   
shall be punished with death or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.]  
38. Penalty for spying. —Every person not otherwise subject to naval law who is or acts as a spy for 
the enemy shall be punished under this Act with death or such other punishment as  is hereinafter 
mentioned as if he were a person subject to naval law.  
39. Correspondence, etc., with the enemy. —Every person subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) traitorously holds correspondence with the enemy or gives intelligence to the enemy; or  
(b) fails to make known to the proper authorities any information he may have received from the 
enemy; or  
(c) assists the enemy with any supplies; or  
(d) having been made a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or aids the enemy;  
shall be punished with death or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
40. Improper communication with the enemy. —Every person subject to naval law who without 
any traitorous intention holds any improper communication with the enemy shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a t erm which may extend to fourteen years or such other punishment as is hereinafter 
mentioned.  
41. Deserting post and neglect of duty. —Every person subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) deserts his post; or  
(b) sleeps upon his watch; or  
1[(c) fails to perform or negligently performs the duty imposed on him; or]  
(d) wilfully conceals any words, practice or design tending to the hindrance of the naval service;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
2[42. Mutiny defined. —Mutiny means any assembly or combination of two or more persons subject 
to naval law, the Army Act, 1950  (40 of 1950) , or the Air Force Act, 1950  (40 of 1950) , or between 
persons two at least of whom , are subje ct to naval law or any such Act, — 
(a) to overthrow or resist lawful authority in the Navy, regular Army or Air Force or any part of 
any one or more of them or any forces co -operating therewith or any part thereof; or  
(b) to disobey such authority in such c ircumstances as to make the disobedience subversive of 
discipline or with the object of avoiding any duty or service against, or in connection with operations 
against, the enemy; or  
(c) to show contempt to such authority in such circumstances as to make su ch conduct subversive 
of discipline; or  
(d) to impede the performance of any duty or service in the Navy, regular Army or Air Force or 
any part of any one or more of them or any forces co -operating therewith or any part thereof.]  
43. Punishment for mutiny.—Every  person subject to naval law, who, — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 8, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
2. Subs . by s. 9, ibid., for section 42 (w.e.f. 16-12-1974).  21 
 (a) joins in a mutiny; or  
(b) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other persons to cause, a mutiny;  or 
(c) endeavours to incite any person to join in a mutiny or to commit an act of  mutiny; or  
(d) endeavours to seduce any person in the regular Army, Navy or Air Force from his  allegiance 
to the Constitution or loyalty to the State or duty to his superior  officers or uses any means to compel 
or induce any such person to abstain from  acting against the  enemy or discourage such person from 
acting against the  enemy; or  
(e) does not use his utmost exertions to suppress  1[or prevent] a mutiny;  or 
(f) wilfully conceals any traitorous or mutinous practice or design or any  traitorous words spoken 
against the S tate; or  
(g) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any mutiny or of any  intention to 
mutiny does not without delay give information thereof to the  commanding officer of his ship or other 
superior officer; or  
(h) utters words of sedition o r mutiny;  
shall be punished with death or such other  punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
44. Persons on board ships or aircraft seducing naval personnel from allegiance. —Every person 
not otherwise subject to naval law who being on board any ship or ai rcraft of the Indian Navy or on board 
any ship in the service of the Government endeavours to seduce from his allegiance to the Constitution or 
loyalty to the State or duty to superior officers any person subject to naval law shall be punished under 
this A ct with death or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned as if he were a person subject to 
naval law.  
45. Striking superior officers. —Every person subject to naval law who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) strikes or attempts to strike his superior officer; or  
(b) draws or lifts up any weapon against such officer; or  
(c) uses or attempts to use any violence against such officer;  
shall be punished, — 
if the offence is committed on active service with imprisonment for a t erm which may extend to ten 
years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned; and  
in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such other 
punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
46. Ill -treating subordinates. —Every person subject to naval law who is guilty of ill -treating any 
other person subject to such law, being his subordinate in rank or position, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such other punishment as is h ereinafter 
mentioned.  
47. Disobedience and insubordination. —Every person subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) wilfully disobeys any lawful command of his superior officer; or  
(b) in the presence of his superior officer, or otherwise shows or expresses his inten tion to 
disobey a lawful command given by such superior officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate, threatening or insulting language to his superior officer; or  
(d) behaves with contempt to his superior officer;  
                                                           
1.  Ins by Act 53 of 1974, s. 10 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974). 
 
 22 
 shall, if the offence is committed on active service or in a manner to show wilful defiance of authority, be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such other punishment as is 
hereinafter mentioned and in other cases, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
48. Quarrelling, fighting and disorderly behavio ur.—Every person subject to naval law , who, — 
(a) quarrels, fights with or strikes any other person, whether such person is or is not  subject to 
naval law; or  
(b) uses reproachful or provoking speeches or gestures tending to make a quarrel or disturbance; 
or 
(c) behaves in a disorderly manner;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
49. Desertion. —(1) Every person subject to naval law who absents himself from his ship or from the 
place where his duty requires him to be, with an intention of not returning to such ship or place, or who at 
any time  and under any circumstances when absent from his ship or place of duty does any act which 
shows that he has an intention of not returning to such ship or place is said to desert.  
(2) Every person who deserts shall, — 
(a) if he deserts to the enemy, be puni shed with death or such other punishment as is hereinafter 
mentioned; or  
(b) if he deserts under any other circumstances, be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned;  
and in every such case he shall forfeit all pay, head money, bounty, salvage, prize money and allowances 
that have been earned by him and all annuities, pensions, gratuities, medals and decorations that may have 
been granted to him and also all clothes and eff ects which he may have left on board the ship or the place 
from which he deserted, unless the tribunal by which he is tried or the Central Government or the Chief of 
the Naval Staff, otherwise directs.  
50. Inducing person to desert. —Every person subject to  naval law who endeavours to seduce any 
other person subject to naval law to desert shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
51. Breaking out of ship and absence with out leave. —Every person subject to naval law who 
without being guilty of desertion improperly leaves his ship or place of duty  1[or any place where he is 
required to be] or is absent without leave shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned and shall also be punished by 
such mulcts of pay and allowances as may be prescribed.  
52. Drunkenness. —2[(1)] Every person subject to naval law who is guilty of drunkenness shall, if th e 
offence is committed on active service, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned and in other cases be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months  or such other punishment as is hereinafter 
mentioned.  
3[(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to be guilty of drunkenness if , 
owing to the influence of alcohol or any drug whether alone or in combination with any other 
circumstances, he is unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty which he may be called upon to 
perform or behaves in a disorderly manner or in a manner likely to bring discredit to the naval service. ] 
53. Uncleanness or indecent acts. —Every person subject to naval law who is guilty of, — 
                                                           
1.  Ins by Act 53 of 1974, s. 11 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974). 
2. Section 52 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  23 
 (a) uncleanness; or  
(b) any indecent act;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years o r such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
54. Cruelty and conduct unbecoming the character of an officer. —(1) Every officer subject to 
naval law who is guilty of cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven ye ars or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
(2) Every officer subject to naval law who is guilty of any scandalous or fraudulent conduct or of any 
conduct unbecoming the character of an officer shall be punished with imprisonment for a term w hich 
may extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
55. Losing ship or aircraft. —(1) Every person subject to naval law who 1[wilfully] loses, strands or 
hazards or suffers to be lost, stranded or hazarded any ship of the Indian Navy or in the service of the 
Government, or loses or suffers to be lost any aircraft of the Indian Navy or in the service of the 
Government shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 
other punishment a s is hereinafter mentioned.  
(2) Every person subject to naval law who negligently or by any default loses , strands or hazards or 
suffers to be lost, stranded or hazarded any ship of the Indian Navy or in the service of the Government, 
or loses or suffers to be lost any aircraft of the Indian Navy or in the service of the Government shall be 
punished with impri sonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment as is 
hereinafter mentioned.  
2[55A. Dangerous unauthorised flying. —Every person subject to naval law, who is guilty of any act 
or neglect in flying or in the use of any aircraft of t he Indian Navy or in relation to any such aircraft or 
aircraft material, which causes or  is likely to cause loss of life  or bodily injury to any person shall, — 
(a) if he acts wilfully or with wilful neglect, be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years  3[or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned]; and  
(b) in any other case, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years 
or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
55B. Inaccurate ce rtificate.—Every person subject to naval law who signs any certificate  in relation 
to an aircraft or aircraft material belonging to or in the service of the Government without ensuring  the 
accuracy thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to  two years or such 
other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
55C. Low flying and annoyance by flying. —Every person subject to naval law being the pilot of an 
aircraft of the Indian Navy, who — 
(a) flies it at a height less than the minimum height authorised by his commanding officer or 
appropriate service authority except while taking off or landing; or  
(b) flies it so as to cause or likely to cause unnecessary annoyance to any person,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term w hich may extend to two years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
55D. Disobedience of lawful command of captain of an aircraft. —Every person subject to naval 
law, who while he is in an aircraft belonging to or in the use of the Government , disobeys any lawful 
command given by the captain of the aircraft, whether such captain is subject to naval law or not, in 
relation to all matters relating to flying or handling of the aircraft or affecting the safety thereof, shall be 
punished with impri sonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such other punishment as 
is hereinafter mentioned.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 14, for “designedly”  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
2. Ins. by s. 14 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -12-1974).  
3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  24 
 56. Offences by officers in charge of convoy. —(1) All officers appointed for the convoy and 
protection of any ships or vessels shall diligently per form their duty without delay according to their 
instructions in that behalf.  
(2) Every such officer subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) does not defend the ships and goods under his convoy without deviation to any other objects; 
or 
(b) refuses to fight in the ir defence if they are assailed; or  
(c) cowardly abandons and exposes the ships in his convoy to hazard; or  
(d) demands or exacts any money or other reward from any merchant or master for convoying 
any ships or vessels entrusted to his care; or  
(e) misuses  the masters or mariners thereof;  
shall be punished with death or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned, and shall also make 
such reparation in damages to the merchants, owners and others as a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction 
may adjudge.  
57. Taking unauthorised goods on board ship. —Every officer subject to naval law in command of 
any ship of the Indian Navy who receives on board or permits to be received on board such ship any 
goods or merchandise whatsoever other than for the sole use of the ship or persons belonging to the ship, 
except goods and merchandise on board any ship which may be shipwrecked or in imminent danger either 
on the high seas or in some port, creek, or harbour, for the purpose of preserving them for their proper 
owners,  or except such goods or merchandise as he may at any time be ordered to take or receive on 
board by order of the Central Government or his superior officer, shall be punished with dismissal from 
the naval service or such other punishment as is hereinafter  mentioned.  
58. Offences in respect of property. —Every person subject to naval law who wastefully expends or 
fraudulently buys, sells or receives any property of Government or property belonging to a naval, military 
or air force mess, band or institution, and every person who knowingly permits any such wasteful 
expenditure, or any such fraudulent purchase, sale or receipt, shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
59. A rson.—Every person subject to naval law who unlawfully sets fire to any dockyard, victualling 
yard or steam factory yard, arsenal, magazine, building, stores or to any ship, vessel, hoy, barge, boat, 
aircraft, or other craft or furniture thereunto belonging, not being the property of an enemy, shall be 
punished with death or such other punishment as is here inafter mentioned.  
60. Falsifying official documents and false declarations. —Every person subject to naval law — 
(a) who knowingly makes or signs a false report, return, list, certificate, book, muster or other 
document to be used for official purposes; or  
(b) who commands, counsels or procures the making or signing thereof; or  
(c) who aids or abets any other person in the making or signing thereof;  or 
(d) who knowingly makes, commands, counsels or procures the making of, a false or fraudulent 
statement or a fraudulent omission in any such document;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such other 
punishmen t as is hereinafter mentioned.  
61. Malingering, etc. —Every person subject to naval law — 
(a) who wilfully does any act or wilfully disobeys any orders whether in hospital or elsewhere 
with intent to produce or to aggravate any disease or infirmity or to del ay his cure; or  
(b) who feigns any disease, infirmity or inability to perform his duty;  25 
 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
62. Penalty for endeavouring to stir  up disturbance on account of unwholesomeness of victuals 
or other just grounds. —Every person subject to naval law who has any cause of complaint either of the 
unwholesomeness of the victuals or upon any other just ground shall quietly make the same known to his 
superior or captain or to the Chief of the Naval Staff, in accordance with the prescribed channels of 
communication and the said superior, captain or Chief of the Naval Staff shall, as far as he is able, cause 
the same to be presently remedied; and every person subject to naval law who upon any pretence 
whatever attempts to stir up any disturbance shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
63. Offences in res pect of papers relating to prize. —(1) All the papers, charter -parties, bills of 
lading passports and other writings whatsoever that shall be taken, seized, or found  1[aboard] any ships 
which are taken as prize shall be duly preserved and the commanding off icer of the ship which takes such 
prize shall send the originals entire and without fraud to the Court of competent jurisdiction or such other 
Court or commissioners as shall be authorised to determine whether such   prize be lawful capture, there to 
be vie wed, made use of and proceeded upon according to law.  
(2) Every commanding officer who wilfully fails to send the papers, charter -parties, bills of lading, 
passports or other writings whatsoever that shall be taken, seized, or found  1[aboard] any ships whi ch are 
taken as prize to the proper Court or other authority shall be punished with dismissal from the naval 
service or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned and in addition shall forfeit and lose any 
share of  the capture.  
64. Offences in respect of price. —Every person subject to naval law who takes out of any prize or 
ship seized for prize, any money , plate or goods, unless it is necessary for the better securing thereof, or 
for the necessary use and service of any ships of war of the Indi an Navy, before the same be adjuged 
lawful prize in a Court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned, and in addition shall 
forfeit and lose  his share of the capture.  
65. Offences in respect of persons on board of prize ship. —Every person subject to naval law who 
in any sort pillages, beats, or ill -treats officers, mariners or other persons on board a ship or vessel taken 
as prize or who unlaw fully strips them off their clothes, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
66. Unlawful taking or ransoming of prize.—Every commanding officer of a ship of the Ind ian 
Navy subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) by collusion with the enemy take as prize any vessel, goods or thing; or  
(b) unlawfully agrees with any person for the ransoming of any vessel, goods or thing taken as 
prize; or  
(c) in pursuance of any unlawful agre ement for ransoming or otherwise by collusion actually 
quits or restores any vessel, goods or thing taken as prize;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
67. Break ing bulk on board a prize ship. —Every person subject to naval law who breaks bulk on 
board any vessel taken as prize, or detained in the exercise of any beligerent right or under any law 
relating to piracy or to the slave trade or to the customs, with inte nt dishonestly to misappropriate 
anything therein or belonging thereto, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “abroad” ( w.e.f. 26-12-1960) . 
 26 
 68. Violation of the Act, regulations and orders. —Every person subject to naval law who neglects 
to obey or contravenes any provisions of this Act or any regulation made under this Act or any general or 
local order, shall, unless other punishment is provided in this Act for such neglect or contravention, be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment as is 
hereinafter mentioned.  
69. Offences in relation to Court -martial.—Every person subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a court -martial wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse fails to attend; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a court -martial to be taken 
or made; or  
(c) being sworn, refuses to answer any questions which he is in law bound to answer; or  
(d) refuses to produce or deliver up a document in his power which the court may legally 
demand; or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of court -martial;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such other 
punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
70. Fraudulent entry. —Every person who upon entry into or offering himself to enter the naval 
service wilfully makes or gives any false statement whether orally or in writing to any officer or person 
authorised to enter or enrol 1[sailors] or others in or for such naval service, shall, if he has become subject 
to naval law, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such other 
punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
71. Es cape from custody. —Every person subject to naval law who being in lawful custody escapes 
or attempts to escape from such custody shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentio ned. 
72. Failure to assist in detention of offenders. —Every person subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) does not use his utmost endeavours to detect, apprehend or bring to punishment all offenders 
against this Act; or  
(b) does not assist the officers appointed for that purpose;  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such other punishment 
as is hereinafter mentioned.  
73. Penalty for failure to attend by members of reserve forces when called up. —Every member 
of the Indian N aval Reserve Forces 2[and every person belonging to any auxiliary forces raised under this 
Act] who, when called up for training or when called up into actual service with the Indian Navy in 
pursuance of the regulations made under this Act, and required by  such call to join any ship or attend at 
any place, fails, without reasonable excuse to comply with such requirement, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or such other punishment as is hereinafter 
mentioned.  
74. O ffences against good order and naval discipline. —Every person subject to naval law who is 
guilty of an act, disorder, or neglect to the prejudice of good order and naval discipline, not hereinbefore 
specified, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term  which may extend to three years or such other 
punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
75. Attempts. —Every person subject to naval law who attempts to commit any of the offences 
specified in sections 34 to 74 and 76 and in such attempt does any act towards  the commission of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-74). 
2. Ins. by s. 15 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
 27 
 offence shall, where no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such attempt, be 
punished,  
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fo urteen years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned, and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, with one -half of 
the maximum punishment provided for the offence or with such other punishment as is herein after 
mentioned.  
76. Abetment of offences. —Any person subject to naval law who abets the commission of any of the 
offences specified in sections 34 to 74 shall, whether the act abetted is committed or not in consequence 
of the abetment, and where no expres s provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, 
be punished with the punishment provided for that offence.  
77. Civil offences. —(1) Every person subject to naval law who commits a civil offence punishable 
with death or with imprisonment  for life shall be punished with the punishment assigned for that offence.  
(2) Every person subject to naval law who commits any other civil offence shall be punished either 
with the punishment assigned for the offence or with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to three 
years or such other punishment as is hereinafter mentioned.  
78. Jurisdiction as to place and offences. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), every 
person subject to naval law who is charged with a naval offence or a civil o ffence may be tried and 
punished under this Act regardless of where the alleged offence was committed.  
(2) A person subject to naval law who commits an offence of murder against a person not subject to 
army, naval or air force law or an offence of culpable  homicide not amounting to murder against such 
person or an offence of rape in relation to such person shall not be tried and punished under this Act 
unless he commits any of the said offences — 
(a) while on active service; or  
(b) at an y place outside India ; or 
(c) at any place specified by the Central Government by notification in this behalf.  
79. Jurisdiction as to time. —No person unless he is an offender  who has avoided apprehension or 
fled form justice or committed the offence of desertion or fraudulent entry or the offence of mutiny shall 
be tried or punished in pursuance of this Act for any offence committed by him unless such trial 
commences within three years from the commission of such offence:  
Provided that in the computation of the said period of t hree years any time during which an offender 
was outside Indial or any time during which he was a prisoner of war shall be deducted:  
1[Provided further that in computation of the said period of three years, any time during which, — 
(a) the commission of the  offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the 
authority competent to initiate action, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of 
such person or authority, whichever is earlier;  
(b) it was not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on which the identity of 
the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the authority investigating into the 
offence, whichever is earlier, shall be excluded;  
Provided also that where the institution  of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed by 
an injunction or order, then, in computing the said period of three years, the period of the continuance of 
the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made and the day on which  it was withdrawn 
shall be excluded:  
Provided also that] no trial for an offence of desertion other than desertion on active service or 
fraudulent entry shall be commenced if the person in question not being an officer has subsequently to the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 3,  for “Proviso further that” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  28 
 commission of  the offence served continuously in an exemplary manner for not less than three years in 
the Indian Navy.  
80. Trial after a person ceases to be subject to naval law. —When any offence mentioned in this 
Chapter has been committed by any person while subject to naval law and such person has since the 
commission of the offence ceased to be subject to naval law, he may be taken into and kept in custody, 
tried and punished under this Act for such offence in like manner as he may have been taken into and kept 
in custody, tried and punished if he had continued subject to naval law:  
Provided that he shall not be tried for such offence except in the case of an offence of mutiny or 
desertion, unless the trial against him commences within six months after he has ceased to be so subject.  
CHAPTER IX  
PROVISIONS AS TO  PUNISHMENTS  
81. Punishments. —(1) The following punishments may be inflicted under this Act, namely: — 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term;  
(c) dismissal with disgrace from the naval service;  
(d) detention;  
(e) dismissal from the naval service;  
(f) forfeiture of seniority in rank in the case of officers  1[and master chief petty officers];  
(g) forfeiture of time for promotion in the case of  2[officers below the rank of commander and 
master chief petty officers];  
(h) dismissal from the ship to which the offender belongs;  
(i) 3[reduction in rank], in the case of  4[petty officers ] and persons holding leading rates;  
(j) fine, in respect of civil offences;  
(k) mulcts of pay and allowances;  
(l) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(m) forfeiture of pay, head money, bounty, salvage, prize money and allowances earned by, and 
all annuities, pensions, gratuities, medals and decorations granted to, the offender or of any one or 
more of the above particulars; also in the case of desertion, of all clothes and effects left by the 
deserter in the ship to which he belongs;  
(n) such minor punishments as are inflicted according to the custom of the navy or may from time 
to time be prescri bed. 
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment preceding it in the above scale.  
82. Provisions as to award of punishment. —(1) The punishments that may be inflicted under this 
Act shall be awarded in  accordance with the provisions of the following sub -sections.  
(2) Except in the case of mutiny in time of war or on active service, the punishment  of death shall not 
be inflicted on any offender until the sentence has been  confirmed by the Central Government.  
(3) The punishment of imprisonment for a term exceeding two years shall in all cases  be accompanied 
by a sentence of dismissal with disgrace from the naval service.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “subordinate officers” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “disrating” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid., for “subordinate and petty officers” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
 29 
 (4) The punishment of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two yea rs may in all  cases be 
accompanied by a sentence of dismissal with disgrace or dismissal from  the naval service:  
Provide d that in the case of officers, unless the sentence of dismissal with disgrace is  also awarded, 
such sentence of imprisonment shall invo lve dismissal from the  naval service.  
(5) The sentence of imprisonment may be rigorous or simple, or partly rigorous and  partly simple.  
(6) The sentence of dismissal with disgrace shall involve in all cases forfeiture of  all pay, head 
money, bounty, salvage, prize money an d allowances that have been  earned by and of all annuities, 
pensions, gratuities, medals and decorations  that may have been granted to the offender and an incapacity 
to serve Government  again in a defence service, or a civil service,  or to hold any post connected  with 
defence or any civil post under the Government:  
Provided  that the forfeiture of moneys shall not apply, except in the case of deserters,  to moneys 
which should have been paid on the last pay day preceding conviction.  
(7) The punishment of dismissal from the naval service shall in the case of persons  who hold any lien 
on appointments in the regular Army or Air Force, involve  dismissal from such army or air force service.  
(8) The punishment of detention may be inflicted for  any term not exceeding two  years but no 
sentence of detention shall be awarded unless naval detention  quarters or army or air force detention 
barracks are in existence.  
(9) The punishment of imprisonment or detention whether on board ship or on shore  shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 14), involve  1[reduction  in rank], in the case of a petty officer or a person 
holding a leading  2[rank],  and shall in all cases be accompanied by stoppage of pay and allowances during  
the term of imprisonment or  detention:  
Provided  that where the punishment awarded is detention for a term not exceeding fourteen  days, the 
sentence may direct that the punishment shall not be accompanied by  stoppage of pay and allowances 
during the term of detention.  
(10) No officer  shall be subject to detention.  
(11) The punishment of forfeiture of seniority shall be imposed in the substantive rank held at the date 
of the sentence, and shall involve a corresponding  forfeiture of seniority in every higher acting rank 
subject always t o the  condition that forfeiture of seniority in any rank shall in no case exceed the  seniority 
in that rank at the date of the sentence.  
(12) The punishment of forfeiture of seniority shall involve the loss of the benefit of  service included 
in the seniori ty forfeited for the purposes of pay, pension,  gratuity, promotion and such other purposes, as 
may be prescribed, provided that  such pay, pension, gratuity and promotion and other purposes depend 
upon such  service.  
3[(12A) No master chief petty officer shall be subject to the punishment of  forfeiture of seniority of 
more than twelve months.]  
(13) The punishment of forfeiture of time for promotion shall delay the promotion by  the time 
specified,  
3[(13A) No master chief petty officer shall be subject to th e punishment  of forfeiture of time for 
promotion of more than twelve months.]  
(14) No person shall be  4[reduced in rank] below the  limits prescribed, or lower either actually or 
relatively than the  5[rank]  in which he entered or was appointed in the naval service.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 4, for “distracting” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “rate” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
3. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “distracting” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “rate” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  30 
 (15) Mulcts of pay and allowances shall not be awarded except as provided in  sub-sections ( 16)                
and ( 17). 
(16) Mulcts of pay and allowances shall be awarded in accordance with the regulations  made under 
this Act on conviction of offe nces under Section 31.  
(17) Mulcts of pay may also be awarded to make good any proved loss or damage occasioned  by the 
offence on which there is a conviction, and for the offence of drunkenness  by 1[sailors].  
(18) The punishment of fine may be awarded in respect of civil offences in addition  to, or in lieu of, 
other punishments specified in this Act.  
(19) The forfeiture of moneys under clause ( m) of sub -section ( 1) of section 81 shall  not, except in 
case of desertion apply to moneys which should have been paid on  the last pay day preceding conviction.  
(20) All other punishments authorised by this Act may be inflicted in such manner as  is heretofore in 
use in the naval service or as may be prescribed.  
(21) Subject to the provisions of the foregoing sub -sections, where any punishment is  specified by 
this Act as the penalty for an offence and it is further declared  that “such other punishment as is 
hereinafter mentioned ” may be  awarded in respect of the same offence, the expression “such other  
punishment ” shall  be deemed to comprise any one or more of the punishments  inferior in degree to the 
specified punishment according to the scale of  punishments laid down in sub -section ( 1) of section 81.  
CHAPTER X  
ARREST  
83. Power to issue warrants of arrest .—(1) The Chief  of the Naval Staff, every officer in command 
of a fleet or squadron of ships of the Indian Navy or of any ship of the Indian Navy or the senior officer 
present at a port or an officer having by virtue of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 93 power to try  
offences, may, by warrant under his hand, authorise any person to arrest any offender subject to naval law 
for any offence triable under this Act mentioned in such warrant and any such warrant may include the 
names of more persons than one in respect of s everal offences of the same nature.  
(2) Any person named in any such warrant as aforesaid may, forthwith on his arrest, if the warrant so 
directs, be taken to the ship of the Indian Navy to which he belongs or some other ship of the                  
Indian  Navy.  
(3) A person authorised to arrest an offender may use such force as may be necessary for the purpose 
of effecting such arrest.  
(4) Where a warrant under sub -section ( 1) is issued to a police officer, the police officer shall take 
steps to execute th e warrant and arrest the offender in like manner as if such warrant had been issued by a 
Magistrate of competent jurisdiction and shall, as soon as may be, deliver the person when arrested into 
naval custody.  
84. Arrest without warrant .—(1) Any person subject to naval law may be ordered without warrant 
into naval custody by any superior officer for any offence triable under this Act.  
(2) A person subject to naval law may arrest without warrant any other person subject to naval law 
though he may be of a higher rank who in his view commits an offence punishable with death, or 
imprisonment for life or for a term which may extend to fourteen years.  
(3) A provost -marshal may arrest any person subject to naval law in accordance with the provisions 
of section 8 9. 
(4) It shall be lawful for the purpose of effecting arrest, or taking a person into custody, without 
warrant to use such force as may be necessary for the purpose.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  31 
 85. Procedure and conditions of naval custody .—(1) No person subject to naval law who is 
arrested under this Act shall be detained in naval custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of 
the grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Every person subject to naval law who is arrested and detained in naval custody shall be produced 
before his commandin g officer or other officer prescribed in this behalf within a period of forty -eight 
hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to such 
commanding or other officer and no such person shall be detained in custo dy beyond the said period 
without the authority of such commanding or other officer.  
86. Investigation after arrest .—The charge made against any person subject to naval law taken into 
custody shall without any unnecessary delay be investigated by the prope r authority and as soon as may 
be either proceedings shall be taken for the trial or such person shall be discharged from custody.  
87. Duty to receive or keep in custody .—(1) The commanding officer shall be responsible for the 
safe custody of every person who is in naval custody on board his ship or in his establishment.  
(2) The officer or  1[sailor] in charge of a guard, or a provost -marshal shall receive and keep any 
person who is duly committed to his custody.  
88. Procedure before trial .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the procedure before trial and the 
manner of investigation shall be as prescribed.  
89. Provost -marshals .—(1) Provost -marshals may be appointed by the Chief of the Naval Staff or 
the prescribed officer.  
(2) The duties of a provost -marshal or to take char ge of persons in naval custody, to preserve good 
order and discipline and to prevent breaches of the same by persons subject to naval law or to the law in 
force relating to the Government of the regular Army or the Air Force.  
(3) A pro vost-marshal may at any time arrest and detain for trial any person subject to naval law who 
commits, or is charged with, an offence and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in 
pursance of a sentence passed under this Act, but shall no t inflict any punishment on his own authority:  
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of                          
another  officer.   
(4) For the purpose of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), a provost -marshal shall be d eemed to include a 
provost -marshal and any of his assistants appointed under the law in force relating to the government of 
the regular Army or the Air Force.  
CHAPTER XI  
CHARGE  
90. Joinder of charges .—For every distinct offence of which any person is accused, there shall be a 
separate charge but except as otherwise provided by regulations made under this Act all separate charges 
may be tried together.  
91. Acts amounting to different offences .—If a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that i t 
is doubtful which of several offences the acts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be 
charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be tried 
at one trial; or he may be charged in the altern ative with having committed some one of the said offences.  
92. Joinder of accused person. —The following persons may be char ged and tried together, 
namely :— 
(i) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction;  
(ii) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or an attempt to commit, 
such offence; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
 32 
 (iii) persons accused of different offences committed in the  course of the same transaction :  
Provided that in a trial by a court -martial the trial  judge advocate may, on the application made in this 
behalf by any accused, direct that each of the accused be tried separately by the same court -martial.  
CHAPTER XII  
AUTHORITIES SAVING  POWER  TO AWARD  PUNISHMENTS  
93. Power of court -martial and commanding o fficers to try offences. —(1) An offence triable 
under this Act may be tried and punished by court -martial.  
(2) An offence not capital which is triable under this Act and which is committed by a person other 
than an officer (and in cases by this Act express ly provided for when committed by an officer), may, 
subject to regulations made under this Act be summarily tried and punished by the commanding officer of 
the ship to which the offender belongs at the time either of the commission or of the trial of the o ffence, 
subject to the restriction that the commanding officer shall not have power to award imprisonment or 
detention for more than three months, or to award dismissal with disgrace from the naval service:  
Provided that no sentence of imprisonment or dism issal shall be carried into effect until approved by 
the prescribed authorities.  
(3) The power by this section vested in a commanding officer of a ship may, subject to regulations 
made under this Act, — 
(a) as respects  1[sailors] on board a tender to the ship, be exercised in the case of a single tender 
absent from the ship, by the officer in command of such tender and in the case of two or more tenders 
absent from the ship in company or acting together, by the officer in immediate command of such 
tenders;  
(b) as respects  1[sailors] on board any boat belonging to the ship, be exercised when such boat is 
absent on detached service by the officer in command of the boat;  
(c) as respect s 1[sailors] on detached service either on shore or otherwise, be exercised by the 
officer in immediate command of those persons;  
(d) as respects  1[sailors] quartered in naval barracks, be exercised by the officer in command 
of  the barracks;  
(e) as respects  1[sailors] attached to or serving with any body of the regular Army or th e Air Force 
under prescribed conditions be exercised by the commanding officer of any such body of the regular 
Army or the Air Force.  
(4) The commanding officer of a ship or barracks may delegate the power of awarding 
punishments inferior in scale to dismi ssal, to other officers under his command in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act.  
94. Power of Central Government, Chief of the Naval Staff and other officers to impose 
forfeiture of time or seniority .— 2[(1) The Central Government may impose on any officer below the 
rank of commander one or more of the following punishments, namely: — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority in rank of not more than twelve months;   
(b) forfeiture of time for promotion of not more than twelve months;   
(c) mulcts of pa y and allowances.  
(2) The Chief of the Naval Staff may impose on 3[any officer below the rank of commander ] one or 
more of the following punishments, namely: — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority in rank of not more than six months;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 2005 , s. 4 , for sub -sections ( 1), (2), (2A), and ( 3) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 5, for “any subordinate officer” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  33 
 (b) forfeiture of time for promo tion of not more than six months;  
(c) mulcts of pay and allowances.  
(2A) The Flag Officer Commanding -in-Chief of a naval  command may, subject to regulations made 
under this Act, impose on any officer below the rank of commander one or more of the following 
punishments, namely: — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority in rank of not more than three months;  
(b) forfeiture of time for pro motion of not more than three months;  
(c) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(d) mulcts of pay and allowances.  
(3) The commanding officer of a ship may. subject to regulations made under this Act, may impose 
on any officer below the rank of commander one or mo re of the following punishments, namely: — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority in rank of not more than three months;  
(b) forfeiture of time for promotion of not more than three months;  
(c) mulcts of pay and allowances. ] 
(4) In imposing punishments under sub -sectio ns (1) 1[(2) and ( 2A)], it shall not be necessary for the 
Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff, as the case may be, to hear the accused in person or 
by any friend or counsel.  
2[(5) The commanding officer of a   3[ship] or the officer -in-charge  of a naval academy may impose on 
any subordinate officer whilst under training such minor punishments, not higher than the punishment of 
severe reprimand or reprimand, as may, from time to time, be prescribed.]  
(1) The Central Government may impose the punishment of forfeiture of time or seniority of not 
more than twelve months on any officer below the rank of commander.   
(2) The Chief of the Naval Staff may impose the punishment of forfeiture of time or seniority of 
not more than six months on any offic er below the rank of commander.   
(2A) The Flag Officer Commanding -in-Chief of a naval command may, subject to regulations 
made under this Act, impose on any officer below the rank of commander one or more of th e 
following punishments, namely :— 
(a) forfeitu re of seniority in rank of not more than three months;  
(b) forfeiture of time for promotion of not more than three months;  
 (c) severe reprimand or reprimand.  
(3) The commanding officer of a ship may subject to regulations made under this Act, impose the 
punishment of forfeiture of time or seniority of not more than three months on any subordinate 
officer.  
95. Disciplinary Courts when may be constituted. —When an officer is, in time of war or during 
active service, alleged to have been guilty of a disciplina ry offence, that is to say of a breach of sections 
41, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 68 and 74 or of any of those sections read with section 75 or 76, the officer having 
the power to order a court -martial may, if he considers the offence to be of such a character as  not to 
necessitate trial by court -martial, in lieu of ordering a court -martial, order a disciplinary court constituted 
as hereinafter mentioned.  
96. Constitution and procedure of disciplinary courts. —(1) A disciplinary court shall be  
composed of not less than three nor more than five officers:  
                                                           
1. Subs .  Act, 48 of 1982, s . 5, for “and ( 2)” (w.e.f. 1 6-10-1982).  
2. Ins. by Act 53 of 1970, s. 16 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
3. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid., for “training ship” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982). 34 
 Provided that the majority of the officers including the president shall be officers of the executive 
branch of the naval service.  
(2) At least one of these officers composing the court shall be superior in rank to t he officer under 
trial and in any case shall be of the rank of substantive or acting commander or of a higher rank.  
(3) A disciplinary court shall have power to impose any punishment inferior to detention in the scale 
hereinbefore contained, but no greater  punishment.  
(4) The officers composing the disciplinary court shall be named by the authority ordering the same 
or by an officer empowered in this behalf by such authority.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of the foregoing sub -sections, the procedure and pra ctice of courts -
martial provided by or under this Act shall apply to the procedure and practice of disciplinary courts 
subject to such modifications as may be prescribed.  
97. Constitution of courts -martial.—(1) Courts -martial shall be constituted and conve ned subject to 
the provisions of the following sub -sections.  
(2) The President, the Chief of the Naval Staff, or any officer empowered in this behalf by 
commission from the Chief of the Naval Staff shall have the power to order courts -martial for the trial  of 
offences under this Act.  
(3) Unless otherwise prescribed in respect of any specified port or station, an officer holding a 
commission from the Chief of the Naval Staff to order courts -martial shall not be empowered to do so if 
there is present at the p lace where such court -martial is to be held an officer superior in rank to himself 
and in command of one or more of the ships of the Indian Navy although such last mentioned officer may 
not hold a commission to order courts -martial and in such a case such last mentioned officer may order a 
court -martial although he does not hold a commission for the purpose.  
(4) If an officer holding a commission from the Chief of the Naval Staff to order courts -martial, 
having the command of a fleet or squadron and being o utside Indian waters die, be recalled, leave his 
station or be removed from his command, the officer upon whom the command of the fleet or squadron 
devolves  and so from time to time the officer who shall have the command of the fleet or squadron, shall 
without any commission from the Chief of the Naval Staff have the same power to order courts -martial as 
the first mentioned officer was invested with.  
(5) If an officer holding a commission from the Chief of the Naval Staff to order courts -martial and 
having the command of any fleet or squadron of the Indian Navy outside Indian waters shall detach any 
part of such fleet or squadron, or separate himself from any part of such fleet or squadron he may by 
commission under his hand empower in the first mentioned ca se, the commanding officer of the squadron 
or detachment ordered on such separate service and in the case of his death or ceasing so to command, the 
officer to whom the command of such separate squadron or detachment shall belong, and in the second 
mention ed case, the senior officer of the ships of the Indian Navy on the division of the station from 
which he is absent, to order courts -martial during the time of such separate service or during his absence 
from that division of the station as the case may be,  and every such authority shall continue in force until 
revoked or until the officer holding it returns to India or until he comes into the presence of a superior 
officer empowered to order courts -martial in the same squadron, detachment or division of sta tion but so 
that such authority shall revive on the officer holding it ce asing to be in the presence of such a superior 
officer and so from time to time as often as the case so requires.  
(6) A court -martial shall consist of not less than five nor more than  nine officers.  
(7) No officer shall be qualified to sit as a member of a court -martial unless — 
(a) he is subject to naval law , 
(b) he is an officer of the Indian Navy of the rank of lieutenant or higher rank, and  
(c) he is of or over twenty -one years of age.  
(8) A prosecutor shall not be  qualified to sit on the court -martial for the trial of the person                          
he prosecutes.  35 
 (9) The officer ordering the court -martial, the officer who was the comman ding officer of the ship to 
which the accused belonged at the time of the commission of the alleged offence and the officer 
investigating the offence shall not be qualified to sit on a court - martial for the trial of such accused.  
(10) Subject to the prov isions of sub -sections ( 7) to ( 9), officers of the Indian Navy shall be eligible to 
sit as members of a court -martial irrespective of the branch of the naval service to which they belong:  
Provided that —  
(a) the majority of the members of the court -martia l, including the president, shall be officers of 
the executive branch of the naval service, and  
(b) at trials for offences against sections 34, 35, 55, 1[55A, 55C] and 56, officers other than 
officers of the executive branch of the naval service shall not be eligible to sit.  
(11) A court -martial shall not be deemed to be duly constituted unless the members thereof are drawn 
from at least two ships not bei ng tenders, and commanded by officers of the rank of lieutenant or                
higher rank.  
(12) The president of a court -martial shall be named by the authority ordering the same or by any 
officer empowered by such authority to name the president.  
(13) No court -martial for the trial of a flag officer shall be duly constituted unless the president is a 
flag officer and the other officers composing the court are of the rank of captain or of higher rank.  
(14) No court -martial for the trial of a captain shall be duly constituted unless the president is a 
captain or of higher rank and  
(15) No court -martial for the trial of a commander shall be duly constituted unless the president is a 
commander or of higher rank and two other members are commanders or off icers of higher rank.  
(16) No court -martial for the trial of a person below the rank of commander shall be duly constituted 
unless the president is a substantive or acting commander or of higher rank.  
(17) No commander or lieutenant -commander or lieutena nt shall be required to sit as a member of a 
court -martial when four officers of higher rank and junior to the president can be assembled at the place 
where the court -martial is to be held, but the regularity or validity of any court -martial or of the 
proceedings thereof shall not be affected by any commander, lieutenant -commander or lieutenant being 
required to sit or sitting thereon under any circumstances and when any commander, lieutenant -
commander or lieutenant sits on any court - martial, the members o f it shall not exceed five.  
(18) Members of the court -martial other than the president shall be appointed, subject to the 
provisions of the foregoing sub -sections, in the manner provided in sub -section ( 19).  
(19) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (11), the president shall summon all officers except such 
as are exempted under the provisions of sub -section ( 20), next in seniority to himself present at the place 
where the court -martial shall be held, to sit thereon until the number of nine or such oth er number not less 
than five as is attainable is complete.  
(20) The officer convening the court -martial or the senior naval officer present at the place where the 
court -martial is to be held, may exempt by writing under his hand conveyed to the president of the court -
martial any officer from attending as member on ground of sickness or urgent public duty.  
(21) In this section references to specified ranks of officers shall, unless otherwise stated, be deemed 
to be references to substantive ranks and to include references to equivalent ranks in all branches of the 
naval service.  
(22) When the naval forces are on active service, officers of the Indian Naval Reserve Forces subject 
to naval law shall be eligible to sit as members of courts -martial on the same basis and under the same 
conditions as officers of the Indian Navy.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1982,  s. 6 (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  36 
 CHAPTER XIII  
PROCEDURE  
Procedure of courts -martial  
98. Where courts -martial to be held. —A court -martial may be held ashore or afloat.  
99. Trial judge advocate. —(1) Every court -martial shall be attended by a person (in this Act referred 
to as the trial judge advocate) who shall be either a ju dge advocate in the department of the Judge 
Advocate -General of the Navy or any fit person appointed by the convening officer:  
Provided that in the case of a court -martial for the trial of a capital offence the trial judge advocate 
shall be a person nomina ted by the Judge Advocate -General of the Navy unless such trial is held outside 
Indian waters.  
(2) The trial judge advocate shall administer oath to every witness at the trial and shall perform such 
other duties as are provided in this Act and as may be pr escribed.  
100. Courts -martial to be public. —The place in which a court -martial is held for the purpose of 
trying an offence under this Act shall be deemed to be an open court to which the public generally may 
have access, so far as the same can convenientl y contain them:  
Provided that, if the court is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest or for the 
ends of justice so to do, the court may at any stage of the trial of any particular case order that the public 
generally or any por tion thereof or any particular person shall not have access to, or be or remain in, the 
place in which the court is held.  
101. Commencement of proceedings. —(1) As soon as the court has been assembled the accused 
shall be brought before it and the prosecuto r, the person or persons, if any, defending the accused and the 
audience admitted.  
(2) Except where the accused defends himself, he may be defended by such person or persons as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) The trial judge advocate shall read out the warrant for assembling the court and the names of 
officers who are exempted from attending under sub -section ( 20) of section 97 together with the reasons 
for such exemption.  
(4) The trial judge advocate shall read out the names of the officers composing the court and shall ask 
the prosecutor whether he objects to any of them.  
(5) If the prosecutor shall have made no objection or after any objection made by the prosecutor has 
been disposed of, the trial judge advocate shall ask the accused if he objects to any member of  the court.  
102. Objections to members. —The following provisions shall apply to the disposal of objections 
raised by the pr osecutor as well as the accused :— 
(a) any member may be objected to on a ground which affects his competency to act as an 
impartial J udge; and the trial judge advocate may reject summarily without reference to the members 
of the court any objection not made on such ground; „ 
(b) objections to members shall be decided separately, those to the officer lowest in rank being 
taken first: pro vided that if the objection is to the President, such objection shall be decided first and 
all the other members whether objected to or not shall vote as to the disposal of the objection;  
(c) on an objection being allowed by one -half or more of the officers entitled to decide 
the  objection, the member objected to shall at once retire and his place shall be filled up before  an 
objection against another member is taken up;           
(d) should the president be objected to and the objection be allowed, the court shall adjourn until 
a new president has been appointed by the convening authority or by the officer empowered in this 
behalf by the convening authority; and  37 
 (e) should a member be objected to on the ground of being summoned as a witness and shoul d it 
be found that the objection has been made in good faith and that the officer is to give evidence as to 
facts and not merely as to character, the objection shall be allowed.  
103. Further objections. —(1) The trial judge advocate shall then ask the accus ed whether he has any 
further objections to make respecting the constitution of the court; and should the accused raise any such 
objection, it shall then be decided by the court, which decision shall be final and the constitution of the 
court -martial shall  not be afterwards impeached and it shall be deemed in all respects to have been duly 
constituted.  
(2) If the accused should have no further objection to make to the constitution of the court or if any 
objection is disallowed, the members and the trial jud ge advocate shall then make an oath or affirmation 
in the form set out in section 104.  
104. Administering oath or affirmation. —(1) Before the court shall proceed to try the person 
charged, an oath or affirmation in the following form and manner shall be ad ministered to the president 
and every member of the court -martial in the order of their senior ity by the trial judge advocate :— 
“I.................................. ....do                       swear in the name of God  
                                                                                            solemnly affirm            that I will duly and faithfully 
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment administer justice according to law, without 
fear o r favour, affection or ill -will, and that I will not on any account at any time whatsoever disclose 
or discover the vote or opinion of any particular member of this court -martial unless thereunto 
required in due course of law. ” 
(2) The trial judge advocate  shall then be sworn or affirmed by the president in the following form: — 
“I......................................do                        swear in the name of God  
                                                                                           solemnly affirm            that I will duly and faithfully 
and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my office according to 
law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will, and that I will not upon any account at any ti me 
whatsoever disclose or discover the vote or opinion of any particular member of this court -martial 
unless thereunto required in due course of law. ” 
105. Arraignment. —(1) When the court is ready to commence the trial, the trial judge advocate shall 
read out the charges and shall ask the accused whether he pleads guilty or not guilty.  
(2) If the accused pleads guilty, then, before such plea is recorded, the trial judge advocate shall 
ensure that the accused understands the charge to which he has pleaded gu ilty and the difference of 
procedure which will result from the plea of guilty.  
(3) If it appears from the accused ‟s replies or from the summary of evidence prepared in the 
prescribed manner that he should not plead guilty, the trial judge advocate may advise the accused to 
withdraw his plea.  
(4) If the court accepts the plea of guilty, it shall be recorded as the finding of the court and the court 
shall proceed to take steps to pass sentence unless there are other charges to be tried in which event the 
sentence shall be deferred until after the findings on such charges are given.  
106. Opening of prosecution case. —(1) If the accused pleads not guilty or refuses to, or does not, 
plead or if he claims to be tried or if in the circumstances mentioned in sub-section ( 3) of section 105 
withdraws the plea of guilty or if the court does not accept the plea of guilty, the court shall proceed to try 
the accused.  
(2) The prosecutor shall open his case by reading the circumstantial letter prepared in accordance w ith 
the regulations made under this Act, reading from this Act or the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  or other 
law the description of the offence charged and stating shortly by what evidence he expects to prove the 
guilt of the accused.  
(3) The prosecutor s hall then examine his witnesses.  
107. Calling of prosecution witness not in the original list. —No witness whose name was not 
included in the original list of witnesses supplied to the trial judge advocate and the accused in 
accordance with regulations made  under this Act shall be called by the prosecutor unless the trial judge 38 
 advocate has given notice to the accused of the prosecutor ‟s intention to call such witness and has 
supplied the accused with a summary of the evidence of such witness.  
108. Swearing of interpreter and shorthand -writer.—(1) At any time during the trial, should the 
court think it necessary, an impartial person may be employed to serve as an interpreter and sworn or 
affirmed as such in the following manner: — 
“I........................... ...........do          swear in the name of God  
                                                                           solemnly affirm            that I will to the best of my ability truly 
interpret and translate as I will be required to do touching the matter before this   court -martial. ” 
(2) During the trial, an impartial person shall be employed as a shorthand -writer and duly sworn or 
affirmed as such in the following manner :— 
“I......................................do           swear in the name of God  
                                                                         solemnly affirm              that I will truly take down to the best of 
my power the evidence to be given before this court -martial and such other matters as I will be 
required, and when required, will deliver to the court a true transcript of the same. ” 
109. Objection to interpreter or shorthand -writer.—(1) Before any person is sworn or affirmed as 
an interpreter or a shorthand -writer, the accused shall be asked if he objects to such person as not being 
impartial and the court shall decide the objection.  
(2) The evidence given by a witness shall be read over to him by the shor thand -writer before the 
witness leaves the court, if so required by the court or the witness.  
110. Swearing of witnesses. —(1) No witness shall be examined until he has been duly sworn or 
affirmed in the following manner: — 
 I........................... ...........do               swear in the name of God  
                                                                          solemnly affirm          that the evidence which I shall give 
before this court shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. ”. 
(2) Every person giving evidence on oath or affirmation before a court -martial shall be bound to state 
the truth.  
111. Plea of no case and defence of accused. —(1) When the examination of the witnesses for the 
prosecution is concluded, the accu sed shall be called on for his defence.  
(2) Before entering on his defence, the accused may raise a plea of no case to answer.  
(3) If such a plea is raided, the court will decide the plea after hearing the accused and the prosecutor 
and the advice of the trial judge advocate.  
(4) If the court accepts the plea, the accused shall be acquitted on the charge or charges in respect 
whereof the plea has been accepted.  
(5) If the court overrules the plea, the accused shall be called upon to enter on his defence.  
(6) The trial judge advocate shall then inform the accused that he may give evidence as a witness on 
his own behalf should he desire to do so and should he make a request in writing to do so, but that he will 
thereby render himself liable to cross -examinati on. 
(7) If the accused does not apply to give evidence, he may make a statement as to the facts of the 
case, and if he has no defence witnesses to examine as to facts, the prosecutor may sum up his case and 
the accused shall be entitled to reply.  
(8) If th e, accused or any one of the several accused applies to give evidence and there are no other 
witnesses in the case for the defence, other than witnesses as to character, then the evidence of such 
accused shall be recorded and if the accused so desires the witnesses as to character shall be examined 
and the prosecutor shall then sum up his case and the accused may reply.  
(9) If the accused or any one of the accused adduces any oral evidence as to facts other than his own 
evidence, if any, the accused may the n sum up his case on the conclusion of that evidence and the 
prosecutor shall be entitled to reply.  39 
 112. Adjournment to view. —(1) Whenever the court thinks that it should view the place in which 
the offence charged is alleged to have been committed or any other place in which any other transaction 
material to the trial is alleged to have occurred, the court shall make an order to that effect and may then 
adjourn to the place to be viewed, along with the prosecutor and the accused and the person, if any, by 
whom the accused is represented.  
(2) The court on completion of the view shall adjourn and reassemble in the court -room.  
113. Summing up by the trial judge advocate. —When the case for the defence and the prosecutor ‟s 
reply, if any, are concluded, the trial  judge advocate shall proceed to sum up in open court the evidence 
for the prosecution and the defence and lay down the law by which the court is to be guided.  
114. Duties of the trial judge advocate. —(1) At all trials by courts -martial it is the duty of t he trial 
judge advocate to decide all questions of law arising in the course of the trial, and specially all questions 
as to the relevancy of facts which it is proposed to prove and the admissibility of evidence or the propriety 
of the questions asked by o r on behalf of the parties; and in his discretion to prevent the production of 
inadmissible evidence whether it is or is not objected to by the parties.  
(2) Whenever in the course of a trial it appears desirable to the trial judge advocate that arguments 
and evidence as to the admissibility of evidence or arguments in support of an application for separate 
trials or on any other points of law should not be heard in the presence of the court, he may advise the 
president of the court accordingly and the presi dent shall thereupon make an order for the court to retire 
or direct the trial judge advocate to hear the arguments in some other convenient place.  
115. Duties of the court. —It is the duty of the court to decide which view of the facts is true and then 
arrive at the finding which under such view ought to be arrived at.  
116. Retirement to consider finding. —(1) After the trial judge advocate has finished his summing 
up, the court will be cleared to consider the finding.  
(2) The trial judge advocate shall not sit with the court when the court is considering the finding, and 
no person shall speak to or hold any communication with the court while the court is considering the 
finding.  
117. Announcement of the finding. —(1) When the court has considered the finding,  the court shall 
be re -assembled and the president shall inform the trial judge advocate in open court what is the finding 
of the court as ascertained in accordance with section 124.  
(2) The court shall give its findings on all the charges on which the acc used is tried.  
118. Drawing up of the finding. —(1) The trial judge advocate shall then draw up the finding as 
announced by the court.  
(2) The finding so drawn up shall be signed by all the members of the court by way of attestation 
notwithstanding any diff erence of opinion there may have been among the members and shall be 
countersigned by the trial judge advocate.  
(3) Where the finding on any charge is one of not guilty the court shall acquit the accused of                   
that charge.  
(4) If the accused  is acquitted of all the charges, the court shall, after signing the findings as provided 
in sub -section ( 2), be dissolved.  
(5) Neither the court nor the trial judge advocate shall announce in open court whether the finding 
was unanimous or not; but the pr esident shall make a record of the division of voting on each finding 
without disclosing the vote or opinion of any particular member of the court -martial and such record shall 
be communicated to the trial judge advocate for transmission to the Judge Advoc ate-General of the Navy.  
119. Evidence of character and previous convictions. —(1) If the accused is found guilty on any or 
all of the charges, the court before awarding punishment may call evidence as to the previou s character 
and qualifications o f the accused and in addition to any oral evidence of general character that may be 40 
 adduced, shall take into consideration the following documents which shall be read by the trial judge 
advocate in open court: — 
(a) for any officer — 
(i) any entries against him relating to his previous convictions in the list of officers who have 
been tried by court -martial; and  
(ii) any previous entries against him in the log of the ship to which he may have belonged 
when the offence or offences for which he is being tried w ere committed and also any documents, 
other than such entries in the log, of the nature of a definite censure by superior authority, which 
log and documents the prosecution is to produce; and  
(iii) any certificate or other documents of character which the accused may produce;  
(b) for a  1[sailor] — 
(i) the entries against him in the conduct and offences record sheets prior to the date of the 
offence charged, but subsequent to his joining his present ship, with character assessed from the 
previous 31st day of December to the date of the offence for which he may be under trial but 
excluding all consideration of the latter;  
(ii) his certificate of service; and  
(iii) any entries against him relating to his previous convictions in the list of those who have 
been tr ied by court -martial.  
(2) The accused may then make a statement in mitigation of punishment and lead any evidence of 
character if he has not already done so before the finding.  
120. Consideration of the sentence. —(1) The Court shall then retire and conside r and determine on 
the punishment proper to be inflicted in conformity with the finding, and all the members of the court, 
whether they have voted for an acquittal or not, shall vote on the question of what punishment is proper to 
be awarded for the offenc e of which the accused has been found guilty.  
(2) The trial Judge advocate shall sit with the court while they are considering the sentence and assist 
the court in the determination of the sentence but shall not vote thereon.  
121. Announcement of the sente nce.—(1) When the court has decided on the sentence whether 
unanimously o r by majority, the trial Judge  advocate shall draw up the sentence in the prescribed form 
which shall be signed by every member of the court by way of attestation notwithstanding any difference 
of opinion there may have been among the members and shall be countersigned by the trial Judge 
advocate.  
(2) The court shall then be reassembled and the accused brought in and the trial Judge advocate shall 
by direction of the court pronounce th e sentence.  
(3) The accused shall then be removed and the court dissolved.  
122. Adjournment. —(1) A court -martial may, if it appears to the court that an adjournment  
desirable, be adjourned accordingly, but except where such an adjournment is ordered, shall  sit from day 
to day with the exception of Sundays until the trial is concluded, unless prevented from so doing by stress 
of weather or unavoidable accident.  
(2) The proceedings of a court -martial shall not, after the commencement of a trial, be delayed by  the 
absence of a member:  
Provided that not less than four members are present : and 
Provided further that if any member is absent from any part of the trial, he shall not thereafter take 
any part in the proceedings.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
 41 
 123. Provisions relating to dissolution of court s-martial.—(1) A court -martial assembled under 
this Act shall be dissolved — 
(a) when the number of members comprising the court is after the commencement of a trial 
reduced below four ; 
(b) by the prolonged illness of the president, trial judge advo cate or the accused;  
(c) by the death of the president or the trial judge advocate;  
(d) on the making of a report under sub -section ( 2) of section 143.  
(2) Whenever a court -martial is dissolved by virtue of sub -section ( 1), the accused may be retired.  
124. Ascertaining the opinion of the court. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections  (2) and 
(3), every question for determination by a court -martial shall be decided by the vote of the majority:  
Provided that where there is an equality of votes, the deci sion most favoura ble to the accused                 
shall prevail.  
(2) The sentence of death shall not be passed on any offender unless four at least of the members 
present at the court -martial where the number does not exceed five, and in all other cases a majority of not 
less than two -thirds of the members present, concur in the sentence.  
(3) Where in respect of an offence, the only punishment which may be awarded is death, a finding 
that a charge for such offence is proved shall not be given unless four at least of the members present at 
the court -martial where the number does not exceed five, and in all other cases a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the members present, concur in the finding.  
125. Finding that the offence was committed with intent  involving less degree of              
punishment. —Where the amount of punishment for any offence depends upon the intent with which it 
has been committed and any person is charged with having committed such an offence with an intent 
involving a greater de gree of punishment, a court -martial may find that the offence was committed with 
an intent involving less degree of punishment and award such punishment accordingly.  
126. Alternative findings. —If the accused is charged with one offence and it appears in ev idence 
that he committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under section 91, he may be 
convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed although he was not charged with it.  
127. Finding lesser offence proved on charge of greater offence. —(1) When a person is charged 
with an offence consisting of several particulars, a combination of some only of which constitutes a 
complete minor offence and such combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he 
may be convicted of the minor offence although he was not charged with it.  
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it to a minor offence, 
he may be convicted of the minor offence although he was not charged with it.  
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such an 
offence, although the attempt is not separately charged.  
128. Transmission of proceedings to the Judge Advocate  General of the Navy. —The trial Judge 
advocate shall  transmit in accordance with the prescribed procedure with as much expedition as may be, 
the original proceedings or a complete and authenticated copy thereof and the original sentence of every 
court -martial attended by him to the Judge Advocate General of  the Navy to be dealt with by him in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter XV.  
129. Right of accused to copy of proceedings and sentence. —Every person tried by a court -martial 
and convicted shall be entitled on demand to one copy of the proceedings and  sentence of such court -
martial free of cost but no such demand shall be allowed after the lapse of one year from the date of the 
final decision of such court.  
Rules as to evidence  
130. Application of the Evidence Act. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , shall apply to all proceedings before a court -martial.  42 
 131. Accused competent witness for defence. —A person of an offence before a court -martial shall 
be a competent witness for the defence and may give evide nce on oath in disproof of the charges made 
against him or any person charged toge ther with him at the same trial : 
Provided that — 
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing ; or 
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be  made the subject of any comment by any of the parties 
or the court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him 
at the same trial.  
132. Judicial notice. —A court -martial may take judicial notice of any matter within the general 
naval, army or air force experience and knowledge of the members.  
133. Presumption as to certain documents. —(1) Whenever it is necessary for the purposes of either 
the prosecution or the defence to prove the contents of any voucher, rece ipt, account, muster, ship ‟s book, 
letter, signal, telegram or other document made or kept in pursuance of any Act of the legislature, any 
regulations framed under this Act or of the custom of the service, a copy of the same purporting to be 
signed and cer tified as a correct copy by the officer for the time being commanding the ship in which the 
same was made or kept or by a Secretary to the Central Government, may be received as evidence of such 
document and of the matters, transactions and accounts therei n recorded.  
(2) A Navy List or Gazette or other official document purporting to be published by authority of the 
Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff shall be evidence of the status and rank of officers 
therein mentioned and of any appointmen t held by such officers until the contrary is proved  
(3) Where it is shown that a person is borne on the books of a ship of the Indian Navy, such fact shall 
be evidence that such person is subject to naval law until the contrary is proved.  
Explanation. — In this section, the term “books of a ship ” shall include any official book, document 
or list purporting to contain the name or names of persons appointed to the ship.  
(4) Where any person subject to naval law is being tried on a charge of desertion, imprope rly leaving 
his ship, or absence without leave and such person has surrendered himself into custody of or has been 
apprehended by any person subject to naval law or by a person subject to the law relating to the 
Government of the regular Army or the Air Fo rce, a certificate purporting to be signed by such person 
and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension shall be evidence of the matters so 
stated unless the contrary is proved.  
(5) Where any person subject to naval law is being tr ied on a charge of desertion, improperly leaving 
his ship, or absence without leave and such person has on arrest or surrender been taken to a police 
station, a certificate purporting to be signed by the officer -in-charge of the station and stating the fac t, 
date and place of such surrender or apprehension shall be evidence of the matters stated unless the 
contrary is proved.  
1[(6) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of: — 
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to the Government;  
(b) the Chief Inspector of Explosives;  
(c) the Director of Finger Print Bureau;  
(d) the Director of Haffkeine Institute, Bombay;  
(e) the Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director of a Central Forensic  Science Laboratory 
or a State Forensi c Science Laboratory;  
(f) the Serologist to the Government,  
uponany matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis, may be  used an evidence in 
any proceeding under this Act. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 5, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  43 
 (7) The statement of a naval, army or air force medical officer taken and attested by the commanding 
officer of a ship or establishment may be given in evidence in any proceeding under this Act:  
Provided that the court may, if it thinks fit, and shall if so required by the prosecutor or the accused, 
summon and examine such medical officer as to the subject -matter of his statement.  
(8) If it is proved that an offender under this Act has absconded and that there is no immediate 
prospect of arresting him, the commanding officer or other prescribed person may, in hi s absence, 
examine any person who might appear to him to be acquainted with the case and record their depositions 
on oath and any such deposition may on the arrest of such person be used in evidence against him in any 
proceeding under this Act, if the depo nent is dead or incapable of giving evidence or his attendance 
cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which under the circumstances 
of the case would be unreasonable.  
134. Summoning of witnesses. —(1) Every person who may be  required to give evidence or produce 
a document before a court -martial shall be summoned in the prescribed manner in writing under the hand 
of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy or the trial judge advocate.  
(2) Every person who may be required to give  evidence before a commanding officer or the officer 
preparing a summary of evidence in accordance with the regulations made under this Act or before a 
board of inquiry shall be summoned in the prescribed manner by writing under the hand of the Judge 
Advoc ate General of the Navy or the senior officer in the station or such other officer prescribed in                
this behalf.  
(3) In the case of a witness subject to naval law or to the law relating to the Government of the regular 
Army or the Air Force, th e summons shall be served in the manner prescribed.  
(4) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be served either in the prescribed manner, or it 
shall be sent to the magistrate within whose jurisdiction the witness may be or resides and such ma gistrate 
shall give effect to the summons as if the witness were required in the court of such magistrate.  
(5) When a witness is required to produce any particular document or thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.  
(6) Every person not subject to naval law who may be summoned as aforesaid shall be allowed and 
paid such reasonable expenses as may be prescribed.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation of sections 123 and 124 of th e 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) , or to apply to any document in the custody of the postal or 
telegraph authorities.  
135. Commissions for examination of witnesses. —(1) Whenever in the course of a trial by court -
martial, it appears to the trial judge  advocate that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of 
justice and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which under the circumstances of the case would be unreasonable , the trial judge advocate 
may dispense with such attendance and may apply to the Judge Advocate General of the Navy to issue a 
commission to  1[any metropolitan magistrate or judicial magistrate of the first class] within the local 
limits of whose jurisdic tion such witness resides, to take the evidence of such witness.  
(2) The trial in such an event may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the 
execution and return of the commission.  
(3) The Judge Advocate General of the Navy on receipt of an application under sub -section (1) may, 
if he thinks fit, issue a commission to the  2[metropolitan magistrate or judicial magistrate of the first class 
or an authority exercising the powers equivalent to those of a judicial magistrate of the f irst class under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,] for the examination of the witness.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 7, for “any district magistrate or a magistrate of the  first class” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
2. Subs by s. 7, ibid.,  for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  44 
 (4) The magistrate or authority to whom the commission is issued or 1[if he is a  Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or suc h metropolitan magistrate or judicial magistrate of the 
first class as is appointed by him in this behalf] shall proceed to such place where the witness is or shall 
summon the witness before him and shall take down his evidence in the same manner and may f or this 
purpose exercise the same powers as in trials of warrant cases under the  2[Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974) ], or of any corresponding law in force at the place where the evidence is recorded.  
136. Examination of witnesses on commission. —(1) Where a commission is issued under the 
provisions of section 135, the prosecutor and the accused may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the trial judge advocate may think relevant to, the issue and the magistrate or authority to  
whom the commission is directed or to whom the duty of executing such commission has been delegated 
shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused may appear before such magistrate or authority by counsel or, 
excep t in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine arid re -
examine, as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 135 has been duly executed, it shall be returned together 
with the d eposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Judge Advocate General of the Navy who 
issued the commission.  
(4) On receipt of the commission and the deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy shall forward the s ame to the trial judge advocate at whose instance the 
commission was issued.  
(5) The commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the 
prosecutor and the accused and may subject to all just exceptions be read in evidence in the case by either 
the prosecutor or the accused and shall form part of the proceedings of the trial.  
(6) Any deposition so taken shall be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the trial whether 
before the same court or, if the said court is d issolved meanwhile, before another court convened for the 
trial of the accused in respect of the same charges.  
137. Power to summon and examine material witnesses. —(1) The trial judge advocate may, at any 
stage of the trial, summon any person as a witness or examine any person in attendance, though not 
summoned as a witness, or recall and re -examine any person already examined; and the trial judge 
advocate shall summon and examine or recall and re -examine any such person if his evidence appears to 
the court  or to the trial judge advocate as essential to the just decision of the case.  
(2) Summons to the witnesses shall be issued as provided under this Act.  
Compensation to aggrieved persons out of fine  
138. Power of court to pay compensation out of fine. —(1) Whenever a court -martial imposes a fine 
as a punishment, the court may when passing judgment order the whole or any part of the fine recovered 
to be applied, — 
(a) in the payment to any person aggrieved as compensation for any loss or injury caused by the 
offence;  
(b) When any person is convicted of any civil offence which includes theft, criminal 
misappropriation, criminal breach of trust or cheating or of having dishonestly received or retained or 
of having voluntarily assisted in disposing of stolen prop erty knowing or having reason to believe the 
same to be stolen property, in compensating any bona fide  purchaser of the property for the loss of the 
same if such property is restored to the possession of the person entitled thereto.  
(2) No such payment or compensation shall, however, be made before the expiry of fifteen days from 
the date of the sentence, and when a petition is presented against the conviction or sentence until the said 
petition is disposed of Power of courts -martial respecting contempt, et c. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for  “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 189 8)” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  45 
 Power of courts -martial respecting contempt, etc.  
139. Summary punishment for contempt of court by person subject to naval law. —When any 
person subject to naval law commits any offence as is described in section 69 in the presence of or in 
relation to a  proceeding before a court -martial such court -martial may punish the offender summarily by 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or such other less punishment as may be 
awarded for that offence under section 69.  
140. Summary punishment f or contempt of court by person not subject to naval law. —When 
any person not subject to naval law commits an offence as is described in section 165 in the presence of a 
court -martial, such court -martial may take such person into custody and at any time bef ore the rising of 
the court on the same day, if it thinks fit, take cognizance of the offence and sentence the offender to fine 
not exceeding two hundred  rupees or in default of payment to simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month, unles s such fine shall be sooner paid.  
141. Powers of court -martial when certain offences are committed by persons not subject to 
naval law. —When any such offence as is described in section 165 of this Act, or section 193, section 
194, section 195, section 196,  section 199, section 200, section 228, section 463 or section 471 of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  is committed by any person not subject to naval law in or in relation to a 
proceeding before a court -martial, such court -martial or the off icer ordering the same if such  court -martial 
is dissolved, may exercise the powers  1[under section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 
1974), ] as if it or he were a criminal court within the meaning of that section.  
142. Powers of courts -martial a nd disciplinary courts in relation to proceedings under this 
Act.—Any trial by a court -martial or disciplinary court under the provisions of this Act shall be deemed 
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal  Code               
(45 of 1860) , and the court -martial or disciplinary court shall be deemed to be a court within the meaning 
of 2[sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .] 
Lunacy of accused  
143. Accused found insane during  trial.—(1) Where it appears in the course of the trial by court -
martial of any person, charged with an offence that such person is insane, the court shall find specially the 
fact of his insanity and shall order such person to be kept in strict custody in such place and in such 
manner as the court may deem fit until the directions of the Central Government thereupon are known.  
(2) Every such case shall be reported by the court to the convening authority for orders of the Central 
Government and it shall be l awful for the Central Government to give orders for the safe custody of such 
person in such place and in such manner as the Central Government may deem fit.  
(3) Whenever on the receipt of a report from the Central Government or otherwise the convening 
authority considers that such person is capable of making his defence, the convening authority may take 
steps to convene a court -martial for the trial of such person.  
144. Lunacy of the accused at the time of offence .—(1) Whenever any person subject to naval l aw 
is acquitted upon the ground that, at the time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, 
by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the 
offence, or that it was wrong or contrar y to law, the finding shall specifically state whether he committed 
the act or not.  
(2) Whenever the finding made under sub -section ( 1) states that the accused person committed the act 
alleged, the court -martial shall, if such act would, but for the incapa city found, have constituted an 
offence, order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and in such manner as may be 
prescribed and shall report the action taken to the officer convening the court.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 8, for “under section 476 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898) ”                                  
(w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
2. Subs by s. 9, ibid.,  for “under sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 (5 of 1898)”                            
(w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
 46 
 (3) The officer convening the court shall then report the case for the orders of the Central Government 
and shall take necessary steps to detain the said person in safe custody pending receipt of such orders.  
(4) The Central Government may on receipt of a report under sub -section ( 3) order the accused 
person to be detained in a mental hospital or other suitable place of safe custody.   
Disposal of property  
145. Disposal of property pending trial .—When any property regarding which an offence appears 
to have been committed or which appears to have been used for the commission of an offence is produced 
before a court -martial, the court may make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody such property 
pending the conclusion of the trial and if the property is subject to speedy or natural decay  may after 
recording such evidence as it thinks necessary order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
146. Disposal of property regarding which offence is committed .—(1) When the trial before any 
court -martial is concluded, the court may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal by destruction, 
confiscation or delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or otherwise of any 
property or document produced before it or in its custody or regarding which an offence appears to ha ve 
been committed or which has been used fo r the commission of any offence : 
Provided that except in the case of property which is subject to speedy or natural decay such property 
or document shall, if so required by regulations, made under this Act, be kep t in custody until the orders 
of the Chief of the Naval Staff are known.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) shall not be carried out for one month, unless the property is 
subject to speedy or natural decay.  
(3) When an order under this section cannot be co nveniently carried out by persons in the naval 
service, a copy of such order certified by the Chief of the Naval Staff or an officer prescribed in this 
behalf, may be sent to a magistrate within whose jurisdiction the property is for the time being situate  and 
such magistrate shall thereupon take steps to cause the order to be carried into effect as if it were an order 
passed by him.  
Explanation. — In this section the term “property ” includes, in the case of property regarding which 
an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the 
possession or under the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have 
been  converted or exchanged and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether 
immediately or otherwise.  
CHAPTER XIV  
EXECUTIVE OF SENTENCES  
147. Form of sentence of death .—In awarding a sentence of death, a court -martial  shall in its 
discretion direc t that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead or shall 
suffer death by being shot to death.  
148. Interim custody until execution of sentence s of death .—A person sentenced to death may be 
detained in naval custody or ma y be removed to a civil prison to be kept in custody until further orders be 
received from the Central Government, the Chief of the Naval Staff or the officer ordering the court -
martial by which he was sentenced to death or other prescribed officer and the  order in the prescribed 
form of the Central Government, the Chief of the Naval Staff or the convening authority or such officer 
shall be sufficient warrant for detaining the person in custody.  
149. Execution of sentences of death .—(1) When a sentence of d eath is to be executed, the Chief of 
the Naval Staff or the convening authority or the prescribed officer shall give directions as to the time, 
place and manner in which sentence is to be carried out and the order of such officer or authority in the 
prescr ibed form shall be sufficient warrant for the execution of such sentence.  
(2) There shall be attached to the prescribed form an order of the Central Government certifying the 
confirmation of the sentence by the Central Government in all cases where such co nfirmation is 47 
 necessary; and where such confirmation is not necessary, a certificate of the Chief of the Naval Staff or 
other prescribed officer stating that such confirmation is not necessary.  
150. Place of imprisonment and detention .—(1) Every term of imprisonment whether 
imprisonment was awarded as an original or commuted punishment may be served in a naval prison, 
naval detention quarters or in any civil prison, house of correction or military or air force prison or 
detention barracks.  
(2) Every term of detention whether the detention was awarded as an original or commuted 
punishment may be served in any naval detention quarters or army or air force detention barracks.  
(3) Where in pursuance of this Act, a person is sentenced to imprisonment or detention or has his 
sentence commuted to imprisonment or detention, the order in the prescribed form of the Central 
Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff or the officer ordering the court -martial by which such person 
was sentenced or the senior offic er present in port or, if he was sentenced by the commanding officer of a 
ship, or other officer empowered under this Act to exercise like powers, the order in the prescribed form 
of such commanding officer or other officer, shall be a sufficient warrant f or the sending of such person 
to the place of imprisonment or detention, as the case may be, thereto undergo the sentence according to 
law, or until he reaches such place of imprisonment or detention for detaining him in naval custody or in 
the case of a p erson sentenced to imprisonment, in any civil prison or place of confinement.  
151. Commencement of sentence .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 1[sub-section s (2) and ( 3)] every 
term of imprisonment or detention awarded in pursuance of this Act shall be reckoned as commencing on 
the day on which the sentence was awarded.  
(2) Where by reason of a ship being at sea or off a place at which there is no proper prison or naval 
detention quarters, a sentence of imprisonment or detention, as the case may be, cannot be duly executed, 
then subject as hereinafter mentioned, an offender under the sentence of imprisonment or detention, as the 
case may be, may be sent with all reasonable speed to some place at which there is a proper prison or 
naval detention quarters or in the case of an offender under sentence of detention to some place at which 
there are some naval detention quarters in which the sentence can be duly executed; and on ar rival there, 
the offender shall undergo his sentence in like manner as if the date of such arrival were the day on which 
the sentence was awarded and notwithstanding that in the meanwhile he has returned to his duty or 
become entitled to his discharge; and  the term of imprisonment or detention, as the case may be, shall be 
reckoned accordingly, subject however to the deduction of any time during which he has been kept in 
confinement in respect of the said offence.  
2[(3) Whenever any offender is sentenced by  a court -martial to a term of imprisonment, in pursuance 
of this Act, not being imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period spent by him in civil or naval 
custody during investigation, inquiry or trial of the same case, and before the date o f order of such 
sentence, shall be set off against the terms of imprisonment imposed upon him, and the liability of such 
offender to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentence shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of 
the term of imprisonment impose d upon him. ] 
152. Imprisonment of offender already under sentence .—Whenever a sentence shall be passed by 
a court -martial on an offender already under sentence either of detention or imprisonment passed upon 
him under this Act for a former offence, the cou rt may award a sentence of detention or imprisonment for 
the offence for which he is under trial to commence at the expiration of the sentence of detention or 
imprisonment to which h e has been previously sentenced : 
Provided that so much of any term of dete ntion imposed on a person by a sentence in pursuance of 
this section as will prolong the total term of detention beyond two years shall be deemed to be remitted.  
153. Change of place of confinement .—Whenever it is deemed expedient, it shall be lawful for t he 
Central Government, the Chief of the Naval Staff or senior officer present, by an order in writing in the 
prescribed form, from time to time to change the place of confinement of any offender imprisoned or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 6, for “sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  
2. Ins. s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  
 48 
 sentenced to be imprisoned or detained in pursu ance of this Act or of any offender undergoing or 
sentenced to undergo detention; and the gaoler or other person having the custody of such offender shall 
immediately on the receipt of such order remove such offender to the gaol, prison or house of correct ion 
or, in the case of an offender undergoing or sentenced to undergo detention, to the naval detention 
quarters mentioned in the said order, or shall deliver him over to naval custody for the purpose of the 
offender being removed to such prison or naval d etention quarters, and every gaoler or keeper of such 
last-mentioned prison, gaol, or house of correction or naval detention quarters shall, upon being furnished 
with such order of removal, receive into his custody and shall confine pursuant to such senten ce or order 
every such offender.  
154. Discharge or removal of prisoners .—Whenever any offender is undergoing imprisonment or 
detention in pursuance of this Act, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval 
Staff, or where an offender is undergoing imprisonment or detention by order of his commanding officer, 
for such commanding officer or the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff, to give an order 
in writing in the prescribed form directing that the offender be di scharged; and it shall also be lawful for 
the Central Government and the Chief of the Naval Staff, by order in writing in the prescribed form, to 
direct that any such offender be delivered over to naval custody for the purpose of being brought before a 
court-martial, either as a witness or for trial or otherwise, and such offender shall accordingly, on the 
production of any such order, be discharged, or be delivered over to such custody.  
155. Time of detention in naval custody .—The time during which any off ender under sentence of 
imprisonment or detention is detained in naval custody shall be reckoned as imprisonment or detention 
under his sentence for whatever purpose he is so detained; and the governor, gaoler, keeper or 
superintendent who shall deliver ov er any such offender shall again receive him from naval custody, so 
that he may undergo the remainder of his punishment.  
156. Removal of insane prisoners .—If any person imprisoned or undergoing detention by virtue of 
this Act shall become insane, and a cer tificate to that effect shall be given by two physicians or surgeons, 
the Central Government shall, by warrant in the prescribed form, direct the removal of such person to 
such asylum or other proper receptacle for insane persons in India as it may judge p roper for the 
unexpired term of his imprisonment or detention; and if any such person shall in the same manner be 
certified to be again of sound mind, the Central Government may issue a warrant in the prescribed form 
for his being removed to such prison  or place of confinement or in the case of a person sentenced to 
detention, such naval detention quarters as may be deemed expedient, to undergo the remainder of his 
punishment, and every gaoler or keeper of any prison , gaol, or house of correction shall rece ive him 
accordingly.  
157. Naval prisons and naval detention quarters .—The Central Government may set apart any 
buildings or vessels or any parts thereof as naval prisons or naval detention quarters and any buildings, 
vessels or parts of buildings or vessel s so set apart as naval prisons or naval detention quarters, as the case 
may be, shall be deemed to be naval prisons or naval detention quarters respectively within the meaning 
of this Act.  
158. Execution of sentence of fine .—When a sentence of fine is imposed under this Act by a court -
martial or disciplinary court, the officer ordering the court -martial or disciplinary court may transmit a 
copy of the order imposing the fine duly certified under his hand to any magistrate in India, and such 
magistrate s hall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the               
1[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ,] or any law corresponding thereto in force in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir as if it were a sentence of fine  imposed by such magistrate.  
159. Power to make regulations in respect of naval prisons and detention quarters. —(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations providing, — 
(a) for the government, management and regulation of naval prisons and detention quarters;  
(b) for the appointment and removal and powers of inspectors, visitors and officers thereof;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 10, for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
 49 
 (c) for the food, bedding and clothing of prisoners or persons undergoing detention therein;  
(d) for the labour  of such prisoners or persons therein and for enabling such prisoners or persons 
to earn by special industry and good conduct remission of a portion of their sentence; and  
(e) for the care of such prisoners or persons, their safe custody and the maintenance of good order 
and discipline among them and the punishment by personal correction, restraint or otherwise of 
offences committed by such prisoners or persons.  
(2) The regulations to be made under this section may apply to naval prisons or detent ion quarters any 
of the provisions of the Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1874) , and rules made thereunder, imposing punishments 
on any persons not being prisoners or relating to the duties of gaolers, medical officers and other officers 
of the prisons.  
(3) The re gulations to be made under this section shall not authorise corporal punishment to be 
inflicted for any offence.  
CHAPTER XV  
JUDIC IAL REVIEW OF COURTS -MARTIAL PROCEEDINGS  
160. Judicial review by the Judge Advocate General of the Navy. —(1) All proceedings of  trials by 
court -martial or by disciplinary courts shall be reviewed by the Judge Advocate General of the Navy 
either on his own motion or on application made to him within the prescribed time by any person 
aggrieved by any sentence or finding, and the Jud ge Advocate General of the Navy shall transmit the 
report of such review together with such recommendations as may appear just and proper to the Chief of 
the Naval Staff for his consideration and for such action as the Chief of the Naval Staff may think fi t. 
(2) Where any person aggrieved has made an application under sub -section (1), the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy may, if the circumstances of the case so require, give him an opportunity of being 
heard either in person or through a legal practitione r or an officer of the Indian Navy.  
161. Consideration by the Chief of the Naval Staff. —(1) On receipt of the report and 
recommendations if any, under section 160, the Chief of the Naval Staff shall in all cases of capital 
sentence and in all cases where t he court -martial is ordered by the President, and may in other cases 
transmit the proceedings and the report to the Central Government together with such recommendations 
as he may deem fit to make.  
(2) Nothing in section 160 or this section shall authorise  the Judge Advocate General of the Navy or 
the Chief of the Naval Staff to make any recommendation for setting aside, or the Central Government to 
set aside, an order of acquittal passed under this Act.  
CHAPTER XVI  
MODIFICATIONS  OF FINDINGS  AND SENTENCES,  PARDONS  AND COMMUTATION ,                                       
REMISSION  AND SUSPENSION  OF SENTENCES  
162. Petitions to the Central Government or Chief of the Naval Staff against findings or 
sentences. —Any person subject to naval law who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of 
any court -martial may present a petition to the Central Government or to the Chief of the Naval Staff, and 
the Central Government or the Chief of the Naval Staff, as the case may be, may pass such order thereon 
as may be thought fit.  
163. Powers of Central Government and the Chief of the Naval Staff in respect of findings and 
sentences .—(1) Where any person is tried under the provisions of this Act, the Central Government or the 
Chief of the Naval Staff, may, in the cas e of a conviction, — 
(a) set aside the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused or order him to be 
retried, or  
(b) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence (provided that such sentence may be legally passed 
on the altered finding), or  50 
 (c) with or without altering the finding, reduce the sentence or commute the punishment awarded 
for any punishment inferior in scale, or  
(d) either with or without conditions, pardon the person or remit the whole or any part of the 
punishment awarded, or  
(e) either with or without conditions, release the person on parole:  
Provided that a sentence of imprisonment shall not be commuted for a sentence of detention for a 
term exceeding the term of imprisonment awarded, and a sentence of dismissal with disgrace not  
accompanied by a sentence of imprisonment shall not be commu ted for a sentence of detention:   
Provided further that nothing in this section shall authorise the Central Government or the Chief of 
the Naval Staff to enhance the sentence.  
(2) Any sentence modified under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be carried into execution as if 
it had been originally passed.  
(3) If any condition on which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has 
been remitted is in the opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission not 
fulfilled, such authority may cancel the pardon or release or remission and thereupon the sentence 
awarded shall be carried into effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been grante d:  
Provided that in the case of a person sentenced to imprisonment or detention such person shall 
undergo only the unexpired portion of the sentence.  
1[163A. Provision relating to parole. —Where any person is tried under the provision s of this Act, 
the Cen tral Government or the chief of the Naval Staff or the Flag Officers commanding -in-Chief of the 
Naval Commands may in the case of conviction either with or without conditions release the person on 
parole.]  
164. Suspension of sentences. —(1) Where a person h as been sentenced to imprisonment or 
detention , the Central Government or the officer who by virtue of the foregoing section or sub -section ( 3) 
of section 150 has power to issue an order of committal (hereinafter in this section referred to as “the 
committing authority ”) may, in lieu of issuing such an order, order that the sentence be suspended until an 
order of committal is issued, and in such case — 
(a) notwithstanding anything in this Act, the term of the sentence shall not be reckoned as 
commenci ng until an order of committal is issued;  
(b) the case may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than three months, be reconsidered 
by the Central Government or committing authority or the prescribed officer, and if on any   such 
reconsideration i t appears to the Central Government or committing authority or such prescribed 
officer that the conduct of the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of 
the sentence, the Central Government or committing authority or such pre scribed officer shall remit 
the whole or any part of it;  
(c) subject to regulations made under this Act, the Central Government or the committing 
authority or such prescribed officer may at any time whilst the sentence is suspended issue an order of 
commit tal and thereupon the sentence shall cease to be suspended;  
(d) where a person subject to naval law, whilst a sentence on him is so suspended, is sentenced to 
imprisonment or detention for any other offence then, if he is at any time committed either under  the 
suspended sentence or under any such subsequent sentence, and whether or not any such subsequent 
sentence has also been suspended, the committing authority may direct that the two sentences shall 
run either concurrently or consecutively, so, however, as not to cause a person to undergo detention 
for a period exceeding the aggregate of two consecutive years.  
(2) When a person has been sentenced to imprisonment or detention and an order of committal has 
been issued, the Central Government or the committi ng authority, or prescribed officer may order the 
sentence to be suspended, and in such cases the person whose sentence is suspended shall be discharged 
and the currency of the sentence shall be suspended until he is again committed under the same sentence , 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 8 (w.e.f. 23 -6-2005).  51 
 and the provisions of clauses ( b), (c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall apply in like manner as in the case 
where a sentence has been suspended before an order of committal has been issued.  
(3) Where a sentence is suspended under this section, whether be fore or after committal, the Central 
Government or, subject to regulations made under this Act, the committing authority or officer by whom 
the sentence is suspended may, direct that any penalty which is involved by the punishment of 
imprisonment or detent ion either shall be or shall not be remitted or suspended.  
CHAPTER XVII  
OFFENCES  IN RELATION  TO COURT -MARTIAL , DISCIPLINARY  COURTS AND  PRISONS  
165. Offences by persons not subject to naval law in relation to courts -martial and disciplinary 
court.—Every person not subject to naval law, who, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a court -martial or disciplinary 
court fails to attend without due cause, or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a court -martial or 
disciplinary court to be taken or made, or  
(c) being sworn or affirmed, refuses to answer any questions put by or before a court -martial or 
disciplinary court, which he is in law bound to answer, or  
(d) refuses to produce or deliver up a document in his power which the court -martial or 
disciplinary court may legally demand, or  
(e) is guilty of contempt of court -martial or disciplinary court,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term wh ich may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
166. Penalties for aiding escape or attempt to escape of prisoners and for breach of prison 
regulations. —(1) Every person, who, — 
(a) conveys or causes to be conveyed into any naval prison or naval detention quarters any arms, 
tools, or instruments, or any mask or other disguise to facilitate the escape of any prisoner or person 
undergoing detention, or  
(b) by any means whatever aids any prisoner or person undergoing detention to escape or in an 
attempt to escape from such prison or naval detention quarters, whether an escape be actually made or 
not, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years.  
(2) Every person who brings or attempts to bring into a naval prison o r naval detention quarters, in 
contravention of regulations made under this Act, any spirituous or fermented liquor, shall for every such 
offence be punished with a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees and not less than one hundred rupees . 
(3) Every perso n, who, — 
(a) brings into a naval prison or naval detention quarters or to or for any prisoner or person 
undergoing detention, without the knowledge of the officer having charge or command thereof, any 
money, clothing, provisions, tobacco, letters, papers, or other articles not allowed by the rules of the 
prison or naval detention quarters, to be in the possession of a prisoner or person undergoing 
detention, or  
(b) throws into the said prison or naval detention quarters, any such articles, or by desire of a ny 
prisoner or person undergoing detention, without the sanction of the said officer carried out of the 
prison or naval detention quarters any of the articles aforesaid,  
shall for every such offence be punished with a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees.  
(4) Every person, who, — 
(a) interrupts any officer of a naval prison or naval detention quarters in the execution of his               
duty, or  52 
 (b) aids or abets any person to assault, resist, or interrupt any such officer, shall for every such 
offence be  punished with imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with fine, or both.  
(5) Every fine recovered under the foregoing sub -sections of this section shall be applied as the 
Central Government may direct notwithstanding any law, charter, or custom to  the contrary.  
167. Penalty as regards gaolers, etc. —Every governor, gaoler, and keeper of any prison, gaol, or 
house of correction or of any naval detention quarters, and every person having the charge of command of 
any place, ship, or vessel for imprisonment, who shall without lawful excuse, refuse or neglect to receive 
or confine, remove, discharge, or deliver up any offender against the provisions of this Act, or any of 
them, shall incur for every such refusal or neglect a penalty not exceeding one thousand rupees and every 
such penalty shall be applied as the Central Government may direct notwithstanding any law, charter, or 
custom to the contrary.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
JUDGE  ADVOCATE  GENERAL OF THE NAVY AND OFFICERS  OF HIS DEPARTMENT  
168. Appointment of the Judge Advocate General of the N avy and his subordinate officers .—(1) 
There shall be appointed by the Central Government a Judge Advocate General of the Navy and as many 
judge advocates in the department of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy as the Central Government 
may deem necessary.  
(2) Out of the judge advocates so appointed, the Central Government may designate any one to be the 
Deputy Judge Advocate General of the Navy.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Jud ge Advocat e General of the Navy           
unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India, and  
(b) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India, or  
(c) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or two or more such courts in 
successio n  
1[Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to 
do in the exigencies of service, relax, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the qualification specified in 
clause ( b) or clause  (c) in respect of any person.]  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Deputy Judge Advocate General of the  Navy 
unless he— 
(a) is a citizen of India , and 
(b) has for at least seven years held a judicial office in the territory of India, or  
(c) has for at least seven years been an advocate of a High Court or two or more such courts in 
succession.  
 1[Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to 
do in the exigencies of service, relax, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the qualification specified in 
clause ( b) or clause ( c) in respect of any person.]  
(5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge advocate unless he — 
(a) is a citizen of India , and 
(b) is qualified for  enrolment as an advocate or a leader  of a High Court.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court, there 
shall be included any period during which the person has he ld judicial office after he became an 
advocate;  
                                                           
1. Ins by Act 53 of 197 4, s. 17 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  53 
 (b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of India 
or been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period before the commencement of 
the Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which was comprised before the 
15th day of August, 1947, within India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, or has 
practised as an advocate of any High Court in any such area as t he case may be;  
(c) the expression “judicial office ” shall be deemed to include the office of the Judge Advocate of 
the Fleet or any of his deputies or assistants and any other legal or judicial office in the department of 
the Judge Advocate of the Fleet held before the commencement of this Act, and the off ice of the 
Judge Advocate General of the Navy or of a judge advocate held after the commencement of this Act.  
169. Functions of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy .—It shall be the duty of the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy to perform such duties of  a legal and judicial character pertaining to the 
Indian Navy as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by the Central Government or the 
Chief of the Naval Staff, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
170. Discharge of functions of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy in his                  
absence .—The functions of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy shall in his absence on leave or 
otherwise, be performed by s uch one of the judge advocates in his department as may be designated in 
this behalf by the Chief of the Nav al Staff.  
CHAPTER XIX  
DISPOSAL  OF THE P RIVATE  PROPERTY OF  PERSONS  DECEASED , MISSING , ETC.  
171. Disposal of property of deceased sailors .—(1) On the death of a  1[sailor] while subject to naval 
law, the commanding officer of the ship to which the  1[sailor] belonged shall as soon as may be, — 
(a) secure all movable property belonging to the deceased that is in the ship or quarters and cause 
an inventory t hereof to be made;  
(b) draw the pay and allowances due to such persons;  
(c) if he thinks fit, and subject to any regulations made in this behalf, collect all moneys left by 
the deceased in any banking company, including any post office sa vings banks, co operative bank or 
society, or any other institution receiving deposits in money however named, and for that purpose 
may require the agent, manager or other proper authority of such banking company, society or other 
institution to pay the moneys to the comman ding officer forthwith notwithstanding anything in the 
rules of the banking company, society or institution; and such agent, manager or other authority shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, be bound to comply with the requisition.  
(2) Where any money has been paid by the banking company, society or other institution in 
compliance with the requisition under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), no person shall have any claim against 
the said banking company, society or other institution in res pect of such money.  
(3) The commanding officer shall, if in his opinion it is necessary for the purpose of securing the 
payment of the ship and service debts and other debts in the ship or quarters of the deceased and the 
expenses, if any, incurred by the commanding officer in respect of the estate of the deceased, cause the 
movable property of the deceased to be sold or converted into money.  
(4) If the representative of the deceased is on the spot and either pays or gives security for the 
payment of the sh ip and service debts and other debts in ship or quarters due from the deceased, the 
commanding officer shall not take action under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section  (3). 
(5) The commanding officer shall, out of the moneys so received, collected or realised under               
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3), pay the ship and service debts and other debts in ship or quarters of the deceased, 
and the expenses incurred in connection w ith the realisation of the assets of the deceased.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-74). 
 54 
 (6) Any property left over after meeting the expenditure indicated in sub -section ( 5), or where the 
representative had paid or given security for the payment of the ship and service debts and other debts i n 
ship or quarters the entire property of the deceased, shall be delivered over by the commanding officer to 
the representative of the deceased, whereupon his responsibility for the administration of the estate of the 
deceased shall cease.  
(7) If no claim is made in respect of the said surplus by a representative of the deceased within twelve 
months of the death, the commanding officer shall take steps to hand over the property to the prescribed 
person who shall continue the administration of the estate of the deceased as provided for in section 176.  
172. Disposal of property of deceased officers .—The provisions of section 171 shall also apply to 
the disposal of the property of an officer who dies while subject to naval law, but with the following 
modificati ons, namely: — 
(i) the functions of the commanding officer under section 171 shall be performed by a Committee 
of Adjustment constituted in this behalf in the prescribed manner; and  
(ii) the surplus, if any, after the payment of debts and expenses specified  in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 171 shall be paid to the person prescribed in this behalf.  
173. Decision of questions as to ship and service debts and other debts in ship or quarters .—If in 
any case dou bt or difference arises as to what are the ship or serv ice debts and the debts in ship or 
quarters of a deceased officer or  1[sailor] or as to the amount payable in respect thereof, the decision of 
the prescribed person shall be final and shall be binding on all persons for all purposes.  
174. Nature of the pow ers of commanding officer or Committee of Adjustment .—For the 
purpose of the exercise of his or its duties under section 171 or 172, as the case may be, the commanding 
officer or the Committee of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall, to the exclusion of a ll other persons 
and authorities have the same rights and powers as if the commanding officer or the Committee had taken 
out representation to the estate of the deceased, and any receipt given by such commanding officer or the 
Committee, as the case may be , shall have effect accordingly.  
Explanation. —“Representation ” includes probate, letters of administration with or without the will 
annexed and a succession certificate issued by a court of competent jurisdiction constituting a person 
executor or administr ator of the estate of the deceased person or authorising him to receive or realise the 
assets of a deceased person.  
175. Powers of Central Government to hand over estate of deceased persons to the 
Administrator -General .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Administrator -General ‟s            
Act, 1913  (3 of 1913) , an Administrator -General shall not interpose in any manner in relation to any 
property of a deceased which has been dealt with under section 171 or section 172 except in so far as h e is 
expressly required or competent to do so by or under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time and in such circumstances as it thinks fit, direct that the 
estate of a deceased  1[sailor] or officer shall be handed over by the commanding officer or the Committee 
of Adjustment, as the case may be, to the Administrator -General of a State for administration and 
thereupon such commanding officer or the Committee shall make over the estate to such               
Administrator -Gene ral. 
(3) Where under this section any estate is handed over to the Administrator -General, the latter shall 
administer such estate in accordance with the provisions of the Administrator -General ‟s Act, 1913               
(3 of 1913) : 
Provided that where the estate is handed over to the Administrator -General before the ship and 
service debts and other debts in ship or quarters of the deceased are paid, it shall be the duty of the 
Administrator -General to pay these debts in priority to any debts due by the dece ased.  
(4) The Administrator -General shall pay the surplus, if any, remaining in his hands after discharging 
all debts and charges, to the heirs of the deceased and if no heir is traceable, shall make over the surplus 
to the person prescribed in this behalf . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seaman” (w.e.f. 16 -12-74). 55 
 (5) The Administrator -General shall not charge in respect of his duties under this section any fee 
exceeding three per cent. of the total amount coming to or remaining in his hands after payment of the 
ship and service debts and the other debts in ship o r quarters.  
176. Disposal of surplus by prescribed persons. —On receipt of the surplus referred to in             
sub-section ( 7) of section 171 or clause ( ii) of section 172 or sub -section ( 4) of section 175, the prescribed 
person shall, — 
(a) if he knows o f a legal representative of the deceased, pay the surplus to that representative;  
(b) if the surplus does not exceed 1[the prescribed amount not exceeding rupees on lakh in value ] if he 
thinks fit, pay or deliver to any person appearing to him to be entitl ed to receive the same, without 
requiring such person to produce any probate, letters of administration, succession certificate or other 
conclusive evidence of title;  
(c) if the prescribed person does not know of any such representative to whom the surplus  could be 
paid under clause ( a), or if the surplus has not been disposed of under clause ( b), publish every year a 
notice in the prescribed form and manner for six consecutive years; and if no claim to the surplus is made 
by the legal representative of the  deceased within six months even after the publication of the last of such 
notices, the prescribed person shall deposit the surplus together with any income or accumulation of 
income accrue therefrom, to the credit of the Central Government:  
Provided that such deposit shall not prejudice the claims of any person to such surplus or any part 
thereof, if he is otherwise entitled to it.  
177. Disposal of effects not converted into money. —Where any part of the estate of a deceased 
officer or  2[sailor] consists of  effects, securities or other property not converted into money, the 
provisions of sub -section ( 7) of section 171 or clause ( ii) of section 172 and section 176 with respect to 
the payment of the surplus shall, save as may be prescribed, extend to the deliv ery, transmission or 
transfer of such effects, securities or property, and the prescribed person shall have the same power of 
converting the same into money as a legal representative of the deceased.  
178. Termination of liability of commanding officer, Com mittee, prescribed person and the 
Central Government. —Any payment or application of money or delivery, sale or other disposition of 
any property made, or purported to be made by the commanding officer, the Committee or the prescribed 
person in good faith i n pursuance of sections 171 to 176 shall be valid and shall fully absolve the 
commanding officer, the Committee or the prescribed person, as the case may be, as well as the Central 
Government from all liability in respect of the money or property so paid, applied or disposed of; but 
nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect the right of any executor or administrator or other legal 
representative or of any creditor of the deceased against any person to whom any such payment or 
delivery as aforesaid has been made.  
179. Saving of rights of representative. —Nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights and duties 
of the representative of a deceased 2[sailor] or officer or any Administrator -General, in respect of the 
property of such deceased  2[sailor] or officer not collected by the commanding officer or the Committee, 
as the case may be, and not forming part of the surplus handed over to the prescribed person either under 
sub-section ( 7) of section 171 or clause ( ii) of section 172.  
180. Application of  sections 171 to 179 to persons of unsound mind. —The provisions of sections 
171 to 179 shall, so far as they can be made applicable, also apply in the case of an officer or  2[sailor] 
subject to naval law who is ascertained in the prescribed manner to be of  unsound mind notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912  (4 of 1912) , or who, while o n active service, is 
officially reported missing, as if the said officer or 2[sailor] had died on the day on which his unsoundness 
of mind is so asc ertained or, as the case may be, on the day on which he  is officially reported missing : 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 23 of 2005 , s. 9, for “ ten thousand rupees in value and ” (w.e.f . 23-6-2005 ).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-74). 
 56 
 Provided that in the case of an officer or  1[sailor] so reported missing, no action shall be taken to 
dispose of the property under sections 171, 172 and 175 until such  time as a certificate under the 
regulations made under this Act is issued by or under the authority of the Chief of the Naval Staff or other 
prescribed person that he is confirmed or presumed to be dead.  
181. Appointment of Standing Committee of Adjustmen t in certain cases. —When an officer 
while subject to naval law dies or is ascertained in the prescribed manner to be of unsound mind or while 
on active service is officially reported missing, the reference in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter to 
the Committee shall be construed as references to the Standing Committee of Adjustment, if any, 
constituted in this behalf in the prescribed manner and such Standing Committee, if constituted, shall 
alone b y entitled to perform all the functions of such Commi ttee unless otherwise directed by the Chief of 
the Naval Staff.  
182. Exercise of powers by other persons. —The functions and powers of the commanding officer 
in this Chapter may in any case be performed or exercised by any other person appointed in this beh alf by 
the Chief of the Naval Staff.  
183. Forfeiture of effects for absence without leave. —If any person subject to naval law is absent 
without leave for a period of one month (whether he is guilty of desertion or of improperly leaving his 
ship or place of  duty or not) but is not apprehended or tried for his offence, he shall be liable for forfeiture 
of pay and allowances and other benefits as the Central Government from time to time by regulations 
provide, and the Central Government, the Chief of the Naval  Staff or the prescribed officer may by an 
order containing a statement of the absence without leave direct that the clothes and effects, if any, left by 
him on board ship or at his place of duty be forfeited and the  same be sold and the proceeds of the sa me 
shall be disposed of as provided in the regulations made under this Act; and every order under this 
provision for forfeiture or sale be conclusive for the purpose of this section as to the fact of the absence 
without leave as therein stated of the perso n therein named; but in any case the Central Government may, 
if it deems fit on sufficient cause being shown at any time after forfeiture and before sale, remit the 
forfeiture, or after sale pay or dispose of the proceeds of the sale or any part thereof to  or for the use of the 
person to whom the clothes or effects belonged, or his representatives.  
CHAPTER XX  
REGULATIONS  
184. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make regulations for the governance, command, discipline, recruitment, conditions of service 
and regulation of the naval forces and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foreg oing power, s uch regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the rank, precedence, powers of command and authority of officers and  1[sailors] in the naval 
service;  
(b) the relative rank, precedence, powers of command and authority of officers and  1[sailors] in 
the na val service in relation to members of the regular Army and the Air Force;  
2[(c) the cases in which, and the conditions subject to which, powers of punishment may be 
exercised under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(ca) the retirement, discharge and dismissal of persons in the naval service;  
(cb) the authority to which any matter referred to in section 19A may be referred and the manner 
in which an enquiry may be made by that authority;]  
(d) the convening and constitution of courts -marital and the appointment o f prosecutors at trials 
by court -martial;    
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f.  16-12-74). 
2. Subs by s. 18, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  57 
 (e) the adjournment, dissolution and sittings of courts -martial;   
(f) the procedure to be observed in trials by courts -martial, the persons by whom an accused may 
be defended in such trials and the appearance of such persons thereat;          
(g) the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to courts -martial  and 
the awards and infliction of death, imprisonment and detention;    
(h) the carrying into effect of sentences of courts -martial;  
(i) any matter necessary for the purpose of carrying this Act into execution as far as it relates to 
the investigation, arrest, custody, trial and punishment of offences triable or punishable under                  
this Act;  
(j) the terms and conditions of  service, the pay, pensions, allowances and other benefits of 
persons in the naval service, including special provision in this behalf during active service;  
(k) the ceremonials to be observed and marks of respect to be paid in the naval service;   
(l) the convening of, the constitution, procedure and practice of boards of inquiry, the summoning 
of witnesses before them and the administration of oaths by such boards;  
(m) the computation of time of absence without leave or custody of deserters and 
absentees   without leave;  
(n) any matter relating to the realisation and disposal of the estates of officers or  1[sailors] who 
are deceased, ascertained to be of unsound mind or reported missing on active service;  
(o) the enquiry into the conduct of prisoners of war,  and their pay and allowances;  
(p) the provision to be made for the wives and children of prisoners of war or missing persons;  
(q) the procedure relating to the exercise of powers under section 163;  
1[(qa) the amount required to be prescribed under clause (b) of section 176 ] 
(r) any other matter which is to be, may be, or is required to be, prescribed under this Act.  
2[184A. Power to make regulations with retrospective effect. —The power to make regulations 
conferred by this Act shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the 
date of commencement of this Act, to the regulations or any of them, but no retrospective effect shall be 
given to any regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such regulation 
may be applicable.]  
3[185. Regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every regulation made under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total 
period of thirt y days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulat ion or, both Houses agree that the regulation 
should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.]  
CHAPTER XXI  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
186. [Repeals ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 ( 58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and the First  
Schedule  (w.e.f.  29-12-1960) . 
187. Provisions as to existing naval forces, appointments, etc. —(1) The Indian Navy in existence 
at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the regular naval force raised under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2005, s. 10 ( w.e.f. 23-6-2005).  
2. Ins. by Act 48 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 16 -10-1982).  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1 974, s. 19 , for section 185  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  58 
 (2) The Indian Naval Reserve, the Indian Naval Volunteer Reser ve and the Indian Fleet Reserve  in 
existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Indian Naval Reserve  Forces raised 
under this Act.  
(3) Officers in the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Forces at the commencement of this Act 
shall be deemed to have been appointed as such under this Act.  
(4) The person holding office as Judge Advocate of the Fleet at the commencement of this Act shall, 
on such commencement, be deemed to have been appointed as the Judge Advocate General of the N avy 
under this Act.  
(5) 1[Sailors] in the Indian Navy or in the Indian Naval Reserve Forces at the commencement of this 
Act shall be deemed to have been duly enrolled as such under this Act.  
CHAPTER XXII  
TRANSITORY  PROVISIONS  
188. Power s of officers of the Royal Navy. —(1) An officer of the Royal Navy attached to or serving 
with the Indian Navy shall have and exercise all such powers as are vested in or may be exercised by an 
officer of the Indian Navy of corresponding rank or holding a co rresponding appointment and shall be 
eligible to be granted a commission to convene courts -martial or to be appointed as president of a               
court -martial or to sit on a court -martial as a member as if he were an officer of the Indian Navy subject  
to naval law.  
(2) The expression “superior officer ” wherever used in this Act shall be deemed to include an officer 
of the Royal Navy when serving under conditions specified in sub -section ( 1). 
 
 
                                                           
4. Subs. by  Act 53 of 1974, s. 2, for “seam an” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1974).  
--------------------------The Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
  
THE PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT (REQUIREMENT AS TO RESIDENCE) ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1957  
[7th December, 1957 .] 
An Act to make in pursuance of clause (3) of article 16 of the Constitution special provisions for 
requirement as to residence in regard to certain classes of public employment in certain areas 
and to repeal existing laws prescribing any such requirement.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Public Employment 
(Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957.  
(2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Repeal of existing laws prescribing requirements as to residence .—Upon the commencement of 
this Act, any law then in force in any State or Union territory by virtue of clause (b) of article 35 of the 
Constitution prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under 
the Government of, or any local or other authority within, that State or Union territory, any requirement as 
to residence therein prior to such employment or appointment shall cease to have effect and is hereby 
repealed.  
3. Power to make rules in respect of certain classes o f public employment in certain        
areas .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules prescribing, 
in regard to appointments to — 
(a) any subordinate service or post under the State Government of Andhra Pradesh, or  
(b) any subordinate service or post under the control of the Administrator of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur or Tripura, or  
(c) any service or post under a  1[local or other authority] (other than  a cantonment board) within 
the Telangana area of Andhra Pradesh or within the  Union territory  of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur or 
Tripura,  
any requirement as to residence within the Telangana area or the said  Union territory, as the case may be, 
prior to such appointment.  
(2) In this section ,— 
2[(a) “Himacha l Pradesh ” includes the territories specified in sub -section  (1) of section  5 of the  
Punjab  Reorganisation  Act, 1966  (11 of 1966); ] 
3[(aa)]”subordinate service or post ” means any service or post appointments to which are not 
notified in the Official Gazette but includes any service of tehsildars;  
(b) “Telangana area ” comprises all the territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
States Reorganisation Act,  1956  (37 of 1956).  
4[4. Parliamentary scrutiny of rules .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before th e expiry of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1969, s. 2, for “local authority” (w.e.f. 19 -3-1969).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -3-1969).  
3. Clause ( a) renumbered as clause ( aa) of that section by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -3-1969).  
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 1964, s. 2, for section 4 (w.e.f. 9 -5-1964).  2 
 session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however , that a ny such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.]  
5. Duration of section 3 and rules .—Section 3 and all rules made thereunder shall cease to have 
effect on the expiration of  1[fifteen years] from the commencement of this Act, but such cesser shall not 
affect the validity of any appointment previously made in pursuance of the said rules.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 o f 1969, s. 3, for “ten years” (w.e.f. 19 -3-1969).  
--------------------------The Railway Protection Force Act, 1957--------------------------
1 
 THE  RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE ACT, 1957  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Constitution of the Force . 
4. Appointment and powers of superior officers.  
5.  [Omitted .]  
6. Appointment of members of the Force.  
7. Certificates to members of the Forces . 
8. Superintendence and administration of the Force.  
9. Dismissal, removal, etc., of members of the force . 
10. Officers and members of the Force to be deemed to be railway servants.  
11. Duties of members of the  Force.  
12. Power to arrest without warrant.  
13. Power to search without warrant.  
14. Procedure to be followed after arrest.  
15. Officers and members of the Force to be considered always on duty and liable to be employed in 
any part of the railways.  
15A. Restrictions resp ecting right to Form association, etc.  
16. Responsibilities of members of the Force during suspension.  
 16A. Surrender of certificate, arms , etc., by persons ceasing to be members of the Force.  
17. Penalties for neglect of duty, etc . 
18. Application of Act 22 of 1922 to members of the Force.  
19. Certain Acts not to apply to members of the Force.  
20. Protection of acts of members of the Force.  
21. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE  RAILWAY PROTECTION FORCE ACT, 1957  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1957  
[29th August , 1957.]  
1[An Act to  provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed Force of the  Union for the 
better protection and security of 2[railway property , passenger are a and passengers ] and for 
matters  connected therewith.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Railway Protection 
Force Act, 1957.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —4[(1)] In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Force ” means the Railway Protection Force constituted under section 3;  
5[(b) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of the Force appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 4;  
(ba) “enrolled member of the Force ” means any subordinate officer, under officer or any other 
member of the Force of a rank lower than that of under officer;  
(bb) “Force custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force in accordance 
with rules made under this Act;]  
(c) “mem ber of the Force ” means a person appointed to the Force under this Act 6* * *; 
7[(ca) “passenger” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Railways Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) ; 
(cb) “passenger  area” shall include railway platform, train, yard and such other area as is 
frequently visited by passengers;]  
(d) “prescribed ” mean prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(e) “railway property ” includes any goods, money or valuable security, or animal,  belonging to, 
or in the charge or possession of, a railway administration;  
8[(ea) “subordinate officer ” means a person appointe d to the Force as an Inspector, Sub-Inspector 
or an Assistant Sub -Inspector; ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 60 of 1985, s. 2, for  the long title (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 2003, s.  2, for “railway property” (w.e.f . 1-7-2004 ).  
3. 10th September 1959, vide notification No. 58 -security/16/9, dated 10 -9-1959, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 1.  
Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962 , s. 3 and Schedule.  
The Act comes into force in Pondicherry  on 1-10-1963, s. 3 and Schedule I.  
Extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Schedule I.  
4. Section 2 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) there of by Act 60 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
5. Subs. by s. 3 , ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -9-85). 
6. The w ords “other than a superior officer ” omitted  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
7. Ins. by Act 52 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-2004). 
8. Ins. by Act 60 of 1985 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  3 
 (f) “superior officer ” means any of the officers appointed under section 4 and includes any other 
officer appointed by the Central Government as a superior officer of the Force;  
1[(fa) “under officer ” means a person appointed to the Force as a Head Constable or Naik;]  
(g) words  and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the India n Railways                
Act, 1890  (9 of 1890),  shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them under that Act.  
 1[(2) Any reference in this act to a law which is not in forc e in any area shall in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.]  
3. Constitution of the Force. —(1) There shall be constituted and maintained by the Central 
Government a  2[an armed Force of the Union] to be called the Railway Protection Force for the  better 
protection and security of railway property.  
(2) The force shall be constituted in such manner shall consist of such number                           
of 3[superior  officers  subordinate off icers, under officers and other enrolled  members] of the Force and 
shall receive such pay and other renumeration as may  be prescribed.  
4. Appointment and powers of superior officers.—4[(1) The Central Government may  appoint a 
person to be the Director -General of the Force and may appoint other  persons to be Inspector -General , 
Additional Inspector -General, Deputy  Inspector -General, Assistant Inspector -General, Senior 
Commandants, Commandants  or Assistant Commandants of the Force.]  
(2) The 5[Director -General] and every other superior officer so appointed  shall posses and exercise 
such powers and authority over the members of the  Force under their respective commands as is provided 
by or under this Act.  
 5. [Classes and ranks among members of the Force. ]—Omitted by the Railway Protection Force  
(Amendment ) Act, 1985 ( 60 of 1985 ), s. 6 (w.e.f.  20-9-1985). 
6[6. Appointment of members of the Force. —The appointment of enrolled members of the Force 
shall rest with the Inspector -General, Additional Inspector -General or Deputy Inspector -General who 
shall exercise that power in accordance with rules made under this Act:  
Provide d that the power of appointment under this section may also be exercised by other superior 
officer as the Inspector -General, Ad ditional Inspector -General or Deputy Inspector -General concerned 
may, by order, specify in this behalf.]  
7. Certificates to members of the Force s.—(1) Every member of the Force shall receive on his 
appointment a certificate in the  form specified in the Sch edule, under the seal of the  7[Inspector -General,  
Additional Inspector -General or Deputy Inspector -General] or such other superior  officer as the 
a 7[Inspector -General, Additional Inspector -General  or Deputy Inspector -General] may specify in this 
behalf by  virtue of which the  person holding such certificate shall be vested with the powers of a member 
of the Force.  
(2) Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person named in it  ceases for any reason 
to be a member of the Force  8* * * . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 60 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
2. Subs.  by s. 4, ibid., for “a Force” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “superior officers and members” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “Inspector -General”  (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
6. Subs . by s. 7, ibid., for s. 6 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Chief Security Officer” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
8. Certain words omitted  by s. 8,  ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  4 
 1[8. Su perintendence and administration of the Force. —(1) The superintendence of the Force shall 
vest in the Central Government, and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act and of any rules 
made there under, the command supervision and administration of the Force shall vest in the                  
Director -General.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the administration of the Force, within such local 
limits in relation to a railway as may be prescribed shall be carried on by an Inspector -General, an 
Additional Inspector -General or a Deputy Inspector -General in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and of any rules  made there under and they shall, subject to any direction that may be giv en by the Central 
Government or the Director -General in this behalf discharge his function under the general supervision of 
the General Manager of the Railway. ] 
9. Dismissal, removal, etc. , of members of the force.—(1) Subject to the provisions of article 311 of 
the Constitution and to such rules  as the Central Government may make under this Act, any superior 
officer may — 
(i) dismiss, suspend or reduce in rank any 2[enrolled member] of the  Force whom he shall think 
remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or  unfit for the same; or  
(ii) award any one or more of the following punishments to any  1[enrolled  member] of the Force 
who discharges his duty in a careless or negligent manner,  or who by any act of his own renders 
himself unfit for the dischar ge thereof,  namely:— 
(a) fine to any amount not exceeding seven days ’ pay or reduction in pay scale;  
(b) confinement to quarters for a period not exceeding fourteen days with or without  
punishment, drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;  
(c) removal fro m any office of distinction or deprivation of any special emolument.  
3[(2) Any enrolled member of the  force aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may, within 
within thirty days  from the date on which the order is communicated to him prefer an appeal ag ainst  the 
order to such authority as may be prescribed : 
Provided  that the prescribed authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the  said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented  by sufficient cause from filing the appeal                  
in time.  
(3) In disposing of the appeal, the prescribed authority shall follow such procedure  as may                          
be prescribed:  
Provided  that no order imposing an enhanced penalty und er sub -section ( 2) shall be made  unless a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard has been given to the person  affected by such order.]  
10. Officers and members of the Force to be deemed to be railway servants. —4[Director -General 
and every  member of the Forc e] shall for all purposes be regarded as railway servants with  the meaning of 
the Indian Railways Act, 1890  (9 of 1890) , other than Chapter VIA thereof,  and shall be entitled to 
exercise the powers conferred on railway servants by or  under that Act.  
5[11. Duties of members of the Force. —It shall be the duty of every superior officer and member of 
the Force— 
(a) promptly to execute all orders lawfully issued to him by his superior authority;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 60 of 1985  s. 9, for section  8 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
2. Subs.  by  s. 10, ibid.,  for “member” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
3. Subs.  by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 2)  (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
4. Subs. by s. 18 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
5. Subs. by Act 52 of 2003, s. 4 , for section 11  (w.e.f.  1-7-2004 ). 5 
 (b) to protect  and safeguard railway property, passenger area and passengers;  
(c) to remove any obstruction in the movement of railway property  or passenger area; and  
(d) to do any other act conducive to the better protection a nd security of railway property, 
passenger area and passengers. ] 
1[12. Power to arrest without warrant.—Any member of the Force may, without an order from a 
Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest — 
(i) any person who voluntarily causes hurt to, or attempts voluntarily to cause hurt to, or 
wrongfully restrain s or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or assaults, threatens to assault, or uses, or 
threatens or attempts to use, criminal force to him or any other member of the Force in the execution 
of his duty as such member, or with intent to prev ent or to deter him from discharging his duty as 
such member, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by him in the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such member; or  
(ii) any person who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable s uspicion exists of his 
having been concerned in, or who is found taking precautions to conceal his presence under 
circumstances which afford reason to believe that he is taking such precautions with a view to 
committing a cognizable offence which relates t o 2[railway property , passenger area and passengers] ; 
or 
(iii) any person found taking precautions to conceal his presence within the railway limits under 
circumstances which afford reason to believe that he is taking such precautions with a view to 
commit ting theft of, or damage to, 2[railway property , passenger area and passengers] ; or 
(iv) any person who commits or attempts to commit a cognizable offence which involves or 
which is likely to involve imminent danger to the life of any person engaged in carrying on any work 
relating to 2[railway property , passenger area and passengers] .] 
13. Power to search without warrant.—(1) Whenever  3* * * any member of the Force, not below 
the rank of a  Senior Rakshak, has reason to believe that any such offence as is referred to in  section 12 
has been or is being committed and that a search -warrant canno t be obtained without affording the 
offender an opportunity of escaping or of  concealing evidence of the offence, he may detain him and 
search his person and  belongings forthwith and , if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has  reason 
to believe to have committed the offence.  
(2) The provisions of the  4[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], relating  to searches under 
that Code shall, so far as may be, apply to searches under  this section.  
14. Procedure to be followed after arrest.—Any 5* * *  member of the Force making an arrest under 
under this Act, shall, without unnecessary delay, make over the person so arrested 6[to a police officer  
together with a detailed report of the circumstances leading to the arrest of such persons] , or in the 
absence of  a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken to the nearest police station.  
15. Officers and members of the Force to be considered always on duty and liable to be 
employed in any part of the railways.—7[(1) Every member of the Force  shall, for the purposes of this 
Act, be considered to be always on duty, and  shall, at any time, be liable to be employed at any place 
within India.]  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 60 of 1985, s. 11 , for section  12 (w.e.f . 20-9-1985). 
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 2003, s. 5 , for “ railway property”  (w.e.f. 1-7-2004). 
3. The words “any superior officer or”  omitted by  Act 60 of 1985, s. 18 and  the Schedule (  w.e.f.  20-9-1985). 
4. Subs. by s. 18 and Schedule, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
5. The words “superior officer or” omitted by s.  18 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
6. Subs. by Act 52 of 2003, s. 6 , for “to a police officer”  (w.e.f. 1-7-2004). 
7. Subs . by Act 60 of 1985, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f.  20-9-1985). 6 
 (2) No 1* * * member of the Force shall engage himself in any  employment or office other than his 
duties under this Act.  
2[15A. Restrictions respecting right to Form association, etc.—(1) No member of the Force shall, 
without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any other society,  institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recreational or 
religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document e xcept where such communication or publication is in the bona fide  discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation. —If any question arises as to whether any society, institution,  association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No member of the Force shall participate in, or address, any meeti ng or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed.]  
16. Responsibilities of members of the Force during suspension. —A member of the Force shall 
not by reason of his suspension from office cease to be a member of the Force; and he shall, during that 
period, be subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and penalties to which he would have been 
subject if he were on duty.  
3[16A. Surrender of certificate, arms, etc., by persons ceasing to be members of the Force. —(1) 
Every person who for any reason ceases to be a member of the Force, shall forthwith surrender to any 
superior officer empowered to receive the same, his certificate of appointment, the arms, acc outrements, 
clothing and other articles which have been furnished to him for the performance of his duties as a 
member of the Force.  
(2) Any person who wilfully neglects or refuses to surrender his certificate of appointment, the arms, 
accoutrements, cloth ing and other articles furnished to him, as required by sub -section ( 1) shall on 
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.  
(3) Nothing in this sect ion shall be deemed to apply to any article which, under the orders of the 
Director -General, has become the property of the person to whom the same was furnished.]  
4[17. Penalties for neglect of duty, etc.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in              
section  9, every enrolled member of the Force who shall be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful  
breach or neglect of any rule or lawful order made by a superior officer, or who shall withdraw from 
duties of his office without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fails, without reasonable cause, to 
report himself for duty on the expiration of t he leave, or who engages himself without authority for any 
employment other than his duty as an enrolled member of the Force, or who shall be guilty of cowardice 
                                                           
1. The words “ superior officer or” omitted by  Act 60 of 1985, s. 12 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
2. Ins. by s. 13,  ibid. (w.e.f. 20-9-1985). 
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
4. Subs . by s. 15, ibid., for section  17 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
 7 
 may be taken into Force custody and shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1973) , an 
offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1973) , the 
Central Government may invest Assistant Inspector -General, Senior Commandant or Commandant with 
the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the purpose of inquiring into or trying any offence committed 
by an enrolled memb er of the Force and punishable under this Act, or any offence committed by an 
enrolled member of the Force against the person or property of another member of the Force:  
Provided  that— 
(i) when the offender is on leave or absent from duty; or  
(ii) when the  offence is not connected with the offender ’s duties as an enrolled member of                         
the Force; or  
(iii) when it is a petty offence even if connected with the offender ’s duties as an enrolled member 
of the Force; or  
(iv) when, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is not practicable for the Commandant invested 
with the powers of a Magistrate to inquire into or try the offence,  
the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of whose jurisdiction the offence has been 
comm itted so requires, be inquired into or tried by an ordinary criminal court having jurisdiction in                    
the matter.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent any enrolled member of the Force 
from being prosecuted unde r any other law for any offence made punishable by that law, or for being 
liable under any such law to any other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence 
by this section:  
Provided  that no person shall be punished twice for the same  offence.]  
18. Application of act 22 of 1922 to members of the Force. —The Police (Incitement to 
Disaffection) Act, 1922 shall apply to members of the Force as it applies to members of a police force.  
1[19. Certain Acts not to apply to members of the Force .— Nothing contained in the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936  (4 of 1936) , or the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947),  or the Factories Act, 
1948  (63 of 1948) , or any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial dispute 
in force  in a State shall apply to members of the Force.]  
20. Protection of acts of members of the Force. —(1) In any suit or proceeding against                  
any  2* * *  member of the Force for any act done by him in the discharge of his duties, it shall be law ful 
for him to plead that such act was done by him under the orders of a competent authority.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the order directing the act, and if it is so 
proved, the   2* * * member of the Force shall thereupon be disch arged from any liability in respect of the 
act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority which issued                 
such order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for b ed time being in force, any  legal 
proceeding, whether civil or criminal, which may lawfully be brought against any  2* * * member of the 
Force for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any 
                                                           
1. Subs . by A ct 60 of 1985, s. 16, for section  19  (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985). 
2. The w ords “s uperior officer or” omitted by s. 18 and  the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-9-1985). 8 
 provision of this Act or the rules thereunder  shall be commenced within the months after th ree act 
complained of shall have been committed and not otherwise; and notice in writing of such proceeding and 
of the cause thereof shall be given to the person concerned and his superior officer at least one month 
before the commencement of such proceeding.  
21. Power to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for  carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,  such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) regulating the classes and grades and the pay and remuneration of   1*** members of the Force 
and their conditions of service in the Force;  
(b) regulating the powers and duties of  1*** members of the Force  authorised  to exercise any 
functions by or under this Act;  
(c) fixing the period of service for  1*** members of the Force;  
2[(d) prescribing the description  and quality of arms, accoutrements, clothing and other necessary 
articles to be  furnished to the members of the Force;  
(e) prescribing the places of residence of the member of the Force;  
(f) institution, management and regulation of any fund for any purpose connected  with the 
administration of the Force;  
(g) regulating the punishments and prescribing authorities  to whom appeal shall be  preferred from 
orders of punishment, or remission of fines, or other punishments  and the procedure to be followed 
for the disposal of such appeals;  
(h) regulating matters with respect to Force custody under this Act, including the  procedure to be 
followed for taking persons into such custody;  
(i) regulating matters with respect to disposal of cases relating to offences under  this Act and 
specifying the places in which person convicted under this Act may  be confined;  
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, imposed or in respect of which  rules are 
required to be made  under this Act. ] 
3[(3) Every rule made under this  Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each 
House of  Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may  be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in m aking any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 7)  
A.B. has been appointed a member of the Railway Protection Force under the Railway Protection 
Force Act, 19 57, and is vested with the powers, func tions and privileges of a member of the Force.  
 
                                                           
1. The words “superior officer s and” omitted by Act 60 of 1985, s. 17 (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985).  
2. Subs . by s. 17, ibid.,  for clause s (d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985) . 
3. Subs . by s. 17, ibid.,  for sub -section  (3) (w.e.f. 20 -9-1985) . 
 
