--------------------------The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES  
AND REMAINS ACT, 1958  
――  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
――  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
2A. Construction of references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.   
ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE  
3. Certain ancient monuments, etc., deemed to be of national importance.  
4. Power of Central Government to declare ancient monuments , etc., to be of national impor tance.  
4A. Categorisation and classification in respect of ancient monume nts or archaeological sites and 
remains declared as of national im portance under sections 3 and 4.   
PROTECTED MONUMENTS  
5.  Acquisition of rights in a protected monument.  
6.  Preserva tion of protected monument by agreement.  
7.  Owners under disability or not in possession.  
8.  Application of endowment to repair a protected monument.  
9.   Failure or refusal to enter into an agreement.  
10. Power to make order prohibiting contravention o f agreement under section 6.  
11. Enforcement of agreements.  
12. Purchasers at certain sales and persons claiming through owner bound by instrument executed 
by owner.  
13. Acquisition of protected monuments.  
14. Maintenance of certain protected monuments.  
15. Voluntary contributions.  
16. Protection of place of worship f rom misuse, pollution or desecration.  
17. Relinquishment of Government rights in a monument.  
18. Right of access to protected monuments.  
PROTECTED AREAS  
19.  Rest rictions on enjoyment of prope rty rights in protected areas.  
20.  Power to acquire a protected area.  2 
 PROHIBITED AND REGULATED AREAS  
SECTIONS  
20A. Declaration of prohibited area and carrying out public work or other works in prohibited  
area.  
20B. Declaration of regulated area in respe ct of every protected monument.  
20C. Application for repair or renovation in prohibited area, or construction or re -construction or 
repair or renovation in regulated area.  
GRANT OF PERMISSION BY COMPETENT AUTHORITY  
20D. Grant of permission by competent aut hority within regulated area.  
20E. Heritage bye -laws.  
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY  
20F. Constitution of National Monuments Authority.  
20G. Selection Committee for selection of members of Authority.  
20H. Salary, allowances and meetings of Authority.  
20-I.  Functions and powers of Authority.  
20J.   Removal of Chairperson and members.  
20K.  Restriction on future employment by Chairperson and members.  
20L.   Power of Central Government to issue directions to Authority.  
20M.  Power of Central Government to issue  directions to competent authority.  
20N.  Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.  
20-O. Bar of jurisdiction of civil court.  
20P.   Annual report.  
20Q.  Power to call for information.  
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS  
21. Excavations in protected areas . 
22. Excavations in areas other than protected areas.  
23. Compulsory purchase of antiquities, etc., discovered during excavation operations.  
24. Excavations, etc., for archaeological purposes.  
PROTECTION OF ANTIQUITIES  
25. Power of Central Government to c ontrol moving of antiquities.  
26. Purchase of antiquities by Central Government.  
PRINCIPLES OF COMPENSATION  
27. Compensation for loss or damage.  
28. Assessment of market value or  compensation.  3 
 MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
29.  Delegation of powers.  
30. Penalties . 
30A. Punishment for construction, etc., in prohibited area.  
30B. Punishment for construction, etc., in regulated area.  
30C. Offences by officers of Government.  
31. Jurisdiction to try offences.  
32. Certain offences to be cognizable.  
33. Special provision  regarding fine.  
34. Recovery of amounts due to the Government.  
35. Ancient monuments, etc., which have ceased to be of national importance.  
35A. Obligation to survey the protected prohibited area and regulated areas.  
35B. Identification of unauthorised co nstructions on or after 16th June, 1992.  
36. Power to correct mistakes, etc.  
37. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
38. Power to make rule.  
39. Repeals and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES  
AND REMAINS ACT, 1958   
ACT NO. 24 OF 19581  
[28th August , 1958.]  
An Act to provide for the preservation of ancient and historical monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains of national importance, for the regulation of 
archaeological excavations and for the protection of sculptures, carvings and other like 
objects.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: ―  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencem ent.―(1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments 
and Archaeological Sites  and Remains Act, 1958.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India.]  
 (3) It shal l come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,― 
(a) “ancient monument ” means any structure , erection or monument, or any tumulus or place 
of interment, or any cave, rock -sculpture, inscription or monolith, which is of historical, 
archaeological or artistic interest and which has been in existence for  not less than one hundred 
years, and includes ―  
(i) the remains of an ancient monument,  
(ii) the site of an ancient monument,  
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be required for 
fencing or covering in or otherwise p reserving such monument, and  
(iv) the means of access to, and convenient insp ection of, an ancient monument;  
(b) “antiquity ” includes ― 
(i) any coin, sculpture, manuscript, epigraph, or other work of art or craftsmanship,  
(ii) any article, object or thing d etached  from a building or cave,  
(iii) any article, object or thing illustrative of science, art, crafts, literature, religion, 
customs, morals or politics in bygone ages,  
(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest, and  
                                                           
1. Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, S. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 22 -11-1962). Extended to 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 11 -7-1965) and Pondicherry b y Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and 
Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 1972, s. 33, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).    
3. 15th October, 1959, vide notification No. S. O. 2307, dated 15th October, 1959, see Gazette  of India,  Extraordinary,       
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
 5 
 (v) any article, objec t or thing declared by the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, to be an antiquity for the purposes of this Act,  
which has been in existence for not less than one  hundred years ; 
(c) “archae ological officer ” means an officer of the D epartment of Archaeology of the 
Government of India not lower in rank than Assistan t Superintendent of Archaeology ; 
(d) “archaeological site and remains ” means any area which contains or is reasonably 
believed to contain ruins or relics of historical or ar chaeological importance which have been in 
existence for not less than one hundred years, and includes ― 
(i) such portion of land adjoining the area as may be required for fencing or covering in or 
otherwise preserving it, and  
(ii) the means of access to, and conv enient inspection of, the area;  
1[(da) “Authority ” means the National Monuments Authority const ituted under section 20F;  
(db) “competent authority ” means an officer not below the rank of Director of archaeology or 
Commissioner of archaeology of the Central or State Government or equivalent rank, specified, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, as  the competent authority by the Central Government to 
perform functions under this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
different competent authorities for the purpose of sections 20C, 20D and 20E;  
(dc) “construction ” means any erection of a structure or a building, including any addition or 
extension thereto either vertically or horizontally, but does not include any re -construction, repair 
and renovation of an existing structure or building, or, c onstruction, maintenance and cleansing of 
drains and drainage works and of public latrines, urinals and similar conveniences, or, the 
construction and maintenance of works meant for providing supply of water for public, or, the 
construction or maintenance,  extension, management for supply and distribution of electricity to 
the public or provision  for similar facilities for public;]  
(e) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of Archaeology, and includes any officer 
authorised by the Central Government  to perform the dutie s of the Director -General ; 
(f) “maintain ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes the fencing, 
covering in, repairing, restoring and cleansing of a protected monument, and the doing of any act 
which may be ne cessary for the purpose of preserving a protected monument or of securing 
convenient access thereto;  
(g) “owner ” includes ― 
(i) a joint owner invested with powers of management on behalf of himself and other joint 
owners and the successor -in-title of any su ch owner ; and 
(ii) any manager or trustee exercising power s of management and the successor -in-office 
of any such manager or trustee;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1992).  6 
 1[(ha) “prohibited area ” means any area specified o r decla red to be a prohibited area under 
section 20A;]  
(i) “protected area ” means any archaeological site and remains which is declared to be of 
national importance by or under this Act;  
(j) “protected monument ” means an ancient monument which is declared to be o f national 
importance by or under this Act;  
1[(k) “re-construction ” means any erection of a structure or building to its pre -existing 
structure, having the same horizontal and vertical limits;  
(l) “regulated area ” means any area specified or declared under  section 20B;  
(m) “repair and renovation ” means alterations to a pre -existing structure or building, but shall 
not include  construction or re -construction. ] 
2[2A. Construction of references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. ―Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law if any, in 
force in that State.]  
ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES  AND REMAINS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE  
3. Certain ancient monuments, etc., deemed to be of national importance .―All ancient and 
historical monuments and all archaeological sites and remains which have been declared by              
the Ancient and Historical M onuments and Archaeological Si tes and Remains (Declaration of     
National Imp ortance) Act, 1951 (71 of 1951 ), or by section 126 of the States Reorganisation                          
Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) , to be of national importance shall be deemed to b e ancient and historical 
monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared to be of national importance for the purposes 
of this Act.  
4. Power of Central Govern ment to declare ancient monuments , etc., to be of national 
importance .―(1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that any ancient monument or 
archaeological site and remains not included in section 3 is of national importance, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, give two months ’ notice of its intention to d eclare such ancient 
monument or archaeological site and remains to be of national importance; and a copy of every such 
notification shall be affixed in a conspicuous place near the monument or site and remains, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Any person interested  in any such ancient monument or archaeological site and remains may, 
within two months after the issue of the notification, object to the declaration of the monument , or the 
archaeological site and remains, to be of national importance.  
(3) On the expiry of the said period of two months, the Central Government may, after 
considering the objections, if any, received by it, declare by notification in the Official Gazette, the 
ancient monument or the archaeological site and remains, as the case may be, to be of national 
importance.  
(4) A notification published under sub -section ( 3) shall, unless and until it is withdrawn, be 
conclusive evidence of the fact that the ancient monument or the archaeological site and remains to 
which it relates is of national impor tance for the purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1992).  
2. Ins. by Act 52 of 1972, s. 33 (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  7 
 1[4A. Categorisation and classification in respect of ancient monuments or archaeological 
sites and remains declared as of national importance under sections 3 and 4 .―(1) The Central 
Government shall, on the recommendati on of the Authority, prescribe categories in respect                 
of ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance under 
sections 3 and 4, and while prescribing such categories it shall have regard to the histo rical, 
archaeological and architectural value and such other factors as may be relevant for the purpose of 
such categorisation.  
(2) The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, classify all the 
ancient monuments or archaeological s ites and remains declared as of national importance under 
sections 3 and 4, in accordance with the categories prescribed under sub -section ( 1) and thereafter 
make the same available to the public and exhibit the same on its website and also in such other 
manner as it may deem fit.]  
PROTECTED MONUMENTS  
5. Acquisition of rights in a protected monument .―(1) The Director -General may, with the 
sanction of the Central Government, purchase, or take a lease of, or accept a gift or bequest of, any 
protected monument.  
(2) Where a protected monument is  without an owner, the Director -General may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, assume the guardianship of the monument.  
(3) The owner of any protected m onument may, by written instru ment, constitute the             
Director -General the guardian of the monument, and the Director -General may, with the sanction of 
the Central Government, accept such guardianship.  
(4) When the Director -General has accepted the guardianship of a monument under                   
sub-section ( 3), the owner shall, except as expressly provided in this Act, have the same estate, right, 
title and interest in and to the monument as if the Director -General had not been constituted a 
guardian thereof.  
(5) When the Director -General has accepted the guardianship of a monument under                       
sub-section ( 3), the provisions of this  Act relating to agreements executed under section 6 shall apply 
to the written to agreemen ts executed under the said sub -section.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the use of any protected monument for customary religious 
observances.  
6. Preservati on of protected monument by agreement .―(1) The Collector, when so directed 
by the Central Government, shall propose to the owner of a protected monument to enter into an 
agreement with the Central Government within a specified period for the maintenance of  the 
monument.  
(2) An agreement under this section may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely: ― 
(a) the maintenance of the monument ; 
(b) the custody of the monument and the duties of any person who may be employed to   
watch it ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 3  (w.e.f. 16-6-1992 ). 8 
 (c) the re striction of the owner ’s right ― 
(i) to use the monument for any purpose,  
(ii) to charge any fee for entry into, or inspection of, the monument,  
(iii) to destroy, remove, alter or deface the monument, or  
(iv) to build on or near the site of the monument;  
(d) the facilities of access to be permitted to the public or any section thereof or to 
archaeological officers or to persons deputed by the owner or any archaeological officer or the 
Collector to inspect or maintain the monument;  
(e) the notice to be given to the Central Government in case the land on which the monument 
is situated or any ad joining land is offered for sale by the owner, and the right to be reserved to 
the Central Government to purchase such land, or any specified portion of such land, at its  market 
value ;  
(f) the payment of any expenses incurred by the owner or by the Central Government in 
connection with the maintenance of the monument;  
(g) the proprietary or other rights which are to vest in the Central Government in respect of 
the monumen t when any expenses are incurred by the Central Government in connection with the 
maintenance of the monument;  
(h) the appointment of an authority to decide any dispute arising out of the agreement; and  
(i) any matter connected with the maintenance of the monument which is a proper subject of 
agreement between the owner and the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government or the owner may, at any time after the expiration of three years from 
the date of execution of an agree ment under this section, termin ate it on giving six months ’ notice in 
writing to the other party:  
Provided that where the agreement is terminated by the owner, he shall pay to the Central 
Government the expenses, if any, incurred by it on the maintenance of the monument during the five 
years immediately preceding the termination of the agreement or, if the agreement has been in force 
for a shorter period, during the period the agreement was in force.  
(4) An agreement under this secti on shall be binding on any per son claiming to be the ow ner of 
the monument to which it relates, from, through or under a party by whom or on whose behalf the 
agreement was executed.  
7. Owners under disability or not in possession .―(1) If the owner of a protected monument is 
unable, by reason of infancy or other disability, to act for himself, the son legally competent to act on 
his behalf may exercise the powers conferred upon an owner by section 6.  
(2) In the case of village prope rty, the headman or other village officer exercising powers of 
management over such property may exercise the powers confer red upon an owner by section 6.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower any person not being of the same religion 
as the person on whose behalf he is acting to make or execute an agreement relating to a protected 
monument which or any part of which is periodically used for the religious worship or observances of 
that religion  9 
 8. Application of endowment to repair a protec ted monument .―(1) If any owner or other 
person competent to enter into an agreement under section 6 for the maintenance of a protected 
monument refuses or fails to enter into such an agreement, and if any endowment has been created for 
the purpose of keepi ng such monument in repair or for that purpose among others, the Central 
Government may institute a suit in the court of the district judge, or, if the estimated cost of repairing 
the monument does not exceed one thousand rupees, may make an application to  the district judge, for 
the proper application of such endowment or part thereof.  
(2) On the hearing of an application under sub -section ( 1), the district judge may summon and 
examine the owner and any person whose evidence appears to him necessary and ma y pass an order 
for the proper application of the endowment or of any part thereof, and any such order may be 
executed as if it were a decree of a civil court.  
9. Failure or refusal to enter into an agreement .―(1) If any owner or other person competent 
to enter into an agreement under section 6 for the maintenance of a protected monument refuses or 
fails to enter into such an agreement, the Central Government may make an order providing for all or 
any of the matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 6  and such order shall be bindin g on the 
owner or such other person and on every person  claiming title to the monument from, through or 
under, the owner or such other person.  
(2) Where an order made under sub -section ( 1) provides that the monument shall be maintained 
by the owner or other person competent to enter into an agreement, all reasonable expenses for the 
maintenance of the monument shall be payable by the Central Government.  
(3) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless the owner or other  person has been given 
an opportunity of making a representation in writing against the proposed order.  
10. Power to make order prohibiting contravention of agreement under section 6. ―(1) If the 
Director -General apprehends that the owner or occupier of a protected monument intends to destroy, 
remove, alter, deface, imperil or misuse the monument or to build on or near the site thereof in 
contravention of the terms of an agreement under  section 6, the Director -General may, after giving the 
owner or occupier an opportunity of making a representation in writing, make an order prohibiting 
any such contravention of the agreement:  
Provided that no such opportunity may be given in any case whe re the Director -General, for 
reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that it is not expedient or practicable to do so.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under this section may appeal to the Central Government 
within such time and in such manner as may be p rescribed and the decision of the Central 
Government shall be final.  
11. Enforcement of agreements .―(1) If an owner or other person who is bound by an agreement 
for the maintenance of a monument under section 6 refuses or fails within such reasonable time as the 
Director -General may fix, to do any act which in the opinion of the Director -General is necessary for 
the maintenance of the monument, the Director -General may authorise any person to do any such act, 
and the owner or other person shall be liable to  pay the expenses of doing any such act or such portion 
of the expenses as the owner may be liable to pay under the agreement.  
(2) If any dispute arises regard ing the amount of expenses pay able by the owner or other person 
under sub -section ( 1), it shall b e referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.  10 
 12. Purchasers at certain sales and persons claiming thro ugh owner bound by instrument 
executed by owner .―Every person who purchases, at a sale for arrears of land revenue or any other 
public demand, any land on which is situated a monument in respect of which any instrument has 
been executed by the owner for the time being under section 5 or section 6, and every person claiming 
any title to a monument from, through or under, an owner who executed any such instrument, shall  be 
bound by such instrument.  
13. Acquisition of protected monuments .―If the Central Government apprehends                 
that a protected monument is in danger of being destroyed, injured, misused, or allowed to fall       
into decay, it may acquire the protected monume nt under the provisions of the Land Acquisition        
Act, 1894  (1 of 1894) , as if the maintenance of the protected monument were a public purpose within 
the meaning of that Act.  
14. Maintenance of certain protected monuments .―(1) The Central Government shall 
maintain every monument which has been acquired under section 13 or in respect of which any of the 
rights mentioned in section 5 have been acquired.  
(2) When the Director -General has assumed the guardianship of a monument under section 5, he 
shall, for the purpose of maintaining such monument, have acce ss to the monument at all reasonable 
times, by himself and by his agents, subordinates and workmen, for the purpose of inspecting the 
monument and for the purpose of bringing such materials and doing such acts as he may consider 
necessary or desirable for the maintenance thereof.  
15. Voluntary contributions .―The Director -General may receive voluntary contributions 
towards the cost of maintaining a protected monument and may give orders as to the management and 
application of any funds so received by him:  
Provided that no contribution received under this section shall be applied to any purpose other 
than the purpose for which it was contributed.  
16. Protection of place of worship fr om misuse, pollution or desecration .―(1) A protected 
monument maintained by t he Central Government under this Act which is a place of worship or 
shrine shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with its character.  
(2) Where the Central Government has acquired a protected monument under section 13, or where 
the Director -General  has purchased, or taken a lease or accepted a gift or bequest or assumed 
guardianship of , a protected monument under section 5, and such monument or any part thereof is 
used for religious worship or observances by any community , the Collector shall make d ue provision 
for the protection of such monument or part thereof, from pollution or desecration ― 
(a) by prohibiting the entry therein, except in accordance with the conditions prescribed with 
the concurrence of the persons, if any, in religious charge of t he said monument or part thereof, of 
any person not entitled so t o enter by the religious usages  of the community by which the 
monument or part thereof is used, or  
(b) by taking such other action as he may think necessary in this behalf.  
17. Relinquishm ent of Government rights in a monument .―With the sanction of the Central 
Government, the Director -General may, ― 
(a) where rights have been acquired by the Director -General in respect of any monument 
under this Act by virtue of any sale, lease, gift or will, relinquish, by notification in the Of ficial 
Gazette, the rights so acquired to the person who would for the time being be the owner of the 
monument if such rights had not been acquired; or  11 
 (b) relinquish any guardianship of a monument which he has assumed under this Act.  
18. Right of access t o protected monuments .―Subject to any rules made under this Act, the 
public shall have a right of access to any protected monument.  
PROTECTED AREAS  
19.  Restictions on enjoyment of property rights in protected areas .―(1) No person, including 
the owner or occupier of a protecte d area, shall construct any building within the protected area or 
carry on any mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting or any operation of a like nature in such area, or 
utilise such area or any part thereof in any other manner without the permission of th e Central 
Government:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of any such area or 
part thereof for purposes of cultivation if such cultivation does not involve the digging of not more 
than one foot of soil from the sur face.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct that any building constructed by any person 
within a protected area in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be removed within a 
specified period and, if the person refuses or fails to comply with the order, the Collector may cause 
the building to be removed and the person shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal.  
20. Power to acquire a protected area .―If the Central Government is of opinion that any 
protected area contains an ancient monument or antiquities of national interest and value, it may 
acquire such area under the provisions o f the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) , as if the 
acquisition were for a public purpose within the meaning of that Act.  
1[PROHIBITED AND REGULATED AREAS   
20A. Declaration of prohibited area and carrying out public work or other works in 
prohibited area .―Every area, beginning at the limit of the protected area or the protected monument, 
as the case may be, and extending t o a distance of one hundred met res in all directions shall be the 
prohibited area in respect of such protected area or protected monument:  
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendatio n of the Authority, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify an area more than one hundred  metres to be the prohibited 
area having regard to the classification of any protected monument or protected area, as the case may 
be, under section 4A.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in section 20C, no person, other than an archaeological officer, 
shall carry out any construction in any prohibited area.  
(3) In a case where the Central Government or the Director -General, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that ― 
(a) it is necessary or expedient for carrying out such public work or any project essential to 
the public; or  
(b) such other work or project, in its opinion, shall not have any substantial adverse impact on 
the preservation, safety, security of, or, access to, the monument or its immediate surrounding,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1992) . 
 12 
 it or he may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), in exceptional cases and having 
regard to the public interest, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit, such public 
work or project essential to the public or other constructions, to be carried out in a prohibited area:  
Provided that any area near any protected monument or its adjoining area declared, during the 
period beginning on or after the 16th day of June, 1992 but end ing before the date on which the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010, 
receives the assent of the President, as a prohibited area in respect of such protected monument, shall 
be deemed to be the prohi bited area declared in respect of that protected monument in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and any permission or licence granted by the Central Government or 
the Director -General, as the case may be, for the construction within the prohibited area on the basis 
of the recommendation of the Expert Advisory Committee, shall be deemed to have been validly 
granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as if this section had been in force at all 
material times:  
Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply to any permission granted, 
subsequent to the completion of construction or re -construction of any building or structure in any 
prohibited area in pursuance of the notification of the Government of India in the Dep artment of 
Culture (Archaeological Survey of India) number S.O. 1764, dated the 16th June, 1992 issued under 
rule 34 of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules, 1959, or, without 
having obtained the recommendations of the Committee  constituted in pursuance of the order of the 
Government of India number 24/22/2006 -M, dated the 20th July, 2006 (subsequently referred to as 
the Expert Advisory Committee in orders dated the 27th August, 2008 and the 5th May, 2009).]  
1[(4) No permission, referred to in sub -section ( 3), including carrying out any public work or 
project essential to the public or other constructions, shall be granted in any prohibited area on and 
after the date on which the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Rema ins (Amendment 
and Validation) Bill, 2010 receives the assent of the President.]  
2[20B. Declaration of regulated area in respect of every protected monument .―Every area, 
beginning at the limit of prohibited area in respect of every ancient monument and arc haeological site 
and remains, declared as of national importance under sections 3 and 4 and extending to a distance of 
two hundred metres in all directions shall be the regulated area in respect of every ancient monument 
and archaeological site and remains : 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify an area 
more than two hundred metres to be the regulated area having regard to the classification of any 
protected monument or protected area, as the case may be, under section 4A:  
Provided further that any area near any protected monument or its adjoining area declared, during 
the period beginning on or after the 16th day of June, 1992 but ending before the date on which the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sit es and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2010, 
receives the assent of the President, as a regulated area in respect of such protected monument, shall 
be deemed to be the regulated area declared in respect of that protected monument in accordance wit h 
the provisions of this Act and any permission or licence granted for construction in such regulated 
area shall, be deemed to have been validly granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as if 
this section had been in force at all material tim es.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16-6-1992).  
2. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -6-1992).  13 
 1[20C. Application for repair or renovation in prohibited area, or construction or               
re-construction or repair or renovation in regulated area .―(1) Any person, who owns any 
building or structure, which existed in a prohibited area before the 16th day of June, 1992, or, which 
had been subsequently constructed with the approval of the Director -General and desires to carry out 
any repair or renovati on of such building or structure, may make an application to the competent 
authority for carrying out such repair or renovation, as the case may be.  
(2) Any person, who owns or possesses any building or structure or land in any regulated area, 
and desires to carry out any construction or re -construction or repair or renovation of such building or 
structure on such land, as the case may be, may make an application to the competent authority for 
carrying out construction or re -construction or repair or renova tion, as the case may be.  
GRANT OF PERMISSION BY COMPETENT AUTHORITY  
20D. Grant of permission by competent authority within regulated area .―(1) Every 
application for grant of permission under section 20C of this Act shall be made to the competent 
authority  in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The competent authority shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of the application, forward the 
same to the Authority to consider and intimate impact of such construction (including the impact of 
large -scale deve lopment project, public project and project essential to the public) having regard to 
the heritage bye -laws relating to the concerned protected monument or protected area, as the case    
may be:  
Provided that the Central Government may prescribe the catego ry of applications in respect of 
which the permission may be granted under this sub -section and the application which shall be 
referred to the Authority for its recommendations.  
(3) The Authority shall, within two months from the date of receipt of applica tion under           
sub-section ( 2), intimate to the competent authority impact of such construction (including the impact 
of large -scale development project, public project and project essential to the public).  
(4) The competent authority shall, within o ne month of the receipt of intimation from the 
Authority under sub -section ( 3), either grant permission or refuse the same as so recommended by the 
Authority.  
(5) The recommendations of the Authority shall be final.  
(6) In case the competent authority refu ses to grant permission under this section, it shall, by order 
in writing, after giving an opportunity to the concerned person, intimate such refusal within three 
months from the date of receipt of the application to the applicant, the Central Government a nd the 
Authority.  
(7) If the competent authority, after grant of the permission under sub -section ( 4) and during the 
carrying out of the repair or renovation work or re -construction of building or construction referred to 
in that sub -section, is of the opi nion (on the basis of material in his possession or otherwise) that such 
repair or renovation work or re -construction of building or construction is likely to have an adverse 
impact on the preservation, safety, security or access to the monument considerab ly, it may refer the 
same to the Authority for its recommendations and if so recommended, withdraw the permission 
granted under sub -section ( 4) if so required:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010,  s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -6-1992).  14 
 Provided that the competent authority may, in exceptional cases, with the approval of the 
Author ity grant permission to the applicant referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 20C until the 
heritage bye -laws have been prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 20E and published under      
sub-section ( 7) of that section.  
(8) The Central Government, or  the Director -General, as the case may be, shall exhibit, on their 
website, all the permissions granted or refused under this Act.  
20E. Heritage bye -laws .―(1) The competent authority, in consultation with Indian           
National Trust for Arts and Cultur al Heritage, being a trust registered under the Indian Trusts          
Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), or such other expert heritage bodies as may be notified by the Central 
Government, shall prepare heritage bye -laws in respect of each protected monument and prote cted 
area.  
(2) The heritage bye -laws referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, in addition to such matters as may 
be prescribed, include matters relating to heritage controls such as elevations, facades, drainage 
systems, roads and service infrastructure (incl uding electric poles, water and sewer pipelines).  
(3) The Central Government shall, by rules, specify the manner of preparation of detailed site 
plans in respect of each protected area or protected monument or prohibited area or regulated area, the 
time wi thin which such heritage bye -laws shall be prepared and particulars to be included in each 
such heritage bye -laws.  
(4) The competent authority for the purpose of preparation of detailed site plans and heritage      
bye-laws may appoint such number of exper ts or consultants as it may deem fit.  
(5) A copy of each of the heritage bye -laws prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded to 
the Authority for its approval.  
(6) A copy of the heritage bye -laws as approved by the Authority under sub -section ( 5) shall be 
laid before each House of Parliament.  
(7) Each heritage bye -laws shall, be made available by the competent authority to the public, by 
exhibiting the same on its website and also in such other manner as it may deem fit, immediately after 
laying the same before each House of Parliament.  
NATIONAL MONUMENTS AUTHORITY  
20F. Constitution of National Monuments Authority .―(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be called as the National Monuments 
Authority.  
(2) The Authority shall consist of, ― 
(a) a Chairperson, on whole -time basis, to be appointed by the President, having proven 
experience and expertise in the fields of archaeology, country and town planning, architecture, 
heritage, conservation -architecture or law;  
(b) such number of members not exceeding five whole -time members and five part -time 
members to be appointed, on the recommendation of the Selection Committee referred to in 
section 20G, by the Central Government, having proven experienc e and expertise in the fields of 
archaeology, country and town planning, architecture, heritage, conservation -architecture or law;  
(c) the Director -General as member, ex officio . 15 
 (3) The tenure of the whole -time Chairperson or every whole -time member and e very part -time 
member, of the Authority shall be three years from the date on which he assumes office as such and 
shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that, save as otherwise provided in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), any person who has 
held any post in the Archaeological Survey of India or in the Ministry of Culture of the Government 
of India or a State Government or has not been found fit to be considered for being appointed to any 
such post shall, not be eligible to be appointed as the Chai rperson or a member of the Authority:  
Provided further that any person, who had either been granted a permission or licence or refused 
any such permission or refused grant of a licence or any person or any of his relative having any 
interest in a prohibite d area or a regulated area shall not be eligible to be appointed as a Chairperson 
or member.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “relative ” means ― 
(i) spouse of the Chairperson or member of the Authority;  
(ii) brother or sister of the Chairperson or member of the Authority;  
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the Chairperson or member of the A uthority;  
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the Chairperson or member of the Authority;  
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the Chairperson or member of the Authority;  
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the Chai rperson or member of the 
Authority;  
(vii) spouse of the person referred to in clauses ( ii) to ( vi); 
(4) An officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, shall be the 
Member Secretary of the Authority.  
(5) The Central Government  shall provide such number of officers and other employees as may be 
necessary for discharge of functions by the Authority under this Act.  
20G. Selection Committee for selection of members of Authority .―(1) Every whole -time 
member and every part -time membe r of the Authority shall be selected by a Selection Committee 
consisting of the following persons, namely: ― 
(a) Cabinet Secretary ―Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) Secre tary in the Ministry of Culture ―member, ex officio ; 
(c) Secretary in the Ministry of Urban d evelopment ―member, ex officio ; 
(d) three experts, having proven experience and expertise in the fields of archaeology, 
architecture, heritage or conservation -architecture to be nominated by the Central Government.  
(2) The Selection Committee referred to in  sub-section ( 1) shall regulate its own procedure for the 
purposes of selecting whole -time members and part -time members of the Authority.  
20H. Salary, allowances and meetings of Authority .―(1) The salaries and allowances payable 
to the whole -time Chairper son and whole -time members, and the other terms and conditions of their 
service or fees or allowances payable to the part -time members, of the Authority shall be such as may 
be prescribed:  16 
 Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms  and conditions of service of 
the whole -time Chairperson and whole -time members shall be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment.  
(2) The Authority shall regulate its own procedure for the purposes of holding its meetings 
(including quorum of such meetings) and granting permissions under this Act.  
(3) All the decisions of the Authority shall be published in such manner as it may decide and also 
on its own website and on the website of the Central Government.  
20-I. Functions and powers of Author ity.―(1) The Authority shall exercise or discharge the 
following powers or functions, namely: ― 
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government for grading and classifying protected 
monuments and protected areas declared as of national importance under secti ons 3 and 4, before 
the commencement of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010  (10 of 2010) ; 
(b) make recommendations to the Central Government for grading and classifying protected 
monuments and pro tected areas which may be declared after the commencement of the       
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation)         
Act, 2010  (10 of 2010) , as of national importance under section 4;  
(c) oversee the working of t he competent authorities;.  
(d) to suggest measures for implementation of the provisions of this Act;  
(e) to consider the impact of large -scale developmental projects, including public projects and 
projects essential to the public which may be proposed in t he regulated areas and make 
recommendations in respect thereof to the competent authority;  
(f) to make recommendations to the competent authority for grant of permission.  
(2) The Authority shall, for the purpose of discharging functions under this Act, hav e the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying 
a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
20J. Removal of Chairperson and members .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in     
sub-section ( 3) of section 20F, the President in the case of the Chairp erson and the Central 
Government in the case of whole -time member and part -time member may, by order, remove from 
office, the Chairperson or any such member of the Authority, if he ― 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offenc e which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as Chairperson or member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is likely to affect prejudicially h is 
functions; or  17 
 (e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chairperson or any member of the Authority shall not be removed under clauses ( d)      
and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he h as been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the 
matter.   
20K. Restriction on future employment by Chairperson and members .―On ceasing to hold 
office, the Chairperson or whole -time member of the Authority, as the case may be, shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, be ineligible, for a period of five years from the date on which they cease to 
hold office, for further employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any institution, 
agency or organisation of any nature mainly dealing with archaeology, country and town planning, 
architecture, heritage and conservation -architecture or whose matters had been before the Chairperson 
or such member.  
20L. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Authority .―(1) Without prejudice 
to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the discharge 
of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on question of policy, other than those 
relating to technical and a dministrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it 
from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be 
final.  
20M . Power of Central Government to issue directions to competent authority .―Without 
prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the competent authority shall, in exercise of its 
powers or the discharge of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions, as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from tim e to time.  
20N. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority .―(1) If, at any time the Central 
Government is of the opinion, ― 
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to 
discharge the functions or perform  the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this     
Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of  the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the 
financial position of the Authority or the administration of the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the p ublic interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a person or 
persons as the President may di rect to exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Authority to make representat ions against the proposed super session and sh all 
consider the representations, if any, of the Authority.  18 
 (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority, ― 
(a) the Chairperson and all other whole -time members and part -time members shall, as from 
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section  (3), be exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to in           
sub-section ( 1); and  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Governme nt. 
(3) On or before the ex piration of the period of super session specified in the notification issued 
under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment 
of its Chairperson and other whole -time members and  part-time members and in such case any person 
who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 20F for reappointment for the remaining period.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to 
be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.  
20-O. Bar of jurisdiction of civil court .―No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any 
matter which the Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be 
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuanc e of 
any power conferred by or under this Act.  
20P. Annual report .―(1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at 
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report giving full description of 
all the activit ies of the Authority for the previous year.  
(2) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
20Q. Power to call for information .―Where the Central Government con siders it expedient so 
to do, it may, by order in writing call upon the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may 
be, to furnish in writing such information, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, relating to 
its affairs as the Central G overnment may require.]  
ARCHAEOLOGICAL EXCAVATIONS  
21. Excavations in protected areas .―An archaeological officer or an officer authorised by him 
in this behalf or any person holding a licence granted in this behalf under this Act (hereinafter referred 
to as the licensee) may, after giving notice in writing to the Collector and the owner, en ter upon and 
make excavations in any protected area.  
22. Excavations in areas other than protected areas .―Where an archaeological officer has 
reason to believe that any area not being a protected area contains ruins or relies of historical or 
archaeologica l importance, he or an officer authorised by him in this behalf may, after giving notice in 
writing to the Collector and the owner, enter upon and make excavations in the area.  19 
 23. Compulsory purchase of antiquities, etc., discovered during excavation         
operations .―(1) Where, as a result of any excavations made in any area under section 21 or       
section 22, any antiquities are discovered, the archaeological officer or the licensee, as the case may 
be, shall, ―  
(a) as soon as practicable, examine such antiquities and submit a report to the Central 
Government in such manner and containing such particulars as may be prescribed;  
(b) at the conclusion of the excavation operations, give notice in writing to the owner of the 
land from which such antiquities have been di scovered, of the nature of such antiquities.  
 (2) Until an order for the 1[compulsory acquisition] of any such antiquities is made under            
sub-section ( 3), the archaeological officer or the licensee, as the case may be, shall keep them in such 
safe custody as he may deem fit.  
(3) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 1), the Central Govern ment may make an order for 
the 2[compulsory acquisition of any such antiquities] .  
 (4) When an order for the 1[compulsory acquisition] of any antiquities is  made under                  
sub-section ( 3), such antiquities shall rest in the Central Government with effect from the date of the 
order.  
24. Excavations, etc., for archaeological purposes .―No State Government shall undertake or 
authorise any person to undertake any excavation or other like operation for archaeological purposes 
in any area which is not a protected area except wit h the previous approval of the Central Government 
and in accord ance with such rules or directions, if any, as the Central Government may make or give 
in this behalf.  
PROTECTION OF ANTIQUITIES  
25. Power of Central Government to control moving of antiquities .―(1) If the Central 
Government considers that any antiquities  or class of antiquities ought not to be moved from the place 
where they are without the sanction of the Central Government, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any such antiquity or any class of such antiquitie s shall 
not be moved except with the written permission of the Director -General.  
(2) Every application for permission under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order refusi ng permission may appeal to the Central Government 
whose decision shall be final.  
26. Purchase of antiquities by Central Government .―(1) If the Central Government 
apprehends that any antiquity mentioned in a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of sec tion 25 is 
in danger of being destroyed, removed, injured, misused or allowed to fall into decay or is of opinion 
that, by reaso n of its historical or archaeo logical importance, it is desirable to preserve such antiquity 
in a public place, the Central Gove rnment may make an order for the 3[compulsory acquisition of such 
antiquity] and the Collector shall thereupon give notice  to the owner of the antiquity 4[to be acquired ].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1972 , s. 33, for  “compulsory purchase ” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “compulsory purchase of any such antiquities at their market value” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “compulsory purchase of such antiquity at its market value ” (w.e.f . 5-4-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “to be purchased” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  20 
 (2) Where a notice of 1[compulsory acquisition] is issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any 
antiquity, such antiquity shall vest in the Central Government with effect from the date of the notice.  
(3) The power of 1[compulsory acquisition] given by this section shall not extend to any image or 
symbol actually used for bona fide  religious observances.  
PRINCIPLES OF COMPENSATION  
27. Compensation for loss or damage .―Any owner or occupier of land who has sustained any 
loss or damage or any diminution of profits from the land by reason of any entry on, or excavations in , 
such land or the exercise of any other power conferred by this Act shall be paid compensation by th e 
Central Government for such loss, damage or diminution of profits.  
28. Assess ment of market value o r compensation .―(1) The market value of any property 
which the Central Government is empowered to purchase at such value under this Act or the 
compensation  to be paid by the Central Government in respect of anything done under this Act     
shall, where any dispute arises in respect of such market value or compensation, be ascertained in     
the manner provided in sections 3, 5, 8 to 34, 45 to 47, 51 and 52 o f the Land Acquisition                
Act, 1894  (1 of 18 94), so far  as they can be made applicable : 
Provided that, when making an enquiry under the sai d Land Acqui sition Act, the Collector shall 
be assisted by two assessors, one of whom shall be a competen t person nominated by the Central 
Government and one a person nominated by the owner, or, in case the owner fails to nominate an 
assessor within such reasonable time as may be fixed by the Collector in this behalf, by the Collector.  
2[(2) For every antiqu ity in respect of which an order for compulsory acquisition has been       
made under sub -section ( 3) of section 23 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 26, there shall be paid 
compensation and the provisions of section s 20 and 22 of the Antiquities and Art  Treasures              
Act, 1972 (52 of 1972 ) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the determination and payment of 
such compensation as they apply in relation to the determination and payment of compensation for 
any antiquity or art treasure com pulsorily acquired under section 19 of that Act.]  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29.  Delegation of powers .―The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any powers conferred on it by or under this Act shall , subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in the direction, be exercisable also by ― 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Govern ment, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government,  
as may be specified in the direction.  
30. Penalties .―(1) Whoever — 
(i) destroys, remove s, injures, alters, defaces, imperi ls or misuses a protected monument, or  
(ii) being the owner or occupier of a protected monument, contravenes an order made under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 10, or  
(iii) removes from a protected monument any sculpture c arving, image, bas -relief, inscription, 
or other like object, or  
(iv) does any act in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 19 , 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1972 , s. 33, f or “compulsory purchase” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5 -4-1976).  21 
  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or  with 1[imprisonment 
which may extend to two ye ars], or with  2[fine which may extend to one lakh  rupees], or with both.  
(2) Any person who moves any antiquity in contravention of a notification issued under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 25 shall be punishable with  3[imprisonment which may exten d to two years 
or with f ine which may extend to one lakh  rupees or with both]; and the court convicting a person of 
any such contravention may b y order direct such person to restore the antiquity to the place from 
which it was moved.  
4[30A. Punishment for construction, etc., in prohibited area .―Whoever raises, on and after 
the date on which the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and 
Validation) Bill, 2010, receives the assent of the President, any construction in the prohibite d area, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with f ine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees or with both.  
30B. Punishment for construction, etc., in regulated area .―Whoever   raises, on and after the 
date on which the Ancient Monu ments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and 
Validation) Bill, 2010, receives the assent of the President, any construction in the regulated area 
without the previous permission of the competent authority or in contravention of the permission 
granted by the competent authority, shall be punishable with imprisonment not exceeding two years or 
with f ine which may extend to one lakh  rupees or with both.  
30C. Offences by officers of Government .―If any officer of the Central Government enters into 
or acquiesces in any agreement to do, abstains from doing, permits, conceals or connives at any act or 
thing whereby any construction or re -construction takes place in a prohibited area or regulated are a, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both.]   
31. Jurisdiction to try offences .―No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a 
magistrate of the first class shall try any of fence under this Act.  
32. Certain offences to be cognizable .―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ), an offence under clause ( i) or clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 1)       
of section 30,  shall be deemed to be a  cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code.  
33. Special provision regarding fine .―Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the 
Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ), it shall be lawful for any magistrate of the first class 
specia lly empowered by the State Government in this behalf and for any presidency magistrate to pass 
a sentence of fine exceeding two thousand rupees on any person convicted of an offence which under 
this Act is punishable with fine exceeding two thousand rupees . 
34. Recovery of amounts due to the Government .―Any amount due to the Government from 
any person under this Act may, on a certificate issue d by the Director -General or an  archaeological 
officer authorised  by him in this behalf be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 8, for  “imprisonment which may extend to thr ee months ” (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “fine which may extend to five thousand rupees ” (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “fine which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ). 22 
 35. Ancient monuments, etc., which have ceased to be of national importance .―If the Central 
Government is of opinion that any ancient and historical monument or archaeological site and remains 
declared to be of national importance by or under this Act has ceased to be  of national importance, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the ancient and historical monument or 
archaeological  site and remains, as the case may be, has ceased to be of national importance for the 
purposes of this Act.  
1[35A. Obligation to survey the protected prohibited area and regulated areas .―(1) The 
Director -General shall, within such time as may be specified by the Central Government, conduct a 
survey or cause survey to be conducted in respect of all prohibited areas and regulated areas for the 
purpose of detailed site plans.  
(2) A report in  respect of such survey referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be forwarded to the 
Central G overnment and to the Authority.   
35B. Identification of unauthorised constructions on or after 16th June, 1992 .―(1) The 
Director -General shall, within such time as ma y be specified by the Central Government, identify     
or cause to be identified, all constructions (of whatever nature) made on and after the 16th day of 
June, 1992 in all prohibited areas and regulated areas and, thereafter, submit from time to time a 
report in respect thereof to the Central Government.  
(2) The Director -General  shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), have the power to call for 
information from the local bodies and other authorities.]   
36. Power to correct mistakes, etc .―Any clerical mistake, patent error or error arising f rom 
accidental slip or omission in the description of any ancient monument or archaeological site and 
remains declared to be of national importance by or under this Act may, at any time, be corrected by  
the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
37. Protection of action taken under the Act .―No suit for compensation and no criminal 
proceeding shall lie against any public servant in respect of any act done or in good faith intended to 
be done in the exercise of any power conferred by this Act.  
38. Power to make rule .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the prohibition or regulation by licensing or otherwise of mining, quarrying, excavating  
blasting or any operation of a like nature near a protected monument or the construction of 
buildings on land adjoining such monument and the removal of unauthorised buildings;  
(b) the grant of licences and permissions to make excavations for archaeologic al purposes in 
protected areas, the authorities by whom, and the re strictions and conditions subject to which, 
such licences may be granted, the taking of securities from licensees and the fees that may be 
charged for such licensees;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 10 (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ). 23 
 (c) the right of acces s of the public to a protected monument and the fee, if any, to be charged 
therefore;  
1[(ca) the categories of ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains, declared as of 
national importance, under sub -section ( 1) of section 4A;  
(cb) the manner o f making application for grant of permission under sub -section ( 1) of       
section 20D;  
(cc) the category of applications in respect of whic h the permission may be granted and 
applications which shall be referred to the Authority for its recommendation, under                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 20D;  
(cd) the other matters including heritage controls such as elevations, facades, drain age 
systems, roads and service infrastructure (including electric poles, water and sewer pipelines) 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 20E;  
(ce) the manner of preparation of detailed site plans in respect of each prohibited area and 
regulated area and the ti me within which such heritage bye -laws shall be prepared and particulars 
to be included in each such heritage bye -laws under sub -section ( 3) of section 20E;  
(cf) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
whol e-time Chairperson and whole -time members, or fees or allowances payable to the part -time 
members, of the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 20H;  
(cg) the form in which and time at which the Authority shall prepare an annual report giving 
full desc ription of its activities for the previous year under section 20P;  
(ch) the form and manner in which the Authority and competent authority shall furnish 
information to the Central Government under section 20Q;]  
(d) the form and conten ts of the report of an  archaeological officer or a licensee under    
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(e) the form in which application s for permission under section 19 or section 25 may be made 
and the particulars which they should contain ; 
(f) the form and manner of preferring appeals under this Act and the time within which they 
may be preferred;  
(g) the manner of service of any order or notice under this Act;  
(h) the manner in which excavations and other like operations for archaeological purposes 
may be carried on; 
(i) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable, ― 
(i) in the case of a rule made with reference to clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both;  
(ii) in the case of a rule made with reference to cla use ( b) of sub -section ( 2), with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2010, s. 11 (w.e.f.  16-6-1992 ). 24 
 (iii) in the case of a rule made with reference to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees.  
1[(4) Every rule made by the Central Govern ment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before th e 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in su ch modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
39. Repeals and savings .―(1) The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites 
and Remains (Declaration of National Imp ortance) Act, 1951 (71 of 1951 ), and section 126 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956) , are hereby repealed.  
(2) The Ancient Mo numents  Preservation Act, 1904  (7 of 1904) , shall cease to have effect in 
relation to ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains declared by or 
under this Act to be of national importance, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before the commencement of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
--------------------------The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMED FORCES (SPECIAL POWERS ) ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1958  
[11th September , 1958.]  
An Act to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon members of the armed forces in 
disturbed areas 1[in the States of 2[3[Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meg halaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura]]].  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title and extent .―(1) This Act may be called  4[the Armed Fo rces (Special Powers)    
Act, 1958 ]. 
5[(2) It extends to the whole of the State s of 2[3[Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura] ]]. 
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―  
(a) “armed forces ” means the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces, and 
includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating ; 
(b) “disturbed area ” means an area which is for the time being declared  by notification under 
section 3 to be a disturbed area;  
(c) all other words and expressions used herein , but not defined and defined in the Air Force 
Act, 1950  (45 of 1950) , or the Army Act, 1950  (46 of 1950) , shall have the meanings re spectively 
assigned to them in those Acts.  
6[3.  Power to declare areas to be disturbed areas .―If, in relation to any State or Union 
territory to which this Act extends, the Governor of that State or the Administrator of that Union 
territory or the Central Government, in either case, is of the opinion that the whole or any part of such 
State or Uni on territory, as the case may be, is in such a disturbed or dangerous condition that the use 
of armed forces in aid of the civil power is necessary, the Governor of that State or the Administrator 
of that Union territory or the Central Government, as the c ase may be, may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare the whole or such part of such State or Union territory to be a disturbed 
area. ] 
4. Special powers of the armed forces .―Any commissioned officer, warrant officer,              
non-commissioned officer or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed forces may, in a 
disturbed area, ― 
(a) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public ord er, after 
giving such due warning as he may consider necessary , fire upon or otherwise use force, even to 
the causing of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the 
time being in force in the disturbed area prohibit ing the assembly of five or more persons or the 
carrying of weapons or of things capable of being used as weapons or of fire -arms, ammunition or 
explosive substances;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 1972, s. 2, for  “in the State of Assam and the Union territory of Manipur” (w.e.f. 5 -4-1972 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1986, s. 40, for  “Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram” (w.e.f.  20-2-1987). 
3. Subs. by Act 69 of 1986, s. 43, for “Assa m, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura and the Union territory 
of Arunachal Pradesh” (w.e.f.  20-2-1987).      
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 1972, s. 3, for “the Armed Forces (Assam and Manipur) Special Powers Act, 1958 ” (w.e.f . 5-4-1972) .      
5. Subs. by s. 3,  ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5 -4-1972).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 5 -4-1972).  2 
 (b) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy any arms dump, prepared o r 
fortified position or shelter from which armed attacks are made or are likely to be made or are 
attempted to be made, or any structure used as  a training camp for armed volunteers or utilised as 
a hide -out by armed gangs or absconders wanted for any offe nce; 
(c) arrest, without warrant, any person who has committed a cognizable offence or against 
whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to commit a cognizable 
offence and may use such force as may be necessary to effect the arre st; 
(d) enter and search without warrant any premises to make any such arrest as aforesaid or to 
recover any person believed to be wrongfully restrained or confined or any property reasonably 
suspected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explo sive substances believed to be 
unlawfully kept in such premises, and may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary.  
5. Arrested persons to be made over to the police .―Any person arrested and taken into custody 
under this Act shall be made over to the officer in charge of the nearest police station with the least 
possible delay, together with a report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest . 
6. Protection to persons  acting under Act .―No prosecution, suit or other legal proceeding shall 
be instituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any person in 
respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of the powers conferred b y this Act.  
7. [Repeal and Saving .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960) , s. 2 and the 
First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960 ). 
--------------------------The Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution and Proceedings) Validation Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE HIMACHAL PRADESH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY (CONSTITUTION AND 
PROCEEDINGS) VALIDATION ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1958  
[30th December, 1958 .] 
An Act to validate the constitution and proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of the New 
State of Himachal Pradesh formed under the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) 
Act, 1954.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of Indi a as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly (Constitution 
and Proceedings) Validation Act, 1958.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, “new Legislative Assembly ” means the body of persons deemed under 
clause ( a) of section 3 to have been the duly constituted Legislative Assembly of the New State of 
Himachal Pradesh.  
3. Validation of the constitution and proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of the new State of 
Himachal Pradesh .—Notwithstanding anything contained i n any law or in any judgment, decree or order 
of any court, — 
(a) the body of persons summoned to meet from time to time as the Himachal Pradesh   
Legislative Assembly (Himachal Pradesh Vidhan Sabha) during the period commencing on the       
1st day of July , 1954, and ending with the 31st day of October, 1956 , by the Lieutenant -Governor of 
Himachal Pradesh in the exercise or purported exercise of the powers conferred on him by section 9 
of the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 (49 of 1951), shall be deemed for all purposes to have 
been the duly constituted Legislative Assembl y of the new State of Himachal Pradesh formed under 
section 3 of the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 (32 of 1954) ; 
(b) the persons who sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings of the new Legislative 
Assembly shall be deeme d to have been entitled so to do as members;  
(c) the persons who functioned as the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the new Legislative 
Assembly shall be deemed to have been duly chosen as the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker 
respectively;  
and accordingly — 
(i) any Bill passed by the new Legislative Assembly (whether the Bill was introduced in the new 
Legislative Assembly or was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of Himachal Pradesh 
functioning immediately before the 1st day of July, 1954) and assented to  by the President shall be 
deemed to have been validly enacted and to have the force of law;  
(ii) any grant made, resolution passed or adopted, proceeding taken or any other thing done by or 
before the new Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to have been made, passed, adopted, taken or 
done in accordance with law.  
4. Court not to question validity of proceedings of new Legislative Assembly on the ground of 
defect in constitution, etc. —No court shall question any Act passed, or any grant, resolution, proceeding 
or thing made , passed, adopted, taken or done, by or before the new Legislative Assembly merely on the 
ground that the new Legislative Assembly had not been duly constituted or on  the ground that a person 
who was not entitled so to do presided over, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings of the 
new Legislative Assembly.  
5. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First     
Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960).  
--------------------------The International Finance Corporation (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
  THE INTERNATIONAL  FINANCE CORPORATION                                                               
(STATUS, I MMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES)  ACT, 1958  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Conferment of status and certain immunities and privileges on the Corporation and 
conferment of certain immunities and privileges on its officers and employees . 
4. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE .  
 
  2 
 THE INTERNATIONAL  FINANCE CORPORATION                                                               
(STATUS, I MMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES)  
ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1958  
[17th October,  1958 .] 
An Act to implement the international agreement for the establishment and operation of the 
International Finance Corporation in so far as it relates to the status, immunities and 
privileges of that Corporation, and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the International Finance Corporation 
(Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1958.  
(2) It extends1 to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Agreement ” means the Agreement for the est ablishment and operation of the 
international body known as the International Finance Corporation;  
(b) “Corporation ” means the International Financ e Corporation established under the 
Agreement.  
3. Conferment of status and ce rtain immunities and privileges on the Corporation and 
conferment of certain immunities and  privileges on its officers and employees .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions of the Agreement 
set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India:  
Provided that nothing in Section 9 of Article VI of the Agreement shall be construed as — 
(a) entitling the Corporation to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without 
any restriction on their su bsequent sale therein; or  
(b) conferring on the Corporation any exemption from duties or taxes which form part of the 
price of goods sold; or  
(c) conferring on the Corporation any exemption from duties or taxes which are in fact no 
more than charges for se rvices rendered.  
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of 
the Agreement set out therein:  
Provided that any notification issued under this sub -section shall be laid for not less than thirty 
days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued and shall be subject to such 
modifications as Parliament may make during the session in which it is so laid or the session 
immediately following.  
4. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
2[(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect  only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. The Act has now been extended by Act 26 of 1968  to the Union territory Pondicherry, comprising the former French 
Establishments in India, (w.e.f 1 -8-1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2  and the Schedule , for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3]  
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE OF LAW  
ARTICLE III  
SECTION  1. Financing Operations  
The Corporation may make investments of its funds in productive private enterprises in the 
territories of its members. The existence of a government or other public interest in such an enterprise 
shall not necessarily preclude the Corporation from making an investment therein.  
*                                      *                                   *                                    *                                    *                  
SECTION  5. Applicability  of Certain Foreign Exchange Restrictions  
Funds, received by or payable to the Corporation in respect of an investment of the Corporation 
made in any member’s territories pursuant to Section 1  of this Article shall not be free, solely by 
reason of any provision of this Agreement, from generally applicable foreign exchange restrictions, 
regulations and controls in force in the territories of that member.  
*                                     *                                  *                                       *                                    *                      
ARTICLE VI  
STATUS , IMMUNITIES  AND PRIVILEGES   
SECTION  1. Purposes of Article  
To enable the Corporation to fulfill the functions with which it is entrusted, the status, immunities 
and privileges set forth in this Article shall be accorded to the Corporation in the territories of                  
each member.  
SECTION  2. Status of th e Corporation  
The Corporation shall possess full juridical personality and, in particular, the capacity:  
(i) to contract;  
(ii) to acquire  and dispose of immovable and movable property;  
(iii) to institute legal proceedings.  
SECTION  3. Position of the Corporation with regard to Judicial Process  
Actions may be brought against the Corporation only in a court of competent jurisdiction in the 
territories of a member in which the Corporation has an office, has appointed an agent for the purpose 
of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed securities. No actions shall, 
however, be brought by mem bers or persons acting for or d riving claims from members. The property 
and assets of the Corporation shall, where soever  located and by whomsoever held , be immune from 
all forms of seizure, attachment or execution before the delivery of final judgment against                        
the Corporation.  
SECTION  4. Immunity of Assets from Seizure  
Property and assets of the Corpo ration, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be 
immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of seizure by 
executive or legislative action.  
SECTION  5. Immunity of Archives  
The archives of the Corporation shall be inviolable.  
SECTION  6. Freedom of Assets from Restrictions  
To the extent necessary to carry out the operations provided for in this Agreement and subject to 
the provisions of Article III, Section 5, and the other provis ions of this Agreement, all property and 4 
 assets of the Corporation shall be free from restrictions , regulations, controls and moratoria of any 
nature.  
SECTION  7. Privilege for Communications  
The official communications of the Corporation shall be accorded  by each member the same 
treatment that it accords to the official communications of other members.  
SECTION  8. Immunities and Privileges of Officers and Employees  
All Governors, Directors, Alternates, officers and employees of the Corporation : 
(i) shall  be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official 
capacity;  
(ii) not being local nationals, shall be accorded the same immunities from immigration 
restrictions, alien registration requirements and national service oblig ations and the same 
facilities as regards exchange restrictions as are accorded by m embers to the 
representatives, officials , and employees of comparable rank of other members;  
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of travelling facilities a s is accorde d by 
members to representatives,  officials and employees of comparable rank of other 
members.  
SECTION  9. Immunities from Taxation  
(a) The Corporation, its assets, property, income and its operations and transactions authorised  by 
this Agreement, shall be immune from all taxation and from all customs duties. The Corporation shall 
also be immune from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty.  
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emoluments paid by the Corporation to 
Directors, Alternates, officials or employees of the Corporation who are not local citizens, local 
subjects, or other local nationals.  
(c) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security issued by the Corpor ation 
(including any dividend or interest thereon) by whomsoever held : 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is issued by the 
Corporation; or  
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the place or cu rrency in which it is 
issued, made payable or paid, or the location of any office or place of business maintained 
by the Corporation.  
(d) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or security guaranteed by the 
Corporation (including any div idend or interest thereon) by whomsoever held : 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is guaranteed by 
the Corporation ; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the location of any office or place  of 
business maintained by the Corporation.  
*                                       *                                      *                                  *                                   *                  
SECTION  10. Waiver  
The Corporation in its discretion may waive any of the privileges  and immunities conferred under 
this Article to such extent and upon such conditions as it may determine.  
 
--------------------------The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 1958  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement .  
2. Application of Act . 
3. Definitions.  
PART  II 
NATIONAL  SHIPPING  BOARD  
 4. Establishment of National Shipping Board . 
5. Fu nctions of National Shipping Board . 
6. Power to make rule s in respect of matters in this Part.  
PART  III 
GENERAL  ADMINISTRATION  
7. Director -General of Shipping . 
8. Mercantile Marine Department.  
9. Surveyors.  
10.  Radio inspectors.  
11.  Shipping offices.  
12. Seamen ‟s employment offices.  
13. Seamen ‟s welfare officers.  
[PART IV.― Omitted .] 
PART  V 
REGISTRATION OF  INDIAN  SHIPS 
20. Application of Part.  
21. Indian ships.  
22. Obligation to register . 
Procedure for registration  
23. Ports of registry.  
24. Registrars of Indian ships.  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Register book.  
26. Application for registry.  
27. Survey and measurement of ships before registry.  
28. Marking of ship.  
29. Declaration of ownership on registry.  
30. Evidence on first registry.  
31. Entry of particulars in registe r book.  
32. Documents to be retained by registrar.  
33. Power of Central Government to inquire into title of Indian ship to be so registered.  
Certificate of registry  
34. Grant of certificate of registry.  
35. Custody and use of certificate.  
36. Power to gran t new certificate when original certificate is defaced, lost, etc.  
37. Endorsement on certificate of change of master.  
38. Endorsement on certificate of change of ownership.  
39. Delivery of certificate of ship lost or ceasing to be an Indian ship.  
40. Prov isional certificate for ships becoming Indian ships abroad.  
41. Temporary pass in lieu of certificate of registry . 
 Transfers of ships, shares, etc.  
42. Transfer of ships or shares.  
43. Registry of transfer.  
44. Transmission of property in Indian ship on d eath, insolvency, etc.  
45. Order for sale where ship has ceased to be an Indian ship.  
46. Transfer of ship on sale by order of court.  
47. Mortgage of ship or share.  
48. Entry of discharge of mortgage.  
49. Priority of mortgages.  
50. Mortgagee not deemed to be owner.  
51. Rights of mortgagee.  
52. Mortgage not affected by insolvency.  
53. Transfer of mortgages.  
54. Transmission of interest in mortgage in certain circumstances.  3 
 Name of ship  
SECTIONS  
55. Rules as to name of ship.  
Registry of alterations, registry anew and transfer of registry  
56. Registry of alterations.  
57. Regulations for registry of alterations . 
58. Provisional certificate and endorsement where ship is to be registered anew.  
59. Registry anew on change of ownership.  
60. Procedure for registry an ew. 
61. Transfer of registry.  
62. Restrictions on re -registry of abandoned ships.  
National character and flag  
63. National colours for Indian ships.  
64. Unlawful assumption of Indian character.  
65. Concealment of Indian, or assumption of foreign, character . 
66. Indian ships to hoist proper national colours in certain cases.  
67. National character of ship to be declared before clearance.  
Miscellaneous  
68. Liabilities of ships not recognised as Indian ships.  
69. Proceedings on forfeiture of ship.  
70. Notice o f trust not received.  
71. Liability of owners.  
72. Evidence of register book, certificate of registry and other documents.  
73. Power to register Government ships under this Part.  
74. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Part.  
PART VI  
CERTIFICA TES OF  OFFICERS  
Masters, mates, engineers, skippers, etc.  
75. Application of Part.  
75A.  Definitions.  
76. Certificates of competency to be held by officers of ships.  
77. When officers deemed duly certificated.  
78. Grade of certificates of competency.  
79. E xamination for, and grant of certificate.  4 
 SECTIONS  
80. [Omitted .] 
81. Form of certificates . 
82. Record of orders affecting certificates.  
83. Loss of certificates.  
84. Production of certificates of competency to shipping master.  
85. Power to cancel or suspe nd certificates obtained on false or erroneous information.  
86. Recognition of certificate of competency *** granted in other countries.  
86A. Foreign ships not to sail without certificated officers.  
87. Power to make rules.  
PART VIA  
OBLIGATION OF CERTAIN C ERTIFICATE HOLDERS TO SERVE GOVERNMENT OR IN INDIAN SHIPS  
87A. Definitions.  
87B. Holders of certificates to serve the Government or in Indian ships for certain period.  
87C. Exemption from section 87B.  
87D. Particulars of certificate, etc. to be furnished.  
PART VII  
SEAMEN AND APPRENTICES  
Classification of seamen, seafarer, maritime labour standards and prescription of minimum 
manning scale  
88. Power to classify seamen.  
88A. Definitions.   
88B. Application of maritime labour standards to seafarers and ships . 
Shipping Masters  
89. Duties of shipping masters.  
90. Fees to be paid.  
Apprenticeship to the sea service  
 
91. Assistance for apprenticeship to sea service.  
92. Special provisions as to apprenticeship to the sea service.  
93. Manner in which contract is to be recorded.  
94.  Production of contracts to authorised person before voyage in ship.  
Seamen’s employment offices  
95. Business of seamen's employment offices . 
96. Supply or engagement of seamen in contravention of Act prohibited.  5 
 SECTIONS  
97. Receipt of remun eration, donation, fees, etc., from seamen for shipping them prohibited.  
97A. Prohibition against discrimination.  
Engagement of seamen  
98. Qualification s for, and medical examination of, seamen.  
99. Prohibition of engagement of seamen in Indian port withou t discharge certificate.  
99A. Prohibition of engagement of seafarer without seafarer‟s identity document.  
100. Agreements with crew.  
101. Form and contents of the agreement.  
102. Engagement of seaman where agreement is made out of India.  
103. Special provi sions with regard to agreements with crew of Indian ships.  
104. Renewal of running agreements in certain cases . 
105. Changes in crew to be reported.  
106. Certificate as to agreement with crew.  
107. Copy of agreement to be made accessible to the crew.  
108. Alteration in agreement with the crew.  
Employment of young persons  
109. Prohibition of engagement of underage persons in certain cases.  
110. [ Omitted .] 
111. Medical examination of young persons.  
112. Maintenance of list or register of young persons in a sh ip. 
113. Power to make rules respecting employment of young persons . 
Engagement of seamen by masters of ships other than Indian ships  
114. Engagements between seamen and masters of ships other than Indian ships.  
115. Power to prohibit engagement of perso ns as seamen.  
116. Engagement of seamen outside India for Indian ships.  
117. Power to board ships and ma ster seamen . 
Discharge of seamen  
118. Discharge before shipping master.  
119. Certificate of discharge.  
120. Certificate as to work of seamen.  
121. Disch arge and leaving behind of seamen by masters of Indian ships.  
122. Wages and other property of seaman or apprentice left behind.  
123. Repatriation of seamen or termination of service at foreign port.  6 
 SECTIONS  
124. Discharge of seamen on change of ownership . 
Payment of wages  
125. Master to deliver account of wages.  
126. Disrating of seamen.  
127. Deductions from wages of seamen.  
128. Payment of wages before shipping master.  
129. Time of payment of wages.  
130. Settlement of wages.  
130A. Certain undisbursed amo unts to be utilised for welfare of seamen.  
131. Master to give facilities to seaman for remitting wages.  
132. Decision of questions by shipping masters.  
133. Power of shipping master to require production of ship's papers.  
134. Rule as to payment to seamen  in foreign currency.  
Advance and allotment of wages  
135. Advance of wages.  
136. Allotment notes respecting seaman's wages.  
137. Commencement and payment of sums allotted.  
Rights of seamen in respect of wages  
138. Right to wages and provisions.  
138A. Worki ng hours of seamen.  
139. Right to recover wages and salvage not to be forfeited.  
140. Wages not to depend on freight.  
141. Wages on termination of service by wreck, illness, etc.  
142. Wages not to accrue during absence without leave, refusal to work or imp risonment.  
143. Compensation to seamen for premature discharge.  
144. Restriction on sale of and charge upon wages.  
Mode of recovering wages  
145. Summary proceedings for wages.  
146. Restrictions on suits for wages.  
147. Wages not recoverable outside India i n certain cases.  
148. Remedies of master for wages, disbursements, etc.  
Power of courts to rescind contracts  
149. Power of Court to rescind contract between master, owner or agent and seaman or 
apprentice.  7 
 Disputes between seamen and employers  
SECTIONS  
150. Power to refer disputes between seamen and their employers to tribunals.  
151. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged during pendency of proceedings before 
tribunal.  
Property of deceased seamen and apprentices  
152. Master to take charge of the e ffects of deceased seamen.  
153. Dealing with and account of property of seamen who die during voyage.  
154. Master to pay and deliver property of deceased seamen.  
155. Property of deceased seaman left abroad but not on board ship.  
156. Dealing with property  of deceased seamen.  
157. Recovery of wages, etc., of seamen lost with their ship.  
158. Property of seamen dying in India.  
159. Payment over of property of deceased seamen by shipping master.  
159A. Nomination.  
160. Disposal of unclaimed property of decease d seamen.  
Distressed seamen  
161. Relief and maintenance of distressed seamen.  
162. Mode of providing for return of seamen to proper return port.  
163. Receiving distressed seamen on ships.  
164. Provisions as to taking distressed seamen on ships.  
165. What s hall be evidence of distress.  
166. Indian consular office to decide return port to which or route by which seaman is to be sent.  
167. Power to make rules with respect to distressed seamen . 
Provisions, health and accommodation  
168. Ships to have sufficient provisions and water.  
169. Allowances for short or bad provisions.  
170. Foreign going Indian ship to carry duly certificated cook.  
171. Weights and measures on board.  
172. Beddings, towels, medicines, medical stores, etc., to be provided and kept on board certain 
ships.  
173. Certain ships to carry medical officer.  
174. Expenses of medical attendance in case of illness.  
175. Accommodation for seaman.  
 8 
 SECTIONS  
176. Inspection by shipping master, etc., of provisions, water, weights and measures and 
accommodat ion. 
176A. Ships to possess Maritime Labour Certificate and Declaration of Maritime Labour 
Compliance.  
177. Inspection by master of provisions, water and accommodation at sea.  
177A. Power to make rules to prevent accidents, etc.  
Special provisions for the protection of seamen in respect of litigation  
178. Meaning of serving seaman.  
179. Particulars to be furnished in plaints, etc.  
180. Notice to be given in case of unrepresented seaman.  
181. Power to set aside decrees and orders passed against serving seama n. 
182. Modification of law of limitation where seaman is a party.  
183. Reference in matters of doubt to shipping masters.  
Provisions for the protection of seamen in respect of other matters  
184. Facilities for making complaints.  
185. Assignment or sale of  salvage invalid.  
186. No debt recoverable till end of voyage.  
187. Seaman 's property not to be detained.  
188. Prohibition against solicitation by lodging house keepers.  
189. Ship not to be boarded without permission before seamen leave.  
Provisions as to d iscipline  
190. Misconduct endangering life or ship.  
191. Desertion and absence without leave.  
192. Power to suspend deserter ‟s certificate of discharge.  
193. Conveyance of deserter or imprisoned seaman on board ship.  
194. General offences against disciplin e. 
195. Smuggling of goods by seamen or apprentices.  
196. Entry of offences in official logs.  
197. Report of desertions and absence without leave.  
198. Entries and certificates of desertion abroad.  
199. Facilities for proving desertion in proceedings for f orfeiture of wages.  
200. Application of forfeiture.  
201. Decision of questions of forfeiture and deduction in suits for wages.  
202. Payment of fines imposed under agreement to shipping master.  9 
 SECTIONS  
203. Seaman or apprentice not to be enticed to desert.  
204. Deserters not to be harboured.  
205. Stowaways and seamen carried under compulsion.  
206. Procedure where seaman not shipped in India is imprisoned on complaint of master or 
owner.  
207. Power to send on board seaman not shipped in India who is undergoi ng imprisonment.  
208. On change of master, documents to be handed over to successor.  
209. Transmission of documents on transfer of seaman from one ship to another.  
210. Leaving behind in India of seaman or apprentice engaged abroad.  
211. Deserters from for eign ships.  
Official logs  
212. Official logs to be kept and to be dated.  
213. Entries in official log books how and when to be made.  
214. Entries required to be made in official log books.  
215. Offences in respect of official logs.  
216. Delivery of officia l logs to shipping masters.  
217. Official logs to be sent to shipping master in case of transfer of ship or loss.  
National Welfare Board of Seafarers  
218. Functions of National Welfare Board for Seafarers.  
218A. Power to make rules for purposes of Maritime  Labour Convention.  
PART VIII  
PASSENGER SHIPS  
Survey of passenger ships  
219. Application of Part.  
220. No ship to carry passengers without a certificate of survey.  
221. Power of surveyor.  
222. Fees in respect of survey.  
223. Declaration of survey.  
224. Se nding of declaration by owner, agent or master to Central Government.  
225. Grant of certificate of survey by Central Government.  
226. Power of Central Government to order a second survey.  
227. Duration of certificates of survey.  
228. Cancellation or suspen sion of certificate of survey by Central Government.  
229. Alterations in ships subsequent to grant of certificate of survey, and additional surveys.  10 
 SECTIONS  
230. Power to require delivery of expired or cancelled certificate of survey.  
231. Certificate of survey to be affixed in conspicuous part of ship.  
232. Ship not to carry passengers in contravention of Act.  
Keeping Order in Passenger ships  
233. Offences in c onnection with passenger ships.  
234. Power to exclude drunken passengers from passenger ships.  
235. Ships with certificates of survey or certificates of partial survey granted outside India.  
236. Power to make rules as to surveys.  
Special trade passenger ships and pilgrim ships  
237. Ports or places where special trade passengers or pilgrims may embar k or be discharged.  
238. Notice to be given of day of sailing.  
239. Power to enter on and inspect ship.  
240. Ship not to sail without certificates A and B.  
241. Contents of certificate A.  
242. Contents of certificate B.  
243. Officers entitled to grant cert ificates.  
244. Survey of ship.  
245. Discretion as to grant of certificate B.  
246. Copy of certificate A to be exhibited.  
247. Special trade passengers or pilgrims to be supplied with prescribed provisions.  
248. Number of passengers on board not to exceed t hat allowed by or under this Part.  
249. Special trade passenger or pilgrim not to be landed at a place other than that at which he has 
contracted to land.  
250. Forwarding of passengers by Indian consular officers.  
251. Recovery of expenses incurred in forw arding passengers.  
252. Ship not to make voyage in contravention of contract.  
253. Information to be sent to ports of embarkation and discharge.  
254. Reports etc., under section 253 to be admissible in evidence.  
255. Destination of ship, time of sailing et c., to be advertised.  
256. Ship taking additional passengers at intermediate place.  
257. Statements concerning passengers.  
258. Death of  special trade passengers on voyage.  
259. Certain ships to carry medical officer and attendants.  
260. Bringing passenger s from foreign port in excess of authorised number prohibited.  11 
 SECTIONS  
261. [Repealed .]  
261A. Bunks to be provided for passengers.  
261B. Space to be provided for passengers when bunks are not provided.  
261C. Airing space to be provided for passengers.  
262. Power to make rules as to special trade passenger ships.  
263. [ Repealed .] 
264. Hospital accommodation.  
265. [ Omitted. ] 
266. [ Omitted .] 
 267. [ Omitted. ] 
 268. [ Omitted. ] 
 269. [Omitted. ] 
270. Bond where pilgrim ship proceeds on outward voyage.  
271. Medi cal inspection and permission required before embarkation of pilgrims.  
272. Medical inspection after embarkation in certain cases.  
273. Pilgrims to arrange return passages.  
274. Issue or production of tickets.  
275. Refund of passage money and deposits.  
276. Disposal of unclaimed passage money and deposit.  
277. Cost of return journey of pilgrims on ships other than those for which return ticket is 
available.  
278. [ Omitted. ] 
279. Co mpensation for delay in sailing.  
280. Substitution of ships.  
281. Sanitary tax es payable by master of pilgrim ship.  
282. Power  to make rules relating to pilgrim ships.  
PART IX  
SAFETY  
283. Countries to which Load Line Convention or Safety Convention applies.  
283A. Definitions.  
Construction of ships  
284. Construction rules.  
Prevention  of collisions  
285. Collision regulations.  12 
 SECTIONS  
286. Observance of collision regulations.  
287. Inspectors of lights and shapes and fog and distress signals.  
Life saving appliances and fire appliances  
288. Power to make rules as to life saving appliance s. 
289. Rules relating to fire appliances.  
290. Inspection of life saving appliances and fire appliances.  
Installation of Radio Telegraphy, Radio Telephony and Direction Finders  
291. Radio requirements.  
292. Radio direction finding apparatus.  
293.  Radio l og. 
294. Powers of radio inspectors.  
295. Application of this Part to ships other than Indian ships.  
296. Power to make rules.  
Signalling lamps  
297. Signalling lamps.  
Stability Information  
298. Information about ship ‟s stability.  
Safety certificates, safet y equipment certificates, safety radio certificates, exemption certificates, 
etc. 
299. Safety certificates and qualified safety certificates for passenger ships.  
299A. Safety construction certificates and construction certificates for cargo ships.  
299B. Po wer to make rules.  
300. Cargo ship safety equipment and cargo ship equipment certificates for ships other th an 
passenger ships.  
301. Cargo ship safety radio certificate and qualified cargo ship safety radio certificate etc.  
302. Exemption certificates.  
303. Duration of certificates.  
304. Modification of safety convention certificates as respects life saving appliances.  
305. Recognition of certificates issued outside India.  
306. Issue of certificates to foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign coun tries.  
307. Prohibition on proceeding to sea without certificates.  
308. Production of certificates by ships other than Indian ships.  
309. Application of certain sections to certificates . 
309A. Alterations pending issue of a safely convention certificate.  13 
 Load lines  
SECTIONS  
310. Ships exempt from provisions relating to load lines.  
311. Power to make rules as to load lines.  
312. Marking of deck line and load lines.  
312A. Alterations after survey.  
313. Submersion of load lines.  
314. Maintenance of load line m arks.  
315. Inspection of ships with respect to load lines.  
Load line certificates  
316. Issue of load line certificates and effect thereof.  
317. Duration and cancellation of certificates.  
318. Ships not to proceed to sea without certificate.  
319. Publicatio n of load line certificate and particulars relating to depth of loading.  
320. Insertion of particulars as to load lines in agreements with crew.  
Special provisions as to ship s other than Indian ships  
 321. Issue to load line certificates to foreign ships i n India and Indian ships in foreign countries.  
322. Recognition of load line certificates issued outside India.  
323. Inspection and control of Load Line Convention ships other than Indian ships.  
324. Certificate of Load Line Convention ships other than Ind ian ships to be produced to customs.  
325. Marking of deck line and load lines of ships other than Indian ships.  
326. Submersion of load line of ships other than Indian ships.  
327. Inspection of ships other than Indian ships belonging to non -Convention coun tries.  
328. Load line certificates of ships other than Indian ships.  
329. Certificates to be produced to customs by ships other than Indian ships registered in                
non-Convention countries.  
Loading of timber  
330. Power to make rules as to timber  cargo.  
Dangerous goods and grain cargoes  
331. Carriage of dangerous goods.  
331A. Grain loading plan.  
332. Carriage of grain.  
Sub-division load lines  
333. Submersion of sub -division load lines in case of passenger ships.  
 14 
 Unseaworthy ships  
SECTIONS  
334. Un seaworthy ship not to be sent to sea.  
335. Obligation of owner to crew with respect to seaworthiness.  
Detention of unsafe ships by the Central Government  
336. Power to detain unsafe ship and procedure for detention.  
Costs of detention and damages incidenta l thereto  
337. Liability of Central Government for costs and damage when ship wrongly detained.  
338. Liability of shipowner for costs when ship rightly detained.  
339. Method of calculating costs of detention and survey.  
340. Power to require from complaina nt security for costs, etc.  
341. Costs, etc., payable by Central Government recoverable from complainant.  
342. Application to ships other than Indian ships of provisions as to detention.  
343. Exemption of ships from certain provisions of this Part.  
344. Po wer to make rules respecting certificates under this Part.  
PART IXA  
NUCLEAR SHIPS  
344A.  Application of Act to nuclear ships.  
344B. Nuclear passenger ship safety certificates and nuclear cargo ship safety certificates.  
344C. Prohibition of proceeding to sea  without certificates.  
344D. Safety assessment and operating manual.  
344E. Foreign nuclear ships to give advance notice of arrival.  
344F. Control on arrival of nuclear ships.  
344G. Notice of accidents to nuclear ships.  
344H. Application of certain section s to or in relation to certain certificates under section  344B.  
344-I. Power to make rules.  
PART IXB  
SECURITY OF SHIPS AND PORT FACILITIES  
 344J. Application.  
344K. Definitions.  
344L. Ship identification number.  
344M. Security measures.  
344N. Port facility assessment.  
344-O. Obligations of companies, etc.  15 
 SECTIONS  
344P. Obligations of port facility.  
344Q. International Ship Security Certificate . 
344R. Ship Security Alert System.  
344S. Control measures.  
344T. Power to make rules.  
PART X  
COLL ISIONS, ACCIDENTS AT SEA AND  LIABILITY  
345. Division of loss in case of collision.  
346. Damages for personal injury.  
347. Right of contribution.  
348. Duty of master of ship to assist in case of collision.  
349. Collision to be entered in official log.  
350. Report to Central  Government of accidents to ship.  
351. Notice of loss of Indian ship to be given to Central Government.  
PART XA  
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY  
 352. Definitions.  
352A. Limitation of liability of damages in respect of certain claims.  
352B. Limit s of liability.  
352C. Limitation Fun d and consolidation of claims . 
352D. Release of ship, etc.  
352E. Scope of application.  
352F. Application of this Part to charterer, manager, etc., of a vessel.  
352FA. Power to make rules.  
PART XB  
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE  
352G. Application.  
352H. Definitions.  
352-I. Liability of owner.  
352J. Limitation of liability.  
352K. Constitution of limitation fund.  
352L. Acquisition of right for compensation by subrogation.  
352M. Consolidation of claim and distribution of fund.  16 
 SECTIONS  
352N. Compulsory insurance or other financial guarantee.  
352O. Acceptance of certificates issued outside India.  
352P. Ban on entering or leaving an Indian port without certificate.  
352Q. Government ships.  
352R. Power to make rules.  
PART XC  
INTERNATIONAL  OIL POLLUTION  COMPENSATION  FUND 
352S. Definitions.  
352T. Contribution to the Fund.  
352U. Contribution payable by persons to the Fund.  
352V. Power to call for information.  
352W. Liability of the Fund.  
352X. Jurisdiction of Courts.  
352Y. Extinguishment of cla ims. 
352Z. Subrogation and right of recourse.  
352ZA. Power to make rules.  
PART XI  
NAVIGATION  
353. Method of giving helm orders.  
354. Duty to report dangers to navigation.  
354A. Communication of intelligence regarding dangers to navigation.  
355. Obligation to render assistance on receiving signal of distress.  
355A. Obligation to render assistance to persons in danger.  
356. Power to make rules as to signals.  
PART XIA  
PREVENTION AND CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION OF THE SEA BY OIL  
356A. Application.  
356B. Definition s. 
356C. Issue of pollution prevention certificate.  
356D. Issue of certificates for foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign countries.  
356E. Requirement for construction and equipment in ships to prevent pollution.  
356F. Record books.  
356G. Insp ection and control of oil tankers and other ships to which this Part applies.  17 
 SECTIONS  
356H. Information regarding contravention of provisions of Convention.  
356-I. Oil reception facilities at ports in India.  
PROVISIONS FOR CONTAINMENT OF ACCIDENTAL POLLUT ION 
356J. Power to give a notice to owner, et c., of polluti ng ship.  
356K. Powers to take measures for preventing or containing oil pollution.  
356L. Power of the Central Government to give directions to certain ships to render certain 
services.  
356M . [Repea led.] 
 356N. [Repealed. ] 
356-O. Power to make rules.  
PART XIB  
CONTROL OF HARMFUL ANTI -FOULING SYSTEMS OF SHIPS  
356P. Application.  
356Q. Definitions.  
356R. Control of anti -fouling systems.  
356S. Issuance of International Anti -Fouling System Certificate.  
356T. Issue of Anti -Fouling System Certificate for foreign ships in India and Indian ships in 
foreign countries.  
356U. Controls of waste materials.  
356V. Record of anti -fouling systems.  
356W. Inspection and control of all ships above 400 gross tonnage.  
356X. Information regarding contravention of the provisions of Convention.  
356Y. Power to make rules.  
PART XII  
INVESTIGATIONS AND INQUIRIES  
357. Definition of “coasts ”. 
358. Shipping casualties and report thereof.  
359. Report of shipping casualties to Central Go vernment.  
360. Application to court for formal investigation.  
361. Court empowered to make formal investigation.  
362. Power of court of investigation to inquire into charges against master s, mates and engineers.  
363. Power of Central Government to direct i nquiry into ch arges of in competency or misconduct.  
364. Opportunity to be given to person to make defence.  
365. Power of court as to evidence and regulation of proceedings.  
366. Assessors.  
367. Power to arrest witnesses and enter ships.  
368. Power to commi t for trial and bind over witnesses.  18 
 SECTIONS  
369. Report by court to Central Government.  
370. Powers of court as to certificates granted by Central Government.  
371. Power of court to censure master, mate or engineer.  
372. Power of court to remove master a nd appoint new master.  
Marine Board  
373. Convening of Marine Boards outside India.  
374. Constitution and procedure of Marine Board.  
375. Decisions of Marine Board to be by majority.  
376. Powers of Marine Board.  
Miscellaneous provisions relating to cancella tion and suspension of certificates  
377. Powers of Central Government to cancel, suspend, etc., certificate of master, mate or 
engineer.  
378. Delivery of Indian certificate cancelled or suspended.  
379. Effect of cancellation or suspension of certificate.  
380. Suspended certificate not to be endorsed.  
381. Power of Central Government to cancel or suspend other certificates.  
Re-hearing of cases  
382. Re -hearing.  
Courts of survey  
383. Constitution of court of survey.  
384. Appeal from surveyor to court of survey . 
385. Powers and procedure of court of survey.  
386. Power to make rules.  
Scientific referees  
 387. Reference in difficult cases to scientific persons.  
Investigations into explosions or fires on board ships  
388. Power to investigate causes of explosion or fire on board ship.  
389. Report to be made regarding cause of explosion or fire.  
PART XIII  
WRECK AND SALVAGE WRECK  
390. Definition of “coasts ”. 
391. Receivers of wreck.  
392. Duty of receiver where vessel is in distress.  
393. Power to pass over adjoining la nds. 
 394. Power of receiver of wreck to suppress, plunder and disorder by force.  
395. Procedure to be observed by persons finding wreck.  19 
 SECTIONS  
396. Investigation of certain matters in respect of vessels wrecked, etc.  
397. Notice to be given by receiver . 
398. Immediate sale of wreck by receiver in certain cases.  
399. Claims of owners to wreck.  
400. Prohibition of certain acts in respect of wreck.  
401. Search warrants where wreck is concealed . 
402. Salvage payable for saving life, cargo or wreck.  
403. Sav ings.  
404. Power to make rules respecting wreck and salvage.  
PART XIV  
CONTROL OF INDIAN SHIPS AND SHIPS ENGAGED IN COASTING TRADE  
405. Application of Part.  
406. Indian ships and chartered ships to be licensed.  
407. Licensing of ships for coasting trade.  
408. Revocation or modification of licence.  
409. Licences to be surrendered when they cease to be valid.  
410. No port clearance until licence is produced.  
411. Power to give directions.  
411A. Powers of the Central Government to protect interests of Indian sh ipping from undue 
foreign intervention.  
412. [ Repealed .] 
413. Power of Director -General to call for information.  
414. Power to make rules.  
PART XV  
SAILING VESSELS  
415. Application of Part.  
416. Decision of question whether a vessel is a sailing vessel.  
417. Certificate of registry.  
418. Particulars relating to sailing vessel to be painted.  
419. Change of name of sailing vessel.  
420. Prevention of overloading or overcrowding.  
421. Certificate of inspection.  
422. Cancellation, re -issue, etc. , of certificate o f inspection.  
423. Registry of alterations.  
424. Transfer of registry.  
425. Closure of registry.  20 
 SECTIONS  
426. Restriction on transfer of sailing vessel.  
427. Mortgages of sailing vessels.  
428. Fraudulent use of certificate of registry or certificate of in spection, etc., prohibited.  
429. Statement relating to crew of sailing vessel to be maintained.  
430. Inquiry into jettisoning of cargo.  
431. Non -Indian sailing vessels not to engage in coasting trade without permission.  
432. Detention of overloaded non -Indian sailing vessels.  
433. Power of courts to rescind contracts between owner and tindal.  
434. Application to sailing vessels of other provisions relating to ships.  
434A. Insurance of members of crew of asailing vessel.  
434B. Policy of insurance.  
435. Power  to make rules respecting sailing vessels.  
PART XVA  
FISHING BOATS  
435A. Application of Part.  
435B. Definition.  
435C. Obligation to register.  
435D. Port of registry.  
435E. Registrars of Indian fishing boats.  
435F. Application for registry.  
435G. Certificate  of registry.  
435H. Particular relating to Indian fishing boats to be painted.  
435-I. Change of name of Indian fishing boat.  
435J. Special provision for Indian fishing boats.  
435K. Certificate of inspection.  
435L. Cancellation, re -issue , etc. of certificat e of inspection.  
435M. Inspection of safety equipments and appliances.  
435N. Registration of alteration.  
435O. Transfer of registry.  
435P. Closure of registry.  
435Q. Restriction on Transfer  of Indian fishing boats.  
435R. Mortgage of Indian fishing boats.  
435S. Fraudulent use of certificate of registry or certificate of inspection, etc. , prohibited.  
435T. Statement relating to crew of Indian fishing boat to be maintained.  
435U. Power to make rules respecting Indian fishing boats.  
435V. Application to Indian fishing boats of other provisions relating to ships.  21 
 SECTIONS  
435W. Fishery data to be furnished by Indian fishing boats.  
435X. Power to exempt . 
PART XVI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
  Penalties  
436. Penalties.  
437. Place of trial.  
438. Cognizance of offences.  
439. Jurisdiction of Magistrate.  
440. Special provision regarding punishment.  
441. Offences by companies.  
442. Depositions to be received in evidence when witness cannot be produced.  
443. Power to detain foreign ship that has occasioned damage.  
444. Power  to enforce detention of ship.  
445. Levy of wages, etc., by distress of movable property or ship.  
446. Notice to be given to consular representative of proceedings taken in respect of foreign 
ship.  
447. Application of fines.  
448. Service of documents.  
PART  XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
449. Power to appoint examiners and to make rule s as to qualifications of ship surveyors.  
450. No person to practise as ship surveyor unless qualified.  
451. Power of ship surveyor to inspect ship.  
452. Inquiry into cause of death on boa rd Indian ship.  
453. Certain persons deemed to be public servants.  
454. Powers of persons authorised to investigate, etc.  
454A. Power to prescribe alternative fittings, etc.  
455. Exemption of public ships, foreign and Indian.  
456. Power to exempt.  
457. Gen eral power to make rules.  
458. Provisions with respect to rules and regulations.  
459. Power to constitute committees to advise on rules, regulations and scales of fees.  
460. Protection of persons acting under Act.  
460A. Removal of difficulties.  
 22 
 PART XVIII  
REPEALS AND SAVINGS  
SECTIONS  
 461. Repeals and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
 THE MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT, 19581 
ACT NO. 44 OF 1958  
[30th October , 1958 .] 
An Act to foster the development and ensure the efficient maintenance of an Indian 
mercantile marine in a manner best suited to serve the national interests and for that 
purpose to establish a National Shipping Board 2* * * to provide for the  3[registration, 
certification, safety and security] of Indian ships and generally to amend and cons olidate 
the law relating to merchant shipping.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different date s may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
5[2. Application of Act .―(1) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act 
which apply to ― 
(a) any vessel which is registered in India; or  
(b) any vessel which is required by this A ct to be so registered; or  
(c) any other vessel which is owned wholly by persons to each of whom any of the 
descriptions specified in clause ( a) or in clause ( b) or in clause ( c), as the case may be, of section 
21 applies,  
shall so apply wherever the vess el may be.  
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act which apply to vessels other 
than those referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall so apply only while any such vessel is within India, 
including the territorial  waters   thereof.]  
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Di u by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch. and to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, s. 3 and Sch. I.   
2. The words “and a Shipping Development fund” omitted by Act 66 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -4-1987).      
3. Subs. by Act 40 of 2007, s. 2 , for the word “registration ”(w.e.f. 1-3-2008 ).  
4. Parts I and II came into force w.e.f. 15th December, 1958, vide Notification No. S. O. 2583A, dated the 10th December, 
1958, see Gazette of India, 1958, Pt. II. Sec. 3( ii). 
Part IV came into force w.e.f. 17th March, 1959, vide Notific ation No. S. O. 627, dated the 17th March, 1959, see Gazette 
of India, 1959, Pt. II, Sec. 3( ii). 
Sections 7, 405 to 414 (both inclusive), 436 (in so far as it relates to offences mentioned against S. Nos. 122 to 125), 437 
to 442, 447, 448, 456 to 460 and s o much of section 461 and of Part I of the Schedule as relate to the Control of Shipping 
Act, 1947 (26 of 1947), came into force on the 1st April, 1960, see Notification No. S. O. 565, dated the 26th February, 
1960, Gazette of India, Pt. II, Sec. 3( ii). 
 The remaining provisions came into force w.e.f. 1st January, 1961, vide Notification No. S. O. 3127, dated the 17th 
December, 1960, see Gazette of India, 1960, Pt. II, Sec. 3( ii). 
5. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 2, for section 2 (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).   24 
 3. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
1[(1) “cargo shi p” means a ship which is not a Passenger ship ;]  
2[(1A)] “coasting ship ” means a ship exclusively employed in trading between any port or 
place in India and any other port o r place on the continent of India or between ports or places in 
India and ports or places in Ceylon or Burma;  
(2) “coasting trade of India ” means the carriage by sea of passengers or goods from any port 
or place in India to any other port or place on the c ontinent of India;  
(3) “collision regulations ” means the regulations made under section 285 for the prevention of 
collisions at sea;  
(4) “company ” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956               
(1 of 1956) ; 
(5) “country to which the Load Line Convention applies ” means, ― 
(a) a country the Government of which has been declared  3*** under section 283 to have 
accepted the Load Line Convention and has not been so declared to have denounced that 
Convention;  
(b) a country to which it has been so declared that, the Load Line Convention has been 
applied under the provisions of  4[article thirty -two] thereof, not being a country to which it 
has been so declared that that Convention has ceased to apply under the provisions of that 
articl e; 
(6) “country to which the Safety Convention applies ” means, ― 
(a) a country the Government of which has been declared under section 283 to have 
accepted the Safety Convention and has not been so declared to have denounced that 
Convention;  
(b) a territory to which it has been so declare that the Safety Convention ex tends, not 
being a territory to which it has been so declared that that Convention has ceased to extend;  
(7) “court ” in relation to sections 178 to 183 (inclusive) means a civil or revenue court;  
(8) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of Shippin g appointed under section 7;  
(9) “distressed seaman ” means a seaman engaged under this Act who, by reason of having 
been discharged or left behind from, or shipwrecked in, any ship at a place outside India, is in 
distress at that place;  
(10) “effects ”, in relation to a seaman, includes clothes and documents;  
(11) “equipment ”, in relation to a ship, includes boats, tackle, pumps, apparel, furniture, life 
saving appliances of every description, spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes 
and signals of distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charts, radio 
installations, appliances for preventing, detecting or extinguishing fires, buckets, compasses, axes, 
lanterns, loading and discharging gears and appliances of all  kinds and all other stores or articles 
belonging to or to be used in connection with or necessary for the navigation and safety of the 
ship;  
                                                      
1. Ins. b y Act 21 of 1966, s. 2  (w.e.f. 28.5.1966).  
2. Cl ause (1) renumbered as clause ( 1A) by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. The words “or is deemed to have been declared ” omitted by Act 25 of 1970, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “articl e twenty -one” (w.e.f. 21 -7- 1968).  25 
 1[(11A) “family ” means ― 
(i) in the case of male, his wife, his children whether married or unmarried, his dependen t 
parents and his de ceased son's widow and children:  
Provided that if a person proves that his wife has ceased under the personal law governing 
him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses belong to be entitled to 
maintenance she shall no  longer be deemed to be a part of such person ‟s family for the 
purpose of this Act unless such person subsequently intimates by express notice , in writing, to 
the Central Government that she shall continue to be so regarded; and  
(ii) in the case of female,  her husband, her children, whether married or unmarried, her 
dependent parents, her husband's dependent parents and her de ceased son's widow and 
children:  
Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central Government expresses her 
desire to exc lude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependent parents shall no 
longer be deemed to be a part of such person's family for the purpose of this Act, unless such 
person subsequently can cels in writing any such notice.  
Explanation .―In either of the above two cases , if the child, or, as the case may be , the 
child of a deceased son, of a person has been adopted by another person and if under the 
personal law of the adopter adoption is legally recognised, such a child shall be consider ed as 
excluded from the family of the first mentioned person.]  
(12) “fishing vessel ” mean s a ship fitted with mechanical  means of propulsion which is 
exclusively engaged in sea fishing for profit;  
(13) “foreign -going ship ” means a ship, not being a home trade ship, employed in trading 
between any port or place in India and any other port or place or between ports or places, outside 
India;  
2[(14) “free board ” means the distance measured vertically downwards, amidships , from the 
upper edge of the deck line to  the upper edge of the related load line;]  
(15) “High Court ”, in relation to a vessel, means the High Court within the limits of whose 
appellate jurisdiction ― 
(a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate; or  
(b) the vessel is for the time being; or  
(c) the cause of action wholly or in part arises;  
(16) “home -trade ship ” means a ship not exceeding three thousand tons gross which is 
employed in trading between any port or place in India and any other port or place on the 
continent of India or between por ts or places in India and ports or places in Ceylon, Maladive 
Islands, Federation of Malaya, Singapore or Burma;  
(17) “Indian consular officer ” means the consul -general, consul, vice -consul, consular agent 
and pro -consul appointed as such by the Central Go vernment, and includes any person authorised 
by the Central Government to perform the functions of consul -general, consul, vice -consul, 
consular agent or pro -consul;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 2 , for clause ( 14)  (w.e.f.21 -7-1968).  26 
 (18) “Indian ship ” means a ship registered as such under this Act and includes any ship 
registered at any port in India at the commencement of this Act which is recogni sed as an Indian 
ship under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
1[(18A) “international voyage ” means a voyage from or to a port or place in India to or from a 
port or p lace outside India;]  
(19) “load line certificate ” means the certificate issued under section 316 or section 321;  
2[(20) “Local Line Contention ” means the International Convention on Load Lines signed in 
London on the 5th day of April, 1966, as amended from  time to time;]  
(21) “Marine Board” means a Board of Marine Inquiry convened under section 373;  
(22) “master ” includes any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having command or 
charge of a ship;  
1[(22A) “nuclear ship ” means a ship provided with a nuc lear power plant;]  
(23) “owner ” means ―  
(a) in relation to a ship, the person to whom the ship or a share in the ship belongs;  
(b) in relation to a sailing vessel, the person to whom the sailing vessel belongs;  
(24) “passenger ” means any person carried on board a ship except ― 
(a) a person employed or engaged in any capacity on board the ship on the business of the 
ship;  
(b) a person on board the ship either in pursuance of the obligations laid upon the master 
to carry shipwrecked, distressed or other person s or by reason of any circumstances which 
neither the master nor the charterer, if any, could have prevented or forestalled;  
(c) a child under one year of age;  
(25) “passenger ship ” means a ship carrying more than twelve passengers;  
(26) “pilgrim ” means a person making a pilgrimage and, in the case of a passenger on board a 
pilgrim ship, includes every person accompanying or travelling with the person making the 
pilgrimage;  
3[(27) “pilgrimage ” means pilgrima ge to any holy place in the Hedj az or to any other  place 
declared by the Central Government to be a place of pilgrimage by no tification in Official 
Gazette;  
(28) “pilgrim ship ” means a special trade passenger ship which makes a voyage to or from the 
Hedjaz, or, as the case may be, to or from any other pla ce of pilgrimage declared as such by the 
Central Government in pursuance of clause ( 27), during the season of the pilgrimage and which 
carries pilgrims in a proportion of not less than one pilgrim for every one hundred tons of the 
gross tonnage of the ship ;] 
(29) “port of registry ”, in relation to a ship or a sailing vessel, means the port at which she is 
registered or is to be registered;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s 2 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 2 , for clause ( 20) (w.e.f.21 -7-1968).  
3. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 3, for clauses ( 27) and ( 28) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  27 
 (30) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(31) “proceeding ” in relation to sections 178 to 183 ( inclusive) includes any suit, appeal or 
application;  
(32) “proper officer ” means the officer designated by the Central Government to be the proper 
officer at the port or place and in respect of the matter to which reference is made in the provision 
of this  Act in which the expression occurs;  
(33) “proper return port ”, in relation to a master, seaman or appre ntice discharged or left 
behind,  means the port at which the master, seaman or apprentice was engaged, or the port agreed 
to as such by the master, seam an or apprentice, as the case may be;  
(34) “radio inspector ” means a person appointed as such under section 10;  
(35) “registrar ” means the registrar referred to in section 24;  
(36) (a) “repatriation expenses ” means expenses incurred in returning a distress ed seaman to a 
proper return port and in providing him with necessary clothing and maintenance until his arrival 
at such port, and includes in the case of a ship wrecked seaman the repayment of expenses 
incurred in conveying him to port after shipwreck and  maintaining him while being so conveyed; 
and 
(b) “excepted expenses ”, in relation to repatriation expenses, means repatriation expenses 
incurred in cases where the cause of the seaman being left behind is desertion or absence without 
leave or imprisonment  for misconduct , or discharge from his ship by a Marine Board on the 
ground of misconduct;  
(37) “Safety Convention ” means the Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea signed in 
London on the  1[1st day of November, 1974] as amended from time to time;  
2[(38) “safety convention certificate ” means, ― 
(i) a passenger ship safety certificate,  
3[(ia) a special trade passenger ship safety certificate,  
(ib) a special trade passenger ship space certificate,]  
(ii) a qualified passenger ship safety certificate,  
(iii) a cargo ship safety construction Certific ate, 
(iv) a qualified cargo ship safety construction certificate,  
(v) a cargo ship safety equipment certificate,  
(vi) a qualified cargo ship safety equipment certificate,  
(vii) a cargo ship safety radio telegraphy certificate,  
(viii) a cargo ship safety ra dio telephony certificate,  
(ix) an exemption certificate,  
(x) a nuclear passenger ship safety certificate,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 3, for “17th day of June, 1960” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 2, for clause ( 38) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  28 
 (xi) a nuclear cargo ship safety certificate, issued under Part IX or, as the case may be, 
Part IXA;]  
(39) “sailing vessel ”, means any description of  vessel provided with sufficient sail area for 
navigation under sails alone, whether or not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion, and 
includes a rowing boat or canoe but does not include a pleasure craft;  
(40) “salvage ” includes all expenses properly  incurred by the salvor in the performance of 
salvage services;  
(41) “sea-going ”, in relation to a vessel, means a vessel proceeding to sea beyond inland 
waters or beyond waters declared to be smooth or partially smooth waters by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(42) “seaman ” means every person (except a master, pilot or apprentice) employed or 
engaged as a member of the crew of a ship under this Act, but in relation to sections 178 to 183 
(inclusive) includes a master;  
(43) “seamen ‟s employment office ” means the seamen's employment office referred to in 
section 12;  
(44) “seamen's welfare officer ” means the seamen's welfare officer referred to in section 13;  
1[(44A) “security ” means maritime security and includes any measure to  protect ports or ships 
or any person or thing relating directly or indirectly to maritime navigation, — 
(i) against terrorism, sabotage, stowaways, illegal migrants, asylum seekers, piracy, 
armed robbery, seizure or pilferage; and  
(ii) against any other ho stile act or influence which threatens the security in the maritime 
transport sector,  
employed by the owners or operators or persons in charge of the vessels or management of port 
facilities, offshore installations and other marine organisations or establi shments;]  
(45) “ship” does not include a sailing vessel ; 
(46) “shipping master ” means the shipping master referred to in section 11; but in relation to 
any seaman for the purposes of sections 178 to 183 ((inclusive) means a shipping master 
appointed, ― 
(i) for the port at which the seaman entered into, or is believed to have entered into, an 
agreement, or  
(ii) where the seaman did not enter into his agreement in India, for the port to which the 
seaman has returned, or is expected to return, on the completion  of his latest voyage;  
(47) “shipping office ” means the shipping office referred in section 11;  
2[(47A) “special trade ” means the conveyance of large number of passengers by sea within 
prescribed sea areas;  
(47B) “special trade passenger ” means a passenger  carried in special trade passenger ship in 
spaces on the weather deck or upper deck or between decks which accommodate more than eight 
passengers and includes a pilgrim or a person accompanying a pilgrim;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2008).  
2. Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  29 
 (47C) “special trade passenger ship ” means a mecha nically propelled ship carrying more than 
thirty special trade passengers;]  
(48) “surveyor ” means the surveyor referred to in section 9;  
1[(48A) “tanker ” means a cargo ship constructed or adapted for the carriage in bulk of liquid 
cargoes of an inflammable  nature;]  
(49) “tidal water ” means any part of the sea and any part of a river within the ebb and flow of 
the tide at ordinary spring tides and not being a harbour;  
(50) “tindal ” means the person in command or charge of a sailing vessel;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
 (53) “valid international load line certificate ” means a certificate purporting to have been 
issued in accordance with the Load Line Convention in respect of a ship, other than an Indian 
ship, by the Government of the country in which the ship is register ed; 
(54) “valid safety convention certificate ” means a certificate purporting to have been issued in 
accordance with the Safety Convention in respect of a ship, other than an Indian ship, by the 
Government of the country in which the ship is registered;  
(55) “vessel ” includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel, or other description of vessel used in 
navigation;  
(56) “voyage ” for the purposes of Part VIII, means the whole distance between the ship's port 
or place of departure and her final port or place of arriv al; 
(57) “wages ” includes emoluments;  
(58) “wreck ” includes the following when found in the sea or in tidal water or on the shores 
thereof―  
(a) goods which have been cast into the sea and then sink and remain under water;  
(b) goods which have been cast or fall into the sea and remain floating on the surface;  
(c) goods which are sunk in the sea, but are attached to a floating object in order that they 
may be found again;  
(d) goods which are thrown away or abandoned; and  
(e) a vessel abandoned without hope or  intention of recovery;  
(59) “young person ” means a person under eighteen years of age.  
PART  II 
NATIONAL SHIPPING  BOARD  
 4. Establishment of National Shipping Board .―(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be 
established a Board to be called the  National Shipping Board (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the 
Board).  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s.2 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Clauses ( 51) and ( 52) omitted by Act 69 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  30 
 (2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: ― 
(a) six members elected by Parliament, four by the House of the People from among its 
members and the other two by  the Council of States from among its members;  
(b) such number of other members, not exceeding sixteen as the Central Government may 
think fit to appo int to the Board, to represent―  
(i) the Central Government,  
(ii) ship owners,  
(iii) seamen, and  
(iv) such other interests as, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be 
represented on the Board : 
Provided that the Board shall include an equal number of persons representing the ship owners 
and seamen.  
(3) The Central Government shall nominate one of t he members of the Board to be the Chairman 
of the Board.  
(4) The Board shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
5. Functions of National Shipping Board .―The Board shal l advise the Central Government―  
(a) on matters relating to Indian shipping, including the development thereof; and  
(b) on such other matters arising out of this Act as the Central Government may refer to it for 
advice.  
6. Power to make rul es in respect of matters in this Part .―(1) The Central Government may 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he followi ng matters, namely:―  
(a) the term of office of members of the Board and the manner of filling casual vacancies in 
the Board;  
(b) the appointment of officers and other employees to enable the Board to discharge its 
functions under section 5 and the terms an d conditions of their service;  
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Board.  
PART  III 
GENERAL  ADMINISTRATION  
7. Director -General of Shipping ―(1) The Central Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint a person  to be the Director -General of Shipping for the purpose of exercising 
or discharging the powers, authority or duties conferred or imposed upon the Director -General by or 
under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct th at any power, authority or 
jurisdiction exercisable by it under or in relation to any such provisions of this Act as may be 
specified in the order shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be so specified, be 
exercisable also by the Directo r-General or by such other officer as may be specified in the order.  31 
 (3) The Director -General may, by general or special order, and with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, direct that any power or authority conferred upon or delegated to, and  any duty 
imposed upon, the Director -General by or under this Act may, subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as he may think fit to impose, be exercised or discharged also by such officer or other 
authority as he may specify in this behalf.   
 8. Merc antile Marine Department .―(1) The Central Government may establish and maintain 
at each of the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and at such other port  in India as it may consider 
necessary an office of the Mercantile Marine Department for the administr ation of this Act and the 
rules and regulations thereunder.  
(2) The office of the Mercantile Marine Department at the port of Bombay, Calcutta or Madras 
shall be in the charge of a principal officer , and the office at any other port shall be in the charge of 
such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf.  
(3) In the discharge of their duties, the principal officer and other officers shall be subject to the 
control of the Director -General.   
9. Surveyors .―(1) The Central Government may by, notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
at such ports as it may consider necessary as many persons as it may think fit to be surveyors for the 
purposes of this Act.  
1[(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Governm ent, in the case 
of cargo ships,  may, by notification in the Official Gazette authorise any person or body of persons, on 
such terms and conditions as may be specified therein, to be surveyor or surveyors  for the purposes o f 
this Act.]  
(2) The surveyors may be nautical surveyors, ship surveyors or engineer and ship surveyors.  
(3) At any port at which no surveyor appointed under this section is available, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ap point any qualified person to perform the 
functions of a surveyor under this Act.  
(4) All acts done under this Act by a principal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department or a 
person appointed under sub -section ( 3) relating to matters within the compete nce of a surveyor shall 
have the same effect as if done by a surveyor for the purposes of this Act.  
 10.  Radio inspectors .―The Central Government may, by notification a in the Official Gazette, 
appoint as many radio inspectors as it may consider necessary for the purpose of securing that the 
requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations there under relating to radio telegraphy, radio 
telephony and direction finders are complied with.  
11.  Shipping offices .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, 
establish a shipping office at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary so to do , and shall 
appoint thereto a shipping master and as many deputy shipping masters and assistant shipping 
masters, as it may consider necessary.  
(2) Shipping masters, deputy shipping masters and assistant shipping masters shall exercise their 
powers and dis charge their duties subject to the general control of the Central Government or of any 
intermediate authority which the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-8-1966).  
 32 
 (3) The Central Government may direct that at any port at which no separate shipping offi ce is 
established, the whole or any part of the business of the shipping office shall be conducted at the 
custom house or at the office of the port officer or at such other office as the Central Government may 
specify, and thereupon the same shall be condu cted accordingly.  
(4) All acts done by or before a deputy shipping master, an assistant shipping master and the 
officer to whom any business of the shipping office is committed under sub -section ( 3) shall have the 
same effect as if done by or before a ship ping master for the purposes of this Act.  
12. Seamen's employment offices .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, establish at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary so to do, a seamen's 
employment office and shall appoint thereto a director and as many deputy directors and assistant 
directors as it may consider necessary.  
(2) The directors, deputy directors and assistant directors shall exercise their powers and 
discharge their duties subject to the general co ntrol of the Central Government or of any intermediate 
authority  which the Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
(3) All acts done by or before a deputy or assistant director shall have the same effect as if done 
by or before a director for the pu rposes of this Act.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that at any port at 
which no separate seamen's employment office is established, the functions of the seamen's 
employment office in that port shall be disch arged by such person or body of persons as it may 
specify in the notification, and thereupon the office of the person or body of persons so specified shall 
be deemed to be the seamen's employment office established at that port for the purposes of this Act . 
13. Seamen ’s welfare officers .―(1) The Central Government may appoint a seamen's welfare 
officers at such ports in or outside India as it may consider necessary.  
(2) A seamen ‟s welfare officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall perform ― 
(a) in the cas e of any such officer appointed at any port in India, such functions in relation to 
welfare of seamen as may be assigned to him by the Central Government;  
(b) in the case of any such officer appointed at any port outside India, such functions in 
relation t o welfare of seamen and such functions of an Indian consular officer under Part VII as 
may be assigned to him by the Central Government.  
(3) If any seamen ‟s welfare officer appointed at any port outside India performs any functions 
assigned to an Indian co nsular officer under Part VII, such functions shall have the same effect as if 
they had been performed by an Indian consular officer for the purposes of that Part.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
PART  V 
REGISTRATION OF  INDIAN  SHIPS 
20. Application of Part .―This Part applies only to sea -going ships fitted with mechanical means 
of propulsion.  
21. Indian ships .―For the purposes of this Act, a ship shall not be deemed to be an Indian ship 
unless owned wholly by persons to each of whom  2[any] of the following d escriptions applies: ― 
(a) a citizen of India; or  
                                                      
1. Part IV omitted by Act 66 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -4-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act  43 of 1961, s. 2, f or “either ” (w.e.f. 28-9-1981).   33 
 1[(b) a company or a body established by or under any Central or State Act which has its 
principal place of business in India; or  
(c) a co -operative society which is registered or deemed to be registered und er the Co -
operative Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912) , or any other law relating to co -operative societies for 
the time being in force in any State.]  
 22. Obligation to register .―(1) Every Indian ship, unless it is a ship which does not exceed 
fifteen tons n et and is employed solely in navigation on the coasts of India , shall be registered under 
this Act.  
(2) No ship required by sub -section ( 1) to be registered shall be recognised as an Indian ship 
unless she has been registered under this Act:  
Provided that any ship registered at the commencement of this Act at any port in India under any 
enactment repealed by this Act, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and shall be 
recognised as an Indian ship.  
(3) A ship required by this Act to be regis tered may be detained until the master of the ship, if so 
required, produces a certificate of registry in respect of the ship.  
2[Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “ship” does not include  a fishing vessel.]  
Procedure for registration  
23. Ports of registry .―(1) The ports at which registration of ships shall be made shall be the 
ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and such other ports in India as the Central Government may, 
by notification  in the Official Gazette, declare to be ports of registry under this Act.  
(2) The port at which an Indian ship is registered for the time being under this Act shall be 
deemed to be her port of registry and the port to which she belongs.  
24. Registrars of Indian ships .―At each of the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, the 
principal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, and at any other port such authority as the 
Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, shall be the registrar of  
Indian ships at that port:  
3[Provided that su bject to such order as the Central Government may issue in this behalf when the 
office of registrar of Indian ships at any port is vacant or the holder of such office is on leave or is not 
available, for any reason at the port to exercise and discharge the  powers, duties and functions of the 
office the senior most surveyor at that port may act as and exercise and discharge the powers' duties 
and functions of the registrar of Indian ships at that port.]  
25. Register book .―Every registrar shall keep a book to  be called the register book and entries in 
that book shall be made in accordance with, the following provisions: ― 
(a) the property in a ship shall be divided into ten shares;  
(b) subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to joint owners or owners  by 
transmission, not more than ten individuals shall be entitled to be registered at the same time as 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 68 of 1993, s. 2, for clauses ( b) and ( c)  (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993).  
2. Explanation  ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).  
3. Proviso i ns. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  34 
 owners of any one ship; but this rule shall not affect the beneficial interest of any number of 
persons represented by or claiming under or through any r egistered owner or joint owner;  
(c) a person shall not be entitled to be registered as owner of a fractional part of a share in a 
ship; but any number of persons not exceeding five may be registered as joint owners of a ship or 
of any share or shares there in; 
(d) joint owners shall be considered as constituting one person and shall not be entitled to 
dispose in severally of any interest in a ship or any share therein in respect of which they are 
registered;  
(e) a company 1[or a co -operative society] may be registered as owner by its name.  
26. Application for registry .―An application for the registry of an Indian ship shall be made ― 
(a) in the case of an individual, by the person requiring to be registered as owner or by his 
agent;  
(b) in the case of more than one individual requiring to be so registered, by some one or  more 
of the persons so requiring or by his or their agent; and  
(c) in the case of a company  2[or a co -operative society] requiring to be so registered, by its 
agent;  
and the authority of the agent shall be testified by writing, if appointed by an individu al, under the 
hand of the person appointing him and, if appointed by a company,  2[or a co -operative society] under 
its common seal.  
27. Survey and measurement of ships before registry .―(1) The owner of every Indian ship in 
respect of which an application for registry is made shall cause such ship to be surveyed by a surveyor 
and the tonnage of the ship ascertained in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The surveyor shall grant a certificate spec ifying the ship ‟s tonnage and build and such other 
particulars descriptive of the identity of the ship as may be prescribed and the certificate of the 
surveyor shall be delivered to the registrar before registry.  
28. Marking of ship .―(1) The owner of an In dian ship who applies for registry under this Act 
shall, before registry, cause her to be marked permanently and conspicuously in the prescribed 
manner and to the satisfaction of the registrar and any ship not so marked may be detained by the 
registrar.  
(2) Subject to any other provision contained in this act and to the provisions of any rules made 
there under, the owner and the master of an Indian ship shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that 
the ship remains marked as required by this section, and t he said owner or master shall not cause or 
permit any alterations of such marks to be made except in the event of any of the particulars thereby 
denoted being altered in the manner provided in this Act or except to evade capture by the enemy or 
by a foreig n ship of war in the exercise of some belligerent right.  
 29. Declaration of ownership on registry .―A person shall not be registered as the owner of an 
Indian ship or of a share therein until he or, in the case of a company  3[or a co -operative society] , the 
person authorised by this Act to make declarations on its behalf has made and signed a declaratio n of 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f.  28-9-1981).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  35 
 ownership in the prescribed form referring to the ship as described in the certificate of the surveyor 
and conta ining the following particulars :― 
(a) a statement whether he is or is not a citizen of India;  1[or in the case of a company, or a 
co-operat ive society, whether the company or a co -operative society, satisfies the requirements 
specified in clause ( b) or, as the case may be, clause ( c) of section 21 ]; 
(b) a statement of the time when and the place where the ship was built or if the ship is buil t 
outside India and the time and place of building is not known, a statement to that effect; and in 
addition, in the case of a ship previously registered outside India, a statement of the name  by 
which she was so registered;  
(c) the name of her master;  
(d) the number of shares in the ship in resp ect of which he or the company, 2[or the                
co-operative society] , as the case may be, claims to be registered as owner; and  
(e) a declaration that the particulars stated arc true to the best of his know ledge and belief.  
Explanation .―In respect of a ship or share owned by more than one person, a declaration may be 
made by such one of them as may be authorised by them.  
30. Evidence on first regist ry.―On the first registry of an Indian ship the following evidence 
shall be produced in ad dition to the declaration of ownership :― 
(a) in the case of a ship built in India, a builder ‟s certificate, that is to say, a certificate signed 
by the builder of the ship and containing a true account of the proper denomination and the 
tonnage of the ship  as estimated by him and the time when and the place where she was built, and 
the name of the person, if any on whose account the ship was built, and if there has been any sale, 
the instrument of sale under which the ship or the share therein has become ve sted in the applicant 
for registry;  
(b) in the case of a ship built outside India, the same evidence as in the case of a ship built in 
India unless the declarant who makes the declaration of ownership declares that the time and 
place of her building are no t known to him, or that the builder ‟s certificate cannot be procured, in 
which case there shall be required only the instrument of sale under which the ship or a share 
therein has become vested in the applicant for registry.  
31. Entry of particulars in reg ister book .―As soon as the requirements of this Act preliminary 
to registry have been complied with the registrar shall enter in the register book the following 
particulars in respect of the ship: ― 
(a) the name of the ship and the name of the port to which she belong s; 
3[(aa) the ship identification number;]  
(b) the details contained in the surveyor ‟s certificate;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 5, for “or in the case of a company, whether the company satisfies the requirements 
specified in clause ( b) of section 21” (w.e.f. 28 -2-1981).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -2-1981).  
3. Ins. by Act 40 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f.  1-3-2008).  
 36 
 (c) the particulars respecting her origin stated in the declaration of ownership; and  
(d) the name and description of her registered owner or owners, and, i f there are more owners 
than one, the number of shares owned by each of them.  
32. Documents to be retained by registrar .―On the registry of a ship, the registrar shall retain 
in his custody the following documents : ― 
(a) the surveyor's certificate;  
(b) the builder's certificate;  
(c) any instrument of sale by which the ship was previously sold;  
(d) all declarations of owners hip. 
33. Power of Central Government to inquire into title of Indian ship to be so registered .―(1) 
Where it appears to the Central Government that there is any doubt as to the title of any Indian ship to 
be registered as an Indian ship, it may direct the r egistrar of her port of registry to require evidence to 
be given to his satisfaction within such time, not being less than thirty days as the Central 
Government may fix, that the ship is entitled to be registered as an Indian ship.  
(2) If within such time as may be fixed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) evidence 
to the satisfaction of the registrar that the ship is entitled to be registered as an Indian ship is not 
given, the ship shall be liable to forfeiture.  
Certificate of registry  
34. Grant of certificate of registry .―On completion of the registry of an Indian ship, the 
registrar shall grant a certificate of registry containing the particulars respecting her as entered in the 
register book with the name of her master.  
35. Custody and use o f certificate .―(1) The certificate of registry shall be used only for the 
lawful navigation of the ship, and shall not be subject to detention by reason of any title, lien, charge 
or interest whatever, had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or other person  to, on or in the ship.  
(2) No person, whether interested in the ship or not, who has in his possession or under his control 
the certificate of registry of a ship, shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause to deliver such 
certificate on demand to the p erson entitled to the custody thereof for the purposes of the lawful 
navigation of the ship or to any registrar, customs collector or other person entitled by law to require 
such delivery.  
(3) Any person refusing or omitting to deliver the certificate as r equired by sub -section ( 2), may, 
by order, be summoned by  1[any Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan Magistrate, 
as the case may be,] to appear before him and to be examined touching such refusal, and if the person 
is proved to have a bsconded so that the order of such magistrate cannot be served on him, or if he 
persists in not delivering up the certificate,  2[the said Magistrate] shall certify the fact, and the same 
proceedings may then be taken as in the case of a certificate mislaid , lost or destroyed, or as near 
thereto as circumstances permit.  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 12 of 1983 , s. 17  and the Sch edule, for “any magistrate of the first class”  (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Schedule, ibid., for “the magistrate” (w.e.f.  18-5-1983).  37 
 (4) If the master or owner of an Indian ship uses or attempts to use for her navigation a certificate 
of registry not legally granted in respect of the ship, he shall be guilty of an offence under this               
sub-section and the ship shall be liable to forfeiture.  
36. Power to grant new certificate when original certificate is defaced, lost, etc .―(1) In the 
event of the certificate of registry of an Indian ship being defaced or mutilated, the registrar of her 
port of registry may, on the delivery to him of that certificate, grant a new certificate in lieu of her 
original certificate.  
(2) In the ev ent of the certificate of registry of an Indian ship being mislaid, lost or destroyed or of 
the person entitled thereto being unable to obtain it from the custody of any other person, the registrar 
of her port of registry shall grant a new certificate in l ieu of her original certificate.  
(3) If the port at which the ship is at the time of the event referred to in sub -section ( 2) or first 
arrives after the event is outside India, then the master of the ship or some other person having 
knowledge of the facts of the case shall make a declaration stating such facts and the names and 
descriptions of the registered owners of such ship to the best of the declarant's knowledge and belief 
to the nearest available Indian consular officer who may thereupon grant a prov isional certificate 
containing a statement of the circumstances under which it is granted.  
(4) The provisional certificate shall, within ten days after the first subsequent arrival of the ship at 
her port of discharge in India, be delivered by the master t o the registrar of her port of registry and the 
registrar shall thereupon grant a new certificate of registry.  
(5) If the certificate of registry stated to have been mislaid, lost or destroyed shall at any time 
afterwards be found, or if the person entitle d to the certificate of registry obtains it at any time 
afterwards, the said certificate shall forthwith be delivered to the registrar of her port of registry to be 
cancelled.  
37. Endorsement on certificate of change of master .―Where the master of an Indian ship is 
changed, each of the following persons, that is to say, ― 
(a) if the change is made in consequence of the removal of the master by a Marine Board or 
by a court under this Act, the presiding officer of the Marine Board  or of the court, as the case 
may be;  
(b) if the change occurs from any other cause, ― 
(i) In India, the registrar or any other officer authorised by the Central Government in this 
behalf at t he port where the change occurs;  and 
(ii) outside India, the  Indian consular officer at the port where the change occurs;  
shall endorse and sign on the certificate of registry a memorandum of the change, and any customs 
collector at any port in India may refused to permit any person to do any act there as master of an 
Indian ship unless his name is inserted in or endorsed on her certificate of registry as her last 
appointed master.  
38. Endorsement on certificate of change of ownership .―(1) Whenever a change occurs in the 
registered ownership of an Indian ship, the change of ownership shall be endorsed on her certificate of 
registry either by the registrar of the ship's port of registry or by the registrar of any port at which the 
ship arrives who has been advised of the change by the registrar of the ship‟s port of registry.  
(2) The master shall, for the purposes of such endorsement by the registrar of the ships port of 
registry, deliver the certificate of registry to the registrar fort hwith  after the change if the change  38 
 occurs when the ship is at her port of registry, and if it occurs during her absence from that port and 
the endorsement under this section is not made before her return, then, upon her first return to that 
port. 
(3) The  registrar of any port, not being the ship ‟s port of registry, who is required to  make an 
endorsement under this  section may, for that purpose, require the master of the ship to deliver to him 
the ship's certificate of registry so that the ship need not th ereby be detained and the master shall 
deliver the same accordingly.  
39. Delivery of certificate of ship lost or ceasing to be an Indian ship .―(1) In the event of a 
registered  ship being either actually or constructively lost, taken by the enemy, burnt or broken up or 
ceasing for any reason to be an Indian ship, every owner of the ship or any share in the ship shall 
immediately on obtaining know ledge of the event, if no notice thereof has already been given to the 
registrar, give notice thereof to the registrar at her port of registry and that registrar shall make an 
entry thereof in the register book and its registry in that book shall be consid ered as closed except so 
far as relates to any unsatisfied mortgages entered therein.  
(2) In any such case, except where the ship ‟s certificate of registry is mislaid, lost or destroyed, 
the master of the ship shall, immediately if the event occurs in any port in India, or within ten days 
after his arrival in port if it occurs elsewhere, deliver the certificate to the registrar of the port or any 
other officer specified in this behalf by the Central Government if the port of arrival is in India, or if 
the a rrival is in any port outside India to the Indian consular officer there, and the registrar if he is not 
himself the registrar of her port of registry or the officer so specified or the Indian consular officer, as 
the case may be, shall forthwith forward t he certificate delivered to him to the registrar of her port of 
registry.  
 40. Provisional certificate for ships becoming Indian ships abroad .―(1) If at any port outside 
India a ship becomes entitled to be registered as an Indian ship, the Indian consular officer there may 
grant to her master on his application a provisional certificate containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed in relation to the ship and shall forward a copy of the certificate at the first conveni ent 
opportunity to the Director -Gene ral. 
(2) Such a provisional certificate shall have the effect of a certificate of registry until the 
expiration of six months from its date or until the arrival of the ship at a port where there is a registrar 
whichever first happens, and on either of thos e events happening shall cease to have effect . 
41. Temporary pass in lieu of certificate of registry .―Where it appears to the Central 
Government that by reason of special circumstances it is desirable that permission should be granted 
to any Indian ship to  pass without being previously registered from one port to any other port in India, 
the Central Government may authorise the registrar of the first -mentioned port to grant a pass in such 
form as may be prescribed, and that pass shall for the time and withi n the limits therein mentioned 
have the same effect as a certificate of registry.  
Transfers of ships, shares, etc.  
 42. Transfer of ships or shares .―(1) No person shall transfer or acquire any Indian ship or any 
share or interest therein  1[at any time during which the security of India or of any part of the territ ory 
thereof is threatened by war  or external aggression and during which a Proclamation o f Emergency 
issued under clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution is in operation] without the previous 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993). 39 
 approval of the Central Government and any transaction effected in contravention of this provision 
shall be void and unenforceable.  
(2) The Central  Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose 
of conserving the tonnage of Indian shipping, refuse to give its approval to any such transfer or 
acquisition.  
1[(2A) No transfer or acquisition of any Indian ship shall be  valid unless ― 
(a) all wages and other amounts due to seamen in connection with their employment on that 
ship have been paid in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(b) the owner of the ship has given notice of such transfer or acquisition of the sh ip to the 
Director -General.]  
(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, an Indian ship or a share therein shall 
be transferred o nly by an instrument in writing.  
(4) The instrument shall contain such description of the ship as is contain ed in the surveyor's 
certificate or some other description sufficient to identify the ship to the satisfaction of the registrar 
and shall be in the prescribed form or as near thereto as circumstances permit and shall be executed by 
the transferor in the pr esence of and be attested by at least two witnesses.  
 43. Registry of transfer .―(1) Every instrument for the transfer of an Indian ship or of a share 
therein when duly executed shall be produced to the registrar of her port of registry, and the registrar 
shall thereupon enter in the register book the name of the transferee as owner of the ship or share, as 
the case may be, and shall endorse on the instrument the fact of that entry having been made with the 
day and hour thereof.  
(2) Every such instrument sh all be entered in the register book in the order of its production to the 
registrar.  
44. Transmission of property in Indian ship on death, insolvency, etc .―(1) Where the 
property in an Indian ship or share therein is transmitted to a person on the death or insolvency of any 
registered owner, or by any lawful means other than  by a transfer under this Act,―  
(a) that person shall authenticate the transmission b y making and signing a declaration in the 
prescribed form (in this Act referred to as a declaration of transmission) identifying the ship and 
also a statement of the manner in which and the person to whom the property has been 
transmitted;  
(b) if the trans mission is consequent on insolvency, the declaration of transmission shall be 
accompanied by proper proof of such claim;  
(c) if the transmission is consequent on death, the declaration of transmission shall be 
accompanied by a succession certificate, proba te or letters of administration under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925) , or a duly certified copy thereof.  
(2) The registrar, on receipt of the declaration of transmission so accompanied, shall enter in the 
register book the name of the person e ntitled under the transmission as owner of the ship or share the 
property in which has been transmitted, and, where there are more persons than one, shall enter the 
names of all those persons, but those persons however numerous shall, for the purpose of th e 
provisions of this Act with respect to the number of persons claiming to be registered as owners, be 
considered as one person:  
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 68 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993).  40 
 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall require the registrar to make an entry in the register 
book under this section,  if he is of opinion that by reason of the transmission the ship has ceased to be 
an Indian ship.  
45. Order for sale where ship has ceased to be an Indian ship .―(1) Where by reason of the 
transmission of any property in a ship or a share therein on death, insolvency or otherwise, a ship 
ceases to be an Indian ship, the registrar of her port of registry shall submit a report to the Central 
Government setting out t he circumstances in which the ship has ceased to be an Indian ship.  
(2) On receipt of such report, the Central Government may make an application to the High Court 
for a direction for the sale to any citizen of India  1[or any  2[company or body or co -operat ive society] 
which satisfies  the requirements specified in c lause (b) or, as the case may be, clause ( c) of section 21] 
of the property so transmitted.  
(3) The High Court may require any evidence in support of the application it thinks requisite and 
may ma ke such order thereon and on such terms and conditions as it thinks just or may reject the 
application  3[in case] it finds that the ship has not ceased to be an Indian ship; and in case the ship or 
the share is ordered to be sold, it shall direct that the proceeds of the sale after deducting the expenses 
thereof, be paid to the person entitled under such transmission or otherwise.  
(4) Every application for sale shall be made within  such time as may be prescribed : 
Provided that an application may be admitted  by the High Court after the time prescribed, if the 
Central Government satisfies the High Court that it had sufficient cause for not making the application 
within such time.  
 46. Transfer of ship on sale by order of court .―Where any court, whether under s ection 45 or 
otherwise, orders the sale of any ship or share therein, the order of the court shall contain a declaration 
vesting in some person named by the court the right to transfer that ship or share, and that person shall 
thereupon be entitled to tran sfer the ship or share in the same manner and to the same extent as if he 
were the registered owner thereof;  and every registrar shall obey the requisition of the person so 
named in respect of any such transfer to the same extent as if such person were the  registered owner.  
 47. Mortgage of ship or share .―(1) A registered ship or a share therein may be made a security 
for a loan or other valuable consideration, and the instrument creating the security (in this Act called a 
mortgage) shall be in the prescrib ed form or as near thereto as circumstances permit, and on the 
production of such instrument the registrar of the ship's port of registry shall record it in the register 
book.  
(2) Mortgages shall be recorded by the registrar in the order in time in which t hey are produced to 
him for that purpose, and the registrar shall, by memorandum under his hand, notify on each mortgage 
that it has been recorded by him stating the day and hour of that record.  
48. Entry of discharge of mortgage .―Where a registered mortgage is discharged, the registrar 
shall, on the production of the mortgage deed with a receipt for the mortgage money endorsed 
thereon, duly signed and attested, make an entry in the register book to the effect that the mortgage 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act  43 of 1981 , s. 6, for “ or any company which satisfies the requirements specified in clause ( b) of   
section 21 ” (w.e.f. 28-9-1981).   
2. Subs . by Act 68 of 1993, s. 4, for “company or any co -operative society ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “in any case ” (w.e.f.16 -12-1960).  
 41 
 has been discharged, and on that entry being made the estate, if any, which passed to the mortgagee 
shall vest in the person in whom (having regard to intervening acts and circumstances, if any) it would 
have vested, if the mortgage had not been made.  
49. Priority of mortgages .―If there are more mortgages than one recorded in respect of the same 
ship or share, the mortgagees shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or constructive notice, have 
priority according to the date on which each mortgage is recorded in the register b ook and not 
according to the date of each mortgage itself.  
50. Mortgagee not deemed to be owner .―Except in so far as may be necessary for making a 
mortgaged ship or share available as a security for the mortgage debt, the mortgagee shall not, by 
reason of his mortgage, be deemed to be the owner of the ship or share, nor shall the mortgagor be 
deemed to have ceased to be owner thereof.  
1[51. Rights of mortgagee .―(1) Where there is only one registered mortgagee of a ship or share, 
he shall be entitled to re cover the amount due under the mortgage by selling the mortgaged ship or 
share without approaching the High Court:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall prevent the mortgagee from recovering 
the amount so due in the High Court as provided  in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) Where there are two or more registered mortgagees of a ship or share they shall be entitled to 
recover the amount due under the mortgage in the High Court, and when passing a decree or thereafter 
the High Court may direct that the mortgaged ship or share be sold in execution of the decree.  
(3) Every registered mortgagee of a ship or share who intends to recover the amount due under the 
mortgage by selling the mortgaged ship or share under sub -section ( 1) shall give an advance notice  of 
fifteen days relating to such sale to the registrar of the ship's port of registry.  
(4) The notice under sub -section ( 3) shall be accompanied with the proof of payment of the wages 
and other amounts referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2A) of sect ion 42.]  
 52. Mortgage not affected by insolvency .―A registered mortgage of a ship or share shall not be 
affected by any act of insolvency committed by the mortgagor after the date of the record of such 
mortgage, notwithstanding that the mortgagor, at the commencement of his insolvency, had the ship 
or share in his possession, order or disposition, or was the reputed owner thereof, and the mortgage 
shall be preferred to any right, claim or interest therein of the other creditors of the insolvent or any 
trustee or assignee on their behalf.  
53. Transfer of mortgages .―(1) A registered mortgage of a ship or share may be transferred to 
any person and the instrument effecting the transfer shall be in the prescribed form or as near thereto 
as circumstances permit, and on the production of such instrument, the registrar sha ll record it by 
entering in the register book the name of the transferee as mortgagee of the ship or share and shall, by 
memorandum under his hand, notify on the instrument of transfer that it has been recorded by him 
stating the day and hour of the record . 
(2) The person to whom any such mortgage has been transferred shall enjoy the same right of 
preference as was enjoyed by the transferor.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1993, s. 5, for section 51 (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993).  
 42 
 54. Transmission of interest in mortgage in certain circumstances .―(1) Where the interest of 
a mortgagee in a ship or share is transmitted on death, or insolvency, or by any lawful means other 
than by a transfer under this Act, the transmission shall be authenticated by a declaration of the person 
to whom the interest is  transmitted containing a statement of the manner in which and the person to 
whom the property has been transmitted, and shall be accompanied by the like evidence as is by this 
Act required in case of a corresponding transmission of the ownership of a ship  or share.  
(2) The registrar, on receipt of the declaration and the production of the evidence aforesaid, shall 
enter the name of the person entitled under the transmission in the register book as mortgagee of the 
ship or share.   
Name of ship  
55. Rules as to name of ship .―(1) An Indian ship shall not be described by any name other than 
that by which she is for the time being registered.  
(2) The registrar may refuse the registry of any Indian ship by the name by which it is proposed to 
register the ship if t hat name is already borne by another ship or if the name be so similar as is 
calculated or likely to deceive.  
(3) A change shall not be made in the name of an Indian ship except in the prescribed manner.  
(4) If any person acts or suffers any person under h is control to act in contravention of this section 
or omits to do or suffers any person under his control to omit to do anything required under 
this 1[section] the ship may be detained until the provisions of this section are complied with:  
Provided that n othing in this sub -section shall apply to a foreign ship which has become, and is 
sought to be registered as, an Indian ship.  
Registry of alterations, registry anew and transfer of registry  
56. Registry of alterations .―When a registered ship is so altered as not to correspond with the 
particulars relating to her tonnage or description contained in the register book, then, if the alteration 
is made at any port having a registrar, that registrar, or if it is made elsewhere, the registrar of the first 
port hay ing a registrar at which the ship arrives after the alteration, shall, on application being made to 
him stating the particulars of the alteration, either cause the alteration to be registered or direct that the 
ship be registered anew.  
57. Regulations for registry of alterations .―(1) For the purpose of registry of an alteration in a 
ship the ship's certificate of registry shall be produced to the registrar, and the registrar shall, in his 
discretion, either retain the certificate of registry and grant a new  certificate of registry containing a 
description of the ship as altered or endorse and sign on the existing certificate a memorandum of the 
alteration.  
(2) The particulars of the alteration so made, and the fact of the new certificate having been 
granted,  or endorsement having been made, shall be entered by the registrar of the ship's port o f 
registry in his register book;  and for that purpose the registrar to whom the application for the registry 
of the alteration has been made (if he is not the registr ar of the ship's port of regist ry) shall forthwith 
report to the last mentioned registrar the particulars and facts as aforesaid, accompanied, where a new 
certificate of registry has been granted, by the old certificate of registry.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “sub-section”  (w.e.f.  26-12-1960).  
 43 
 58. Provisional certifica te and endorsement where ship is to be registered anew .―(1) Where 
any registrar, not being the registrar of the ship ‟s port of registry, on an application as to an alteration 
in a ship directs the ship to be registered anew, he shall either grant a provisional certificate describing 
the ship as altered, or pro visionally endorse the particulars of the alteration on the existing certificate.  
(2) Every such provisional certificate, or certificate provisionally endorsed, shall, within ten days 
after the first subsequent arrival of the ship at her port of discharge in India, be delivered to the 
registrar thereof and that registrar shall cause the ship to be registered anew.  
(3) The registrar granting a provisional certificate, or provisionally endorsing a certificate under 
this section shall add to the certificate or  endorsement a statement that the same is made provisionally, 
and shall send a report of the particulars of the case to the registrar of the ship's port of registry, 
containing a similar statement as the certificate or endorsement.  
59. Registry anew on cha nge of ownership .―Subject to the other provisions contained in this 
Act, where the ownership of any Indian ship is changed, the registrar of the port at which the ship is 
registered may, on the application of the owner of the ship, register the ship anew although registry 
anew is not required under this Act.  
60. Procedure for registry anew .―(1) Where a ship is to be registered anew, the registrar shall 
proceed as in the case of first registry, and on the delivery to him of the existing certificate of registry 
and on the oth er requisites to registry, or in the case of a change of ownership such of them as he 
thinks material, being duly complied with, shall make such registry anew, and grant a certificate 
thereof.  
(2) When a ship is registered anew, her former registry shall b e considered as closed except so far 
as relates to any unsatisfied mortgage entered thereon, but the names of all persons appearing on the 
former register to be interested in the ship as owners or mortgagees shall be entered in the new 
register and the reg istry anew shall not in any way affect the rights of any of those persons.  
61. Transfer of registry .―(1) The registry of any ship may, with the previous approval of the 
Director -General, be transferred from one port of registry to another on the applicatio n to the registrar 
of the existing port of registry of the ship made by declaration in writing of all persons appearing in 
the register to be interested therein as owners or mortgagees, but that transfer shall not in any way 
affect the rights of those pers ons or any of them and those rights shall in all respects continue in the 
same manner as if no such transfer had been effected.  
(2) On receipt of any such application the registrar shall transmit notice thereof to the registrar of 
the intended port of regi stry with a copy of all particulars relating to the ship and the names of all 
persons appearing in that register to be interested therein as owners or mortgagees.  
(3) The ship's certificate of registry shall be delivered to the registrar either of the exis ting or 
intended port of registry, and, if delivered to the former, shall be transmitted to the registrar of the 
intended port of registry.  
(4) On receipt of the documents aforesaid the registrar of the intended port of registry shall enter 
in his register  book all the particulars and names so transmitted as aforesaid, and grant a fresh 
certificate of registry, and thence forth such ship shall be considered to be registered at the new port of 
registry, and the name of the ship ‟s new port of registry shall be  substituted for the name of her 
former port of registry on the ship.  
62. Restrictions on re -registry of abandoned ships .―Where a ship has ceased to be registered 
as an Indian ship by reason of having been wrecked or abandoned, or for any reason other than 44 
 capture by the enemy, the ship shall not be re -registered until she has at the expense of the applicant 
for the registry  been surveyed by a surveyor and certified by him to be seaworthy.  
National character and flag  
63. National colours for Indian ships .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare what shall be the proper national colours  for all ships registered under this 
Act and for all ships which are not so registered but which are owned by the Government or by any 
local authority or by any body corporate established by or under any law for the time being in force in 
India or by a cit izen of India; and different colours may be declared for different classes of ships.  
(2) Any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, or any customs collector , or any Indian 
consular officer, may board any ship on which any colours are hoisted contrary to this Act and seize 
and take away the colours which shall be forfeited to the Government.  
64. Unlawful assumption of Indian character .―No person on board a ship which is not an 
Indian ship shall, for the purpose of making it appear to be an Indian ship, use  the Indian national 
colours, unless the assumption of Indian character has been made (the burden of proving which shall 
lie on him) for the purpose of escaping capture by the enemy or by a foreign ship of war in the 
exercise of some belligerent right.  
65. Concealment of Indian, or assumption of foreign, character .―No owner or master of an 
Indian ship shall knowingly do anything , or permit anything to be done, or carry or permit to be 
carried any papers or documents, with intent to conceal t he Indian character of the ship  from any 
person entitled by any law for the time being in force to inquire into the same, or with intent to 
assume a foreign character for the ship, or with intent to deceive any person so entitled as aforesaid.  
 66. Indian ships to hoist proper national colours in certain cases .―An Indian ship shal l hoist 
the proper national colours ― 
(a) on a signal being made to her by any vessel of the Indian Navy;  
(b) on entering or leaving any foreign port;  
(c) if of fifty tons gross tonnage or more, on entering or leaving any Indian port.  
67. National character  of ship to be declared before clearance .―(1) A customs collector shall 
not grant a clearance for any ship until the master of such ship has declared to that officer the name of 
the country to which he claims that she belongs, and that officer shall thereu pon inscribe that name on 
the clearance.  
(2) If a ship attempts to proceed to sea without such clearance, she may be detained by any 
customs collector until the declaratioin is made.  
Miscellaneous  
68. Liabilities of ships not recognised as Indian ships .―Where it is declared by this Act that an 
Indian ship shall not be recognised as such, that ship shall not be  entitled to any privileges, benefits, 
advantages or protection usually enjoyed by Indian ships or to use the Indian national colours for 
Indian ships  or to assume the Indian national character, but so far as regards the payment of dues the 
liability to fine and forfeiture and the punishment of offences committed on board such ship, or by 
any person s belonging to her, such ship shall be dealt with in th e same manner in all respects as if she 
were a recognised Indian ship.  
 69. Proceedings on forfeiture of ship .―Where any ship has either wholly or as to any share 
therein become subject to forfeiture under this Part, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, any 45 
 customs collector or any Indian consular officer or any other officer authorised by the Central 
Government, may seize and detain the ship , and bring her for adjudication before the High Court, and 
the High Court may thereupon adjudge the ship wit h her equipment to be forfeited to the Government, 
and make such order in the case as to the High Court seems just and may award to the officer bringing 
in the ship for adjudication such portion of the proceeds of the sale of the ship or any share therein as 
the High Court thinks fit.  
 70. Notice of trust not received .―No notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall 
be entered in the register book or be receivable by the registrar, and subject to any rights and powers 
appearing by the regist er book to be vested in any other person, the registered owner of a ship or of a 
share therein shall have power to dispose of the ship or share in the manner provided in this Act and 
to give effectual receipts for any money paid or advanced by way of consi deration.  
 71. Liability of owners .―Where any person is beneficially interested otherwise than by way of 
mortgage in any ship or share in a ship registered in the name of some other person as owner, the 
person so interested shall, as well as the registered owner, be subject to all the pecu niary penalties 
imposed by this or any other Act on the owners of ships or shares therein, so nevertheless that 
proceedings for the enforcement of any such penalties may be taken against both or either of the said 
parties with or without joining the other of them.  
72. Evidence of register boo k, certificate of registry and other documents .―(1) On 
application to the registrar and on payment of the prescribed fee, a person may, at any time during 
office hours, inspect any register book, and may obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register 
book.  
(2) The following documents shall be ad missible in evidence in any Court in manner provided by 
this Act, namely: ― 
(a) any register book on its production from the custody of the registrar  or other person 
having the lawful custody thereof;  
(b) a certificate of registry under this Act purporting to be signed by the registrar or any other 
officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government;  
(c) an endorsement on a certificate of registry purporting to be signed by the registrar or any 
other officer a uthorised in this behalf by the  Central G overnment;  
(d) every declaration made in pursuance of this Part in respect of an Indian ship.  
(3) A certified copy of an entry in a register book shall be admissible in evidence in any Court and 
have the same effect to all intents as the original entry in the register book of which it is a copy.  
73. Power to register Government ships under this Part .―The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, 
ships belonging to the G overnment other than ships of the Indian Navy may be registered as Indian 
ships under this Act and thereupon this Act , subject to any exceptions and modifications which may 
be made in the notification either generally or with respect to any class of ships belonging to 
Government, shall apply to ships belonging to Government registered in accordance with those rules 
as they apply to Indian ships registered in manner provided by this Act.  
74. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Part .―(1) The Central Government may 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  46 
 (2) In particular, and with out prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :― 
(a) the manner in which the tonnage of any ship shall be ascertained, whether for the purpose 
of registration or otherwise, including the mode of measurement;  
(b) the recognition for the purpose of ascertaining the tonnage of any ship or for any other 
purpose, of any ton nage certificate granted in respect of any ship in any country outside India, the 
tonnage regulations of which are substantially the same as the tonnage rules made by the Central 
Government, including the conditions and restrictions subject to which such r ecognition may be 
granted;  
(c) the manner in which surveys of ships shall be conducted and the form of certificate s of 
surveying officers;  
(d) the manner in which ships shall be marked;  
(e) the form in which any document required by this Part shall be prep ared and the particulars 
which it should contain;  
(f) the persons by whom and the authorities before which any declaration required by this Part 
shall be made and the circumstances in which any such declaration may be waived and other 
evidence accepted;  
(g) the form of the instrument creating a mortgage on a ship or share of transferring a 
mortgage;  
(h) the returns that shall be made by registrars to the Director -General or to such other 
authority as the Central Government may appoint and the form in which and the intervals within 
which such returns shall be made;  
(i) the procedure for the registration, marking or alteration of the names of Indian ships;  
1[(j) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspection of any ship for the purposes of 
registrati on and the manner in which such fees may be collected;]  
(k) the manner in which registrars and other authorities may exercise their powers under the 
Part or maintain their books and other registers;  
(l) the manner in which ships belonging to the Government , to which the provisions of this 
Act may be made applicable under section 73, may be registered;  
(m) any other matter which may be or is to be prescribed.  
PART VI  
CERTIFICATES OF  OFFICERS  
2[Masters, mates, engineers, skippers, etc. ] 
3[75. Application of P art.―This Part applies to ― 
(a) every sea -going Indian ship fitted with mechanical means of propulsion wherever it is; and  
(b) every foreign ship while it is a port or place in India.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 5,  for clause ( j) (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).   
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1987, s. 2, for “Master s, mates and engineers ” (w.e.f.1 -7-1989).   
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for s ections 75 and 76 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  47 
 75A. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “contiguous zone ” means the contiguous zone of India described , or notified as such for 
the time being under section 5 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 1976) ; 
(b) “convention ” means the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification 
and Watch keeping for Seafarers, 1978, signed at London on the 7th day of July, 1978, as 
amended from time to time;  
1[76. Certificates of competency to be held by officers of ship s.―(1) Every Indian ship, when 
going to sea from any port or place, shall be provided with officers duly certificated under this Act in 
accordance with such manning scales as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may prescribe different m anning scales for different types 
of ships.  
(2) Every ship, whether at sea or in any port or place, shall engage such number of persons and 
with such qualifications as may be prescribed for maintaining watches.] ] 
77. When officers deemed duly certificated .―Subject to the provisions contained in section 86, 
an officer shall not be deemed to be duly certificated under this Act unless he holds a certificate of a 
grade appropriate to his station in the ship or of a higher grade granted in accordance with this A ct. 
2[78. Grade s of certificates of competency .―(1) Cert ificates of competency shall be  granted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act for each of the following grades, namely: ― 
extra Master;  
master of a foreign -going ship;  
first mate of a foreign -going ship;  
second mate of a foreign -going ship;  
master of a home -trade ship;  
mate of a home -trade ship;  
navigational watch keeping officer;  
extra first class engineer;  
marine engineer officer class I;  
marine engineer officer class II;  
marine engineer office r class III;  
marine engineer officer class IV;  
engine driver of a sea -going ship;  
skipper grade I of a fishing vessel;  
skipper grade II of a fishing vessel;  
mate of a fishing vessel;  
engineer of a fishing vessel;  
engine driver of a fishing vessel;  
dredger master grade I;  
dredger master grade II;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 63 of 2002, s. 2, for section 76 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1987, s. 4, for section  78 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  48 
 dredger mate grade I;  
dredger mate grade II;  
dredger engineer grade I;  
dredger engineer grade II;  
dredger driver grade I;  
dredger driver grade II.  
(2) A certificate of competency granted for any grade of engineer or  engine driver shall state 
whether it entitles the holder to act as engineer of ships or fishing vessels fitted with steam or motor 
engines or with any other type of engines and the holder shall not be entitled to act as engineer of a 
ship fitted with a ty pe of engin e not stated in the certificate.   
(3) Certificates issued to masters, mates and engineers who have to work on board ships carrying 
dangerous goods shall require endorsement as to the additional qualifications that may be prescribed.  
(4) If it ap pears to the Central Government that certificates of competency for grades, other than 
those referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be granted, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the other grades in respect of which certificates of compet ency may be granted.  
(5) A certificate of competency for a foreign -going ship shall be deemed to be of a higher grade 
than the corresponding certificate of a home -trade ship, and shall entitle the lawful holder thereof to 
go to sea in the corresponding gra de in such home -trade ship; but no certificate for a home -trade ship 
shall entitle the holder to go to sea as a master or mate of a foreign -going ship.  
(6) A certificate of competency as extra master shall be deemed to be of a higher grade than any 
other c ertificate of competency as master or mate of a foreign -going ship or a home -trade ship or 
navigational watch keeping officer.  
(7) A certificate of competency as extra first class engineer shall be deemed to be of a higher 
grade than any other certificate of competency as marine engineer officer, engineer or engine driver of 
a fishing vessel or engine driver of a sea -going ship.]  
79. Examination s for, and grant of , certificate s.―(1) The Central Government or a person duly 
authorised by it in this behalf shall appoint persons for the purpose of examining the qualifications of 
persons de sirous of obtaining certificate  of competency under section 78.  
(2) The Central Government or such authorised person  shall grant to every applicant, who is duly 
reported by the examiners to have passed the examination satisfactorily and to have given satisfactory 
evidence of his sobriety, experience and ability and general good conduct on board ship , such a 
certificate of competency as the case requires:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in any case in which it has reason to believe that the 
report has been unduly made, require, before granting a certificate, a re -examination of the applicant  
or a further inquiry into his testimonials and character.  
1[(3) Every certificate granted under sub -section ( 2), shall be valid for suc h period as may be 
prescribed.]  
80. [Certificates of service of naval officers .] Omitted by Act Merchant Shipping  (Amend ment )              
Act, 1986 (33 of 1986),  s. 2 (w.e.f . 14-8-1986). 
81. Form of certificates .―Every certificate of competency granted under this Act shall be in the 
prescribed form and shall be made in duplicate, and one copy shall be delivered to the person entitled 
to the certificate, and the other shall be kept and recorded in the prescribed m anner.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1987,  s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989).  49 
 82. Record of orders affecting certificates .―A note of all orders made for cancelling, 
suspending, altering or otherwise affecting any certificate of competency, in pursuance of the powers 
contained in this Act, shall be entered on the copy of the c ertificate kept under section 81.  
83. Loss of certificates .―Whenever a person holding a certificate granted under this Act proves 
to the satisfaction of the Central Government that he has, without fault on his, part, lost or been 
deprived of such certifica te, the Central Government shall on payment of the prescribed fee, cause a 
copy of the certificate, to which by the record kept in accordance with this Act he appears to be 
entitled, to be granted to him, and such copy shall have all the effect of th e orig inal. 
84. Production of certificates of competency to shipping master .―(1) The master of a              
foreign -going ship or the master of a home -trade ship of two hundred tons gross or more―  
(a) on signing the agreement with his crew, shall produce to the shipping master before whom 
the same is signed, the certificates of competency which the  1[mates and engineers] of the ship are 
by this Act required to hold;  2*** 
(b) in the case of a running agreement, shall, also, before the second and every subsequent 
voyage, produce to the shipping master the certificate of competency of any mate or engineer then 
first engaged by him who is required by this Act to hold a certificate.  
3[(c) who is not required to sign the agreement with the crew, shall submit before 
commencing the first voyage from any port to the Mercantile Marine Depar tment having 
jurisdiction over such port, a list of crew with the particulars of grades of certificates of master, 
mates and engineers and shall also report to that Department of any later change in the list of the 
crew before any subsequent voyage.]  
(2) Upon the production of the certificates of competency, the shipping master shall, if the 
certificates are such as the master, mates and engineers of the ship ought to hold, give to the master a 
certificate to the effect that the proper certificates of compe tency have been so produced.  
(3) The master shall, before proceeding to sea, produce the certificate given to him by the 
shipping master to the customs collector.  
(4) No customs collector shall clear any such ship outwards without the production of such 
certificate; and, if any ship attempts to go to sea without a clearance, the customs collector may detain 
her until the certificate is produced.  
85. Power to cancel or suspend certificates obtained on false or erroneous information .―If it 
appears to the Central Government that the holder of a certificate granted under this Act has obtained 
it on false or erroneous information, it may cancel or suspend such certificate:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed by the  Central Government unless the 
person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a representation against the order 
proposed.  
86. Recognition of certificate of competency 4*** granted in other countries .―(1) If 
provision is made by the laws in force  in any country other than India for the grant of certificates of 
competency  2*** similar to those referred to in this Act, and the Central Government is satisfied ― 
(a) that the conditions under which any such certificates are granted in that country requi re 
standards of competency  2*** not lower than those required for the grant under this Act of 
corresponding certificates; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1987, s. 6, for “master, mat e, engineers and engine drivers”  (w.e.f.  1-7-1989).    
2. The word “and” omitted by s.  6, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-7-1989).  
3. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  
4. The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 14 -8-1986).  50 
 (b) that certificates granted under this Act are accepted in that country in lieu of the 
corresponding certificates granted under the laws of that country;  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any certificate of 
competency  2*** granted under the laws in force in that country and specified in that notification, 
shall for the purposes of thi s Act be recognised as equivalent to the corresponding certificate of 
competency  2*** granted under this Act and specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever the provisions of this Act require that a person employed in any capacity on board 
any ship shall b e the holder of a specified certificate of competency  2*** granted under this Act, any 
person employed in that capacity shall, if he is the holder of a certificate recognised under              
sub-section ( 1) as equivalent to the first -mentioned certifica te or to a certificate of higher grade 
granted under this Act, and still in force, be deemed to be duly certificated under this Act.  
1[86A. Foreign ships not to sail without certificated officers .―(1) Every master of a foreign 
ship shall, before proceeding  to sea from any port or place in India, ensure that the ship has the 
requisite number of officers and engineers of appropriate grades  as specified by the Convention.  
(2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may, at any 
reasonable time, go on board a ship to which any of the provisions of this Part applies for the purpose 
of ensuring that the officers holding certificates issued in accordance with the Conventio n are actually 
appointed and are  present, and satisfy hims elf about the adequacy of such officers for the                      
watch -keeping duties in ports and at sea.  
(3) If any report made under sub -section ( 2) by a surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf 
by the Central Government, reveals any deficie ncy in a foreign ship in relation to the requirements of 
the Convention  and the Central Government is satisfied that it will be unsafe for such ship to proceed 
to sea, that ship may be detained by the officer authorised for this purpose till such requireme nts are 
fulfilled.]  
2[87. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Part.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of th e following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the form and manner in which a service endorsement shall be made on the certificate of 
competency of a marine engineer officer class II;  
(b) the number of persons and the qualifications they may possess for maintaining 
watches 3[by different types of ships] at sea or in any port or place;  
(c) the conduct of the examination of persons desirous of obtaining certificates of competency 
and endorsements thereon for the grades falling under section 78;  
(d) the qualifications to b e required of persons desirous of obtaining certificates of 
competency for the grades falling under section 78;  
(e) the fees to be paid by applicants for examination;  
(f) the period for which certificate granted under sub -section ( 2) of section 79 shall be  valid;  
(g) the form of such certificates and the manner in which copies of certificates are to be kept 
and recorded;  
(h) the circumstances or cases in which certificates of competency may be cancelled or 
suspended.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1987, s. 7 (w.e.f.  1-7-1989).    
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for section 87 (w.e.f.  1-7-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s.  3,  for “by a ship ”(w.e.f.  1-2-2003 ).  51 
 1[PART VIA  
OBLIGATION OF CERTAIN CERT IFICATE HOLDERS TO SERVE GOVERNMENT OR IN INDIAN SHIPS  
87A. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context other requires, ― 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which the Merchant Shipping ( Amendment)  Act, 1979  
(20 of 1979) , comes into force;  
(b) “certificate ” means ― 
(i) a certificate of competency referred to in section 78; or 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(iii) a certificate of competency 3*** referred to in section 86,  
which has been obtained by any person by avail ing of training facilities in any of the merchant  navy 
training establishments in India or experience of sea service on bo ard any Indian ship  4***; 
(c) “Government ” includes ― 
(i) a Board of Trustees constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act , 1963  (38 of 1963)  for 
any port,  
(ii) a corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act,  
(iii) A Government company within the meaning of section 617 of the Compan ies 
Act,1956  (1 of 1956) , and  
(iv) a Merchant Navy Training Institution financed wholly or mainly by Government;  
(d) “suitable employment ”, in relation to the holder of any certificate, means employment in a 
capacity for which the holding of such certifica te is an essential qualification.  
87B. Holders of certificates to serve the Government or in Indian ships for certain 
period .―(1) Every citizen of India who obtains, on or after the appointed day, a certificate shall be 
liable to serve the Government or in any Indian ship, for such period not extending beyond four years 
from the date on which he obtains such certificate or for such shorter period as the Central 
Government may, by a general or special order published in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(2) No citizen of India who has obtained on or, after the appointed day a certificate shall accept 
any employment other than an emp loyment under the Government or in any Indian ship, before the 
expiry of the period during which he is liable to serve the Government or in any Indian ship in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and the orders made thereunder.  
(3) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), a citizen of India 
who has obtained, on or after the appointed day, two or more certificates shall not be liable to serve 
under the Government or in any Indian ship for any period or periods ex ceeding, or, as the case may 
be, exceeding in the aggregate, seven years or such shorter period as the Central Government may, by 
a general or special order , published in the Official Gazette, specify.  
87C. Exemption from section 87B .―(1) When any person referred to in section 87B has failed 
to secure suitable employment within a reasonable period from the date on which he applied for the 
same, he may make an application to the Director -General for exempting him from the requirements 
of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of that section and if the Director -General is satisfied that the grounds 
                                                      
1. Part VIA ins. by Act 20 of 1979, s. 2 (w.e.f.  4-5-1979).  
2. Sub -clause ( ii) omitted by Act 33 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 14 -8-1986).  
3. The words „or service ” omitted by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-1986).  
4. The words “or Indian Naval ship” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-1986) . 52 
 stated in the application justify the exemption sought for, he shall, by order, exempt such person from 
the requirements of those sub -sections.  
(2) The Dir ector -General may, either on own motion or on an application made by any person 
referred to in section 87B, by order in writing, exempt such person from the requirements of                    
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of that section, if the Director -Genera l is satisfied ― 
(a) that it is necessary so to do for compliance with any request made by the Government of 
any foreign country to make available the services of Indian personnel for meeting shortage of 
qualified personnel in its ships or shore establishme nts, or for compliance with any request made 
by any agency of the United Nations Organisation for making available Indian personnel for 
providing consultancy services on its behalf in technical co -operation or technical assistance 
programme in any country;  or 
(b) that such person is likely to suffer undue hardship if he is not so exempted.  
(3) An application for exemption under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall set out clearly all 
the particulars on the basis of whic h such exemption is applied for.  
(4) Every such application shall be disposed of by the Director -General as expeditiously as 
possible an d where the Director -General refuses to grant the exemption applied for, he shall record his 
reasons therefore and communicate the same to the applicant.  
(5) Where, within a period of forty -five days of the date of receipt of any such application, the 
Director -General does not refuse to grant the exemption applied for, or does not communicate the 
refusal to the applicant, the Director -General shall be deeme d to have granted the exemption applied 
for. 
(6) Where the Director -General refuses to grant the exemption applied for, the applicant may 
prefer an appeal against such refusal to the Central Government within thirty days of the receipt of the 
order of the Director -General refusing the exemption and the Central Government may make such 
orders as it deems fit:  
Provided that the Central Government may admit any appeal after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficien t cause for not preferring the appeal in time:  
Provided further that no order confirming the order of the Director -General shall be made  under  
this sub -section without giving the appellant an opportunity to represent his case.  
 87D. Particulars of certific ate, etc. , to be furnished .―Every citizen of India who obtains, on 
or after the appointed day, a certificate, shall furnish, in such form and at such intervals as may be 
described, particulars of the certificate or certificates obtained by him and of his employment. ] 
PART VII  
SEAMEN  AND APPRENTICES  
1[Classification of seamen, seafarer, maritime labour standards and prescr iption of minimum 
manning scale ] 
88. Power to classify seamen .―The Central Government may make rules for the classification 
of seamen other than ship's officers into  different categories and for the prescription of the minimum 
manning scale of seamen of such categories for ships; and different scales may be prescribed for 
different classes of ships.  
2[88A. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requir es,― 
(a) “Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance ” means a declaration issued by the 
Director -General of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organization authorized by him in 
this behalf, in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements and standards set out in the 
provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 201 4, s. 2, for “ Classification of seamen and prescription of minimum manning scale ”               
(w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
2.  Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  53 
 (b) “Maritime Labour Certificate ” means the certificate issued by the Director -General of 
Shipping or by any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in this behalf, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention;  
(c) “Maritime Labour Convention ” means the International Convention of Maritime Labour 
Organisation on Maritime Labour Standards signed in Geneva on the 23rd February, 2006;  
(d) “seafarer ” means  any person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on 
board a sea going ship, but does not include ― 
(i) the employment or engagement or work on board in any capacity of any person in a 
ship of war; or  
(ii) any Government ship used for milit ary or non -commercial purposes.  
88B. Application of maritime labour standards to seafarers and ships. ―(1) The provisions 
relating to maritime labour standards as contained in the Maritime Labour Convention, shall apply to 
all seafarers and ships engaged in co mmercial ac tivities, but does not include ― 
(a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters within, or closely adjacent to, 
sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating to ports apply;  
(b) ships engaged in fis hing activities;  
(c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks;  
(d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, on the 
recommendation of the Director -General of Shipping, by order , extend the provisions of the said            
sub-section to ships not engaged in commercial activities with such exceptions and modifications as it 
may consider necessary.]  
Shipping Masters  
89. Duties of shipping masters .―It shall be the duty of shipping masters ― 
(a) to superintend and facilitate the engagement and discharge of seamen in the manner 
provided in this Act;  
(b) to provide means for securing the presence on board at the proper times of the seamen 
who are so en gaged;  
(c) to facilitate the making of apprenticeship to the sea service;  
(d) to hear and decide disputes under section 132 between a master, owner or agent of a ship 
and any of the crew of the ship:  
1[(dd) to transmit the complaint of any dispute of a for eign seaman of a vessel, registered in a 
country other than India, in Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner or agent, to the 
competent authority of the country of registration and a copy of such complaint sha ll be 
forwarded to the Director -Gene ral, Internation al Labour Organisation Office; ] 
(e) to perform such other duties relating to seamen, apprentices and merchant ships as are for 
the time being committed to them by or under this Act.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1998, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -9-1997).  54 
 90. Fees to be paid .―(1) The Central Government may, by no tification in the Official Gazette, 
fix the fee s which shall be payable upon all engagements and discharges effected before a shipping 
master.  
(2) Scales of the fees payable for the time being shall be conspicuously placed in the shipping 
office, and a shi pping master may refuse to proceed with any engagement or discharge unless the fees 
payable thereon are first paid.  
(3) Every owner or master of a ship engaging or discharging any seamen in a s hipping office or 
before a shipping master s shall pay to the sh ipping master the whole of the fees hereby made payable 
in respect of such engagement or discharge, and may, for the purpose of reimbursing himself in part, 
deduct in respect of each such engagement or discharge from the wages of all persons (except 
appren tices) so engaged or discharged, and retain any sums not exceeding such sums as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf:  
Provided that, if in any case the sums which may be so deducted exceed the amount of th e fee 
payable by him, such excess shall be paid by him to the shipping master in addition to such fee.  
(4) For the purpose of determining the fees to be paid upon the engagement and discharge of 
seamen belonging to foreign -going ships which have running ag reements as hereinafter provided, the 
crew shall be considered to be engaged when the agreement is first signed, and to be discharged when 
the agreement finally terminates; and all intermediate engagements and discharges shall be considered 
to be engagemen ts and discharges of single seamen.  
Apprenticeship to the sea service  
91. Assistance for apprenticeship to sea service .―All shipping masters shall give to persons 
desirous of apprenticing  1[young persons not under the age of sixteen years] to sea service o r requiring 
apprentices not under that age for the sea service such assistance as may be in their power, and may 
receive from those persons such fees as the Central Government may fix.  
92. Special provisions as to apprenticeship to the sea service .―2[(1) The apprenticeship of any 
person to the sea service shall be by contract in writing between the apprentice or if he is a young 
person, then, on his behalf by his guardian, and the master or owner of the ship requiring the 
apprentice.]  
(2) Every such contrac t shall be executed in duplicate in the prescribed form and in accordance 
with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(3) Every such contract shall be executed in the presence of, and shall be attested by, the shipping 
master of the port,  who shall, before the execution of the contract, satisfy himself — 
(a) that the intended apprentice — 
(i) understands the contents and provisions of the contract;  
(ii) freely consents to be bound;  
(iii) has attained the age of  3[sixteen years]; and  
(iv) is in possession of a certificate to the effect that he is physically fit for sea service;  
(b) if the intended apprentice is  4[an young person], that his guardian's consent has been 
obtained to his being bound as an apprentice.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 4, for “boys not  under fifteen years of age” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
3.  Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
4.  Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “a minor” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  55 
 (4) Every such contract made i n India and every assignment, alteration or cancellation thereof, 
and where the apprentice bound dies or deserts , the fact of the death or desertion shall be recorded in 
the manner specified in section 93.  
93. Manner in which contract is to be recorded .―For the purpose of the record — 
(a) the master or owner of the ship to whom an apprentice to the sea service is bound shall 
transmit the contract executed in duplicate within seven days of the execution thereof, to the 
shipping master, who shall record one co py and endorse on the other the fact that it has been 
recorded and redeliver it to the master or owner;  
(b) the master or owner shall notify any assignment or cancellation of the contract and the 
death or desertion of the apprentice to the shipping master,  within seven days of the occurrence, if 
it occurs within India, or , as soon as circumstances permit, if it occurs elsewhere.  
94.  Production of contracts to authorised person before voyage in ship .―(1) The master of a 
ship shall, before carrying an appren tice to sea from a port in India, cause the apprentice to appear 
before the shipping master before whom the crew are engaged, and shall produce to him the contract 
by which the apprentice is bound, and every assignment thereof.  
(2) The name of the apprenti ce, with the date of the contract and of the assignments thereof, if 
any, and the names of the ports at which the same have been registered, shall be entered on the 
agreement with the crew.  
Seamen’s employment offices  
95. Business of seamen's employment of fices .―(1) It shall be the business of the seamen's 
employment offices ― 
1[(a) to issue licence, to regulate and control the recruitment and placement service, and to ― 
(i) ensure that no fees or other charges for recruitment or placement of seafarers are bo rne 
directly or indirectly or in whole or in part, by the seafarers;  
(ii) ensure that adequate machinery and procedures exist for the investigation, if 
necessary, of complaints concerning the activities of recruitment and placement services; and  
(iii) to m aintain registers of seamen in respect of the categories of seamen .] 
(c) to perform such other duties relating to seamen and merchant ships as are , from time to 
time, committed to them by or under this Act.  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of enabling seamen ‟s employment 
offices effectively to exercise their powers under this Act; and in particular and, without prejudice to 
the generality of such power, such rules may, provide for ― 
(a) consultation with respect to any specified matter by seamen's employment offices with 
such advisory boards or other authorities as the Central Government may think fit to constitute or 
specify in this behalf;  
3[(b) the levy and collection of such fees as may be specified for the issue  of licences to 
recruitment and placement services, renewal of such licences and services to be rendered by the 
seamen's employment office;  
(c) the issue of directions by the Central Government to any seamen ‟s employment office or 
any recruitment and place ment service with reference to the exercise of any of its powers;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 o f 2002, s. 4, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f.  1-2-2003).  
2. Omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f.  1-2-2003).  56 
 (ca) the conditions under which the recruitment and placement service to recruit and place 
seafarers abroad;  
(cb) the circumstances and conditions under which licence to be suspended or with drawn;  
(cc) the conditions under which seafarers ‟ personal data to be processed by the recruitment 
and placement services including the collection, storage, combination and communication of such 
data to third parties;]  
(d) the supersession of any seamen's employm ent office which fai ls to comply with any such 
direction.  
1[Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “recruitment and placement service ” means any person, company, institution, agency or 
other organisation, in the public or private sector  which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on 
behalf of employers or placing seafarers with employers;  
2*   *   *   *  * 
  96. Supply or engagement of seamen in contravention of Act prohibited .―(1) A person shall 
not engage or supply a seaman to be entered on board any ship in India unless that person is the 
owner, master or mate of the ship, or is the agent of the owner or is bona fide  the servant and in the 
constant employ of the owner, or is a director of a seaman ‟s employme nt office, or a shipping master . 
(2) A person shall not employ for the purpose of engaging or supplying a seaman to be entered on 
board any ship in India, any person s unless that person is the owner, master or mate of the ship, or is 
the agent of the owner or is bona fide  the servant an d in the constant employ of the owner , or is a 
director of a seamen ‟s employment office, or a shipping master.  
(3) A person shall not receive or accept to be entered on board any ship any seaman, if that person 
knows that the seaman has been engaged or sup plied in contravention of this section or section 95.  
 3[97. Receipt of remuneration, donation, fees, etc., from seamen for shipping them 
prohibited .―(1) A person or company or organisation including a union purporting to represent the 
interests of seamen shall not demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any seaman or 
person seeking employment as seaman or any person on his behalf, any r emuneration or donation or 
fees or compulsory subscription of any kind attributable from such seaman or person ‟s employment as 
seaman, other than the fees authorised by this Act.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the company employing or proposing to employ pers on as seaman to 
ensure that no money has been demanded or received by any person or company or organisation 
including the union purporting to represent the interests of seamen by way of any remuneration or 
donation or fees or compulsory subscription of any  kind attributable to employment of such person as 
seaman.]   
 4[97A. Prohibition against discrimination .―There shall be no discrimination between 
seamen, ― 
(a) on the ground of their membership or lack of membership in any particular union 
purporting to rep resent the interests of seamen and membership in such union shall not be                    
pre-requisite condition;  
(b) on the basis of training institute from where they obtained training or place of issue of 
their continuous discharge certificates,  
for their recruitment and engagement on board any ship.]  
                                                      
1. The Explanation  ins. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 4  (w.e.f.  1-2-2003).  
2. Explanation  omitted by Act 32 of 2014, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 5, for section 97 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  57 
  Engagement of seamen   
98. Qualification s for, and medical examination of, seamen .―(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, with effect from such date as may be specified 
in the notification, seamen generally or any category of seamen in particular shall not be engaged or 
carried to sea to w ork in any capacity in any ship or in any class of ships so specified, unless each one 
of them possesses the prescribed qualifications.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided under the rules made under sub -section ( 3), no person shall 
engage or carry to sea any seaman to work in any capacity in any ship or in any class of ships 
specified in this behalf by the Central Government, unless the seaman is in possession of a certificate 
in the prescribed form granted by the prescribed authority to the effect that he is physically fit to be 
employed in that capacity.  
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of 
this section; and, in particular, and, without prejudice to the generality of such power, any rules so 
made may provide for ― 
(a) the courses of training to be pursued, the vocational standards to be attained or the tests to 
be passed by seamen generally or by any class of seamen in particular;  
(b) the standard of physical fitness required of seaman,  different standards being l aid down, if 
necessary, for different classes of seamen having regard to the age of the seamen to be examined 
or the nature of the duties to be performed by them;  
(c) the nature of the medical examination of seamen, the authorities by which the examination  
shall be conducted, and the fees payable therefore;  
(d) the form and contents of medical certificates and the period of their validity;  
(e) the re -examination by such medical authority as may be specified of persons who have 
been refused medical certifica tes of physical fitness in the first instance and the fees payable for 
such re -examination;  
(f) the circumstances in which, or the conditions subject to which, any seaman or class of 
seamen, or any ship or class of ships, may be exempted from the operation  of sub -section ( 2). 
99. Prohibition of engagement of seamen in Indian port without discharge certificate .―No 
person shall engage or carry to sea any seaman under this Act in any ship, except a home -trade ship of 
less than two hundred tons gross, from any port in India unless the seaman is in possession of a 
certificate of discharge or a continuous certificate  of discharge issued under this Part.  
 1[99A. Prohibition of engagement of seafarer without seafarer’s identity document .―(1) No 
person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer in any ship, unless the seafarer is in possession of 
seafarer's identity docum ent. 
(2) The seafarer ‟s identity document under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued in such form and 
manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
100. Agreements with crew .―The master of every Indian ship, except a home -trade shi p of less 
than two hundred tons gross, shall enter into an agreement (in this Act called the agreement with the 
crew) in accordance with this Act with every seaman whom he engages in, and carries to sea as one of 
his crew from any port in India.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2007, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2008).  
2. Explanation  omitted by Act 32 of 2014, s. 7 ( w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  58 
 101. Form and contents of the agreement .―(1) An agreement with the crew shall be in the 
prescribed form, and shall be dated at the time of the first signature thereof, and shall be  1[signed by 
the owner or agent and the master] before any seaman signs the same.  
(2) The agreement with the crew sh all contain as terms thereof the following particulars, 
namely: ― 
(a) the name of the ship or ships on board which  the seaman undertakes to serve;  
(b) either the nature and, as far as practicable, the duration of the intended voyage or 
engagement or the max imum period of the voyage or engagement, and the places or parts of the 
world, if any, to which the voyage or engagement is not to extend;  
(c) the number and description of the crew of different categories in each department;  
2[(cc) hours of work and rest in a week, as may be prescribed;]  
(d) the time at which each seaman is to be on board or to begin work;  
(e) the capacity in which each seaman is to serve;  
(f) the amount of wages which each seaman is to receive;  
4[(ff) the entitlement for leave, as may be prescribed;  and] 
(g) a scale of the provisions which are to be furnished to each seaman, such scale being not 
less than the scale fixed by the Central Government and published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) a scale of warm clothing and a scale of additional provisions  to be issued to each seaman 
during periods of employ ment in specified cold regions;  
(i) any regulations as to conduct on board and as to f ines or other lawful punishment  for 
misconduct, which have been sanctioned by the Central Government as reg ulations proper to be 
adopted, and whi ch the parties agree to adopt;  
(j) payment of compensation for personal injury or death caused by accident  3[arising out of 
employment or] in the course of employment;  
(k) where it is agreed that the services of any s eaman shall end at any port not in India, a 
stipulation to provide him either fit employment on board some other ship bound to the port at 
which he was shipped or to such other port in India as may be agreed upon, or a passage to some 
port in India free of  charge or on such other terms as may be agreed upon;  
 2[(kk) the terms of agreement with the crew shall be determined after consultation with such 
organisations in India as the Central Government may, by order, notify to be the most 
representative of the employers of seamen and of seamen.]  
(l) stipulations relating to such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(3) The agreement shall provide that in the event of a dispute arising outside India between the 
master, owner or agent of a ship and a seaman in resp ect of any matter touching the agreement, such 
dispute shall be referred to the Indian consular officer whose decision thereon shall be binding on the 
parties until the return of the ship to the port in India at which  the seaman is to be discharged : 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s.  4, for “signed by the master ” (w.e.f.15 -7-1985).   
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “arising out of and” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  59 
 Provid ed that in the case of a ship other than an Indian ship, no such dispute shall be referred to 
the Indian consular officer if such reference is contrary to the rules of international law.  
(4) The agreement with the crew shall be so framed as to admit of sti pulations, to be adopted at 
the will of the master and seaman in each case (not being inconsistent with the provisions of this Act) 
respecting the advance and allotment of wages and may contain any other stipulations which are not 
contrary to law.  
1[102. Engagement of seaman where agreement is made out of India .―N otwithstanding 
anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the master of a ship registered at a port outside 
India who has an agreement with the crew made in due form according to the law of that port or of the 
port in which her crew were eng aged may engage in any port in India ― 
(a) a seaman who is not a citizen of India and who holds a continuous discharge certificate or 
any other similar document of identity issued by the competent authority of the country in which 
the ship is registered or,  as the case may be, of the country in which the said agreement was made; 
or 
(b) a seaman who is a citizen of India and who holds a certificate of discharge or a continuous 
certificate of discharge issued under this Act,  
and any seaman so engaged under cla use ( a) or clause ( b) may sign the agreement aforesaid and it 
shall not be necessary for him to sign an agreement under this Act.]  
103. Special provisions with regard to agreements with crew of Indian ships .―(1) The 
following provisions shall have effect with respect to every agreement made  in India with the crew of 
an Indian ship,  namely: ― 
(a) the agreement shall, subject to the provision  of this Act as to substitute, be signed by each 
seaman in the presence  of a shipping master;  
(b) the ship ping master shall cause the agreement to be read over and explained to each 
seaman, in a language understood by him or shall otherwise ascertain that each seaman 
understands the same before he signs it, and shall attest e ach signature;  
(c) when the crew is first engaged, the agreement shall be signed in duplicate, and one part 
shall be retained by the shipping master, and the other part shall be delivered to the master, and 
shall contain a special place or form for the des criptions and signatures of substitutes or persons 
engaged subsequently to the first departure of the ship;  
(d) when a substitute is engaged in the place of a seaman who has duly signed the agreement 
and whose services are within twenty -four hours of the s hip's putting to sea lost by death, 
desertion or other unforeseen cause, the engagement shall, if practicable, be made before a 
shipping master, and if not practicable, the master shall, before the ship puts to sea, if practicable, 
and, if not, as soon aft erwards as possible, cause the agreement to be read over and explained to 
the substitute; and the substitute shall thereupon sign the same in the presence of a witness, who 
shall attest the signature.  
(2) In the case of an agreement made in India with the crew of a foreign -going Indian ship the 
following provisions shall have effect in addition to the provisions specified in sub -section ( 1), 
namely :— 
(a) the agreement may be made for a voyage of the ship or, if the voyages of the ship average 
less than six months in duration, may be made to extend over two or more voy ages, and 
agreements so made are  in this Act referred to as running agreements;  
(b) a running agreement may be made to extend over two or more voyages so that it shall 
terminate either within si x months from the date on which it was executed, or on the first arrival 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s.   5, for section  102 (w.e.f.  15-7-1985).  60 
 of the ship at her port of destination in India after the expiration of that period, or on the discharge 
of cargo consequent upon such arrival, whichever of these dates shall be the latest:  
Provided that no such running agreement shall continue in force , if, after the expiration of 
such period of six months as aforesaid, the ship proceeds on a voyage from a port outside India to 
any other such port which is not on the direct route or a  customary route to her port of destination 
in India;  
(c) on every return to a port in India before the final termination of a running agreement, the 
master shall discharge or engage before the shipping master at such port any seaman whom he is 
required by  law so to discharge or engage, and shall upon every such return endorse on the 
agreement a statement (as the case may be) either that no such discharge s or engagements have 
been made or are intended to be made before the ship leaves port, or that all thos e made have been 
made as required by law;  
(d) the master shall deliver the running agreement so endorsed to the shipping master, and the 
shipping master shall, if the provisions of this Act relating to agreements have been complied 
with, sign the endorseme nt and return the agreement to the master.  
(3) In the case of an agreement made in India with the crew of a home -trade Indian ship of two 
hundred tons gross or more, the following provisions shall have effect in addition to the provisions 
specified in sub -section ( 1), namely: — 
(a) the agreement shall not be for a period longer than six months, but if the period for which 
the agreement was entered into expires while the ship is not in an Indian port, the agreement shall 
continue in force until the ship is ag ain in an Indian port:  
Provided that, except with the consent in writing of the seaman concerned, the agreement 
shall not continue in force for more than three months after the expiration of the period for which 
it was entered into;  
(b) an agreement for se rvice in two or more ships belonging to the same owner may be made 
by the owner instead of by the master, and the provisions of this Act with respect to the making of 
the agreement shall apply accordingly.  
104. Renewal of running agreements in certain case s.―(1) When a running agreement has 
been made with a crew of a foreign -going Indian ship and the ship arrives after th e expiration of a 
period of six months from the date on which it was executed at a port of destination in India which is 
not the port at w hich the crew have agreed to be discharged, the master may, with the previous 
sanction of the shipping master renew the agreement with the crew, or may be required by the 
shipping master so to renew the agreement for the voyage from such port of destinatio n to the port in 
India at which the crew have agreed to be discharged.  
(2) If the master of the ship is required by the shipping master to renew the agreement as aforesaid 
and refuses so to renew it, any expenses which may be incurred by the Government for  the 
subsistence of the crew and their conveyance to the port at which they have agreed to be discharged 
shall be a charge upon the ship, and shall be recoverable as if they were expenses incurred in respect 
of distressed seamen under the provisions of thi s Act.  
105. Changes in crew to be reported .―1[(1)] The master of every foreign -going Indian ship and 
of every home -trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more, the crew of which has been 
engaged before a shipping master, shall, before finally leaving the port where the engagement took 
place , sign and send to the nearest shipping master a full and accurate statement in the prescribed 
form, of every change which has taken place in his crew, and that statement shall be admissible in 
evidence.  
                                                      
1. Section 105 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 41 of 1984, s.   6 (w.e.f.  15-7-1985).    61 
 1[(2) A copy of the statement referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also be sent to the seaman's 
employment office concerned.]  
106. Certificate as to agreement with crew .―(1) In the case of a foreign -going Indian ship or a 
home -trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more, on the due execution of an agreement with 
the crew in accordance with this act, and also  when, in the case of a foreign -going Indian ship, the 
agreement is a running agreement, on compliance by the master before the second and every 
subsequent voyage made after the first commencement of the agreement with the  provisions of this 
Act respecting that agreement, the shipping master shall grant the mas ter of the ship a certificate to 
that effect.  
(2) The master of every such ship shall, before proceeding to sea, produce that certificate to the 
customs collector whose duty it is to grant a port clearance.  
(3) No customs collector shall clear any such shi p outwards without the production of such 
certificate, and, if any such ship attempts to go to sea without a clearance, the customs collector may 
detain her until such certificate as aforesaid is produced.  
(4) The master of every such ship shall, within fo rty-eight hours after the ship's arrival at the port 
in India at which the crew is to be discharged, deliver such agreement to a shipping master at the port; 
and such shipping master shall thereupon give to the master a certificate of such delivery; and no  
customs collector shall clear any such inwards without the production of  such certificate.  
107. Copy of agreement to be made accessible to the crew .―The master shall, at the 
commencement of every voyage or engagement, cause a legible copy of the agreement  and, if 
necessary, a certified translation thereof in a language understood by the majority of the crew 
(omitting the signatures), to be placed or posted up in such part of the ship as to be accessible to the 
crew.  
 108. Alteration in agreement with the c rew.―Every erasure, inter lineation or alteration in any 
agreement with the crew (except additions made for the purpose of shipping substitutes or persons 
engaged subsequently to the first departure of the ship) shall be wholly inoperative,  2[unless proved to 
have been made with the consent of all the persons, interested in the erasure, interlineation or 
alteration by the written attestation, ― 
(a) if in India, of some shipping master or customs collector; or  
(b) if outside India, by an Indian consular officer o r at any port outside India at which no 
Indian consular officer is available any such person as is authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government by notif ication in the Official Gazette ]. 
Employment of young persons  
3[109. Prohibition of engagement of  underage persons in certain cases. ―(1) No person under 
the age of sixteen years shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship.  
(2) (a) No young person shall be engaged in night work.  
(b) The period of night work shall be such, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that th e Director -General of Shipping, ― 
(i) for giving effective training; or  
(ii) for performing a specific nature of duty,  
                                                      
1.  Ins.  Act 41 of 1984, by s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
2. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid., for certain words   (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 9, for section 109 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  62 
 at night, may, by order permit engagement of any young person in night work which shall not be 
detrimental to the health or well being of such young person.]  
110. [Engagement of young persons as trimmers or stokers. ] Omitted by the  Merchant  Shipping 
(Second Amendment ) Act, 2014  (32 of 2014), s. 10 ( w.e.f . 1-4-2015).   
 111. Medical examination of young persons .―(1) Save as otherwise provided in                       
sub-section ( 2), no young person shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any 
ship, unless there has been delivered to the master a certificate granted by a prescribed authority that 
the young person is physica lly fit to be employed in that capacity.  
(2) Sub -section ( 1) shall not apply, — 
(a) to the employment of a young person in a ship in which all persons employed are 
members of one family; or  
(b) where the shipping master, on the ground of urgency, has author ised a young person to be 
engaged and carried to sea, without the certificate required by sub -section ( 1) being delivered to 
the master, and the young person is not employed beyond the first port at which the ship in which 
he is so engaged calls except in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) A certificate of physical fitness required under this section shall remain in force for one year 
only from the date on which it is granted.  
112. Maintenance of list or register of young persons in a sh ip.―There shall be included in 
every agreement with the crew of every Indian ship and every other ship which engages young 
persons in India , a list of young persons who are members of the crew, together with particulars of the 
dates of their birth, and, in  the case of any such ship where there is no agreement, the master shall 
keep a register of young persons with particulars of the dates of their birth and of the dates on which 
they became or ceased to be members  of the crew.  
1[113. Power to make rules res pecting employment of young persons .―The Central 
Government may make rules for the purposes of employment of young persons, prescribing ― 
(a) the authorities, whose certificates of physical fitness shall be accepted for the purposes of 
section 111;  
(b) the form of register of young persons to  be maintained in ships where there is no 
agreement with the crew.]  
Engagement of seamen by masters of ships other than Indian ships  
114. Engagements between seamen  and masters of ships other than Indian ships .―(1) When 
the master of a ship other than an Indian ship engages a seaman at any port in India to proceed to any 
port outside India, he shall enter into an agreement with such seaman, and the agreement shall be 
made before a shipping master in the manner provided by this Act for the making of agreeme nts in the 
case of foreign going Indian ships.  
(2) All the provisions, of this Act respecting the form of such agreements and the stipulations to 
be contained in them and the making and signing of the same shall be applicable to the engagement of 
such seam an. 
(3) The master of a ship other than an Indian ship shall give to the shipping master a bond with 
the security of some approved person resident in India for such amount as may be fixed  by the Central 
Government in respect of each seaman engaged by him at any port in India and conditioned for the 
due performance of such agreement and stipulations, and for the repayment to the Central 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2014,  s. 11, for section 113 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  63 
 Government of all expense s which may be incurred by it in respect of any such seaman who is 
discharged or left behind at any port out of India and becomes distressed and is relieved under the 
provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the shipping master may waive the execution of a bo nd under this section where the 
owner of the ship has an agent at any port in India and such agent accepts liability in respect of all 
matters for which the master of the ship would be liable if he were to execute a bond under this 
section or may accept fr om the agent such security as may be approved by the Central Government.  
(4) The fees fixed under section 90 shall be payable in respect of every such engagement, and 
deductions from the wages of seamen so engaged may be made to the extent and in the manne r 
allowed  under the said section 90.  
115. Power to prohibit engagement of persons as seamen .―The Central Government or any 
officer authorised by it in this behalf, if satisfied that in the national interest or in the interests of 
seamen generally it is necessary so to do, may, by order in writing, prohibit the owner, master or 
agent of any ship o ther than an Indian ship specified in the order from engaging in India or in any 
specified part of India, any person to serve as a seaman on such ship.  
116. Engagement of seamen outside India for Indian ships .―With respect to the engagement 
of seamen outsi de India, the following  provisions shall have effect: — 
When the master of an Indian ship engages a seaman at any port outside India, the provisions of 
this Act respecting agreements with the crew made in India shall apply subject  to the following 
modificat ions:— 
(a) at any such port having an Indian consular officer, the master shall, before carrying the 
seaman to sea, procure the sanction of the consular officer, and shall, if not contrary to any law in 
force in that port, engage the seaman before that off icer; 
(b) the master shall request the Indian consular officer to endorse upon the agreement an 
attestation to the effect that it has been signed in his presence and otherwise, made as required by 
this Act, and that it has his sanction, and if the attestat ion is not made, the burden of proving that 
the engagement was made as required by this Act shall lie up on the master.  
117. Power to board ships and m aster seamen .―For the purpose of preventing sea men 
from being taken on board any ship at any port in India contrary to the provisions of this Act, 
any shipping master or deputy or assistant shipping master or any director, deputy director or 
assistant director of the s eamen's employment office, may enter at any time o n hoard any 
such ship upon which he has reason to believe that seamen have been shipped, and may 
muster and examine the several seamen employed therein.  
Discharge of seamen  
118. Discharge before shipping ma ster.―(1) When a seaman serving in a foreign -going ship is, 
on the termination of his engagement, discharged in India, he shall, whether, the agreement with the 
crew be an agreement for the voyage or running agreement, be discharged in the manner provided by 
this Act in the presence of a shipping master.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply inflation to the discharge, of seamen serving in a 
home -trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more as they apply in relation to the discharge of 
seamen serving in a foreign -going ship:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply where a seaman is discharged from a Ship under an 
agreement made in accordance with section 103 for service in two or more ships, for the purpose of 
being engaged in another sh ip to which the agreement relates.  64 
 (3) If the master, owner or agent of a home -trade ship, other than a ship to which the last 
preceding sub -section applies, so desires, the seamen of that ship may be discharged in the same 
manner as seamen discharged from  a foreign -going ship.  
119. Certificate of discharge .―(1) The master shall sign and give to a sea man discharged fr om 
his ship in India, either on  his discharge or on payment of his wages, a certificate of his discharge in 
the prescribed form specifying the period of his service and the time and place of hi s discharge.  
(2) The master shall also, upon the discharge of every certificated officer whose certificate of 
competency has been delivered to and retained by him, return the certificate to the officer.  
120. Certificate as to work of seamen .―(1) When a sea man is discharged from a ship in India, 
the master shall furnish to the shipping master before whom the discharge is made a report in the 
prescribed form stating — 
(a) the quality of the work of the seaman; or  
(b) whether the seaman has fulfilled his oblig ations under the agreement with the crew; or  
(c) that he declines to express an opinion on those particulars;  
and the shipping master shall, if the seaman so desires, give to him or endorse on his certificate of 
discharge a copy of such report.  
(2) A seam an who is entitled to a certificate of discharge under section 119 may, if he so desires, 
be granted by the master, in lieu of the certificate referred to in sub -section ( 1) of the said section or 
the report referred to in sub -section ( 1) of this section, a continuous discharge certificate specifying 
the period of his service together with an endorsement stating — 
(a) the quality of the work of the seaman; or  
(b) whether the 'seaman has fulfilled his obligations under the agreement with the crew; or  
(c) that he declines to express an opinion on those particulars;  
and the shipping master shall thereupon sign and give such continuous discharge certificate 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) If the master states that he de clines to express an opinion on the particulars mentioned in 
clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), he shall enter in the official log book his 
reasons for so declining.  
121. Discharge and leaving behind of seamen by masters of Indian s hips.―(1) The master of 
an Indian ship shall not — 
(a) discharge a seaman before the expiration of the period for which he was engaged, unless 
the seaman consents to his discharge; or  
(b) except in circumstances beyond his control, leave a seaman or apprent ice behind;  
without the authority of the officer specified in this behalf by the Central Government and the officer 
aforesaid shall certify on the agreement with the crew that he has granted such authority, and also the 
reason, for the seaman being dischar ged or the seaman or apprentice being left behind.  
(2) The officer aforesaid to whom application is made for authority in terms of sub -section ( 1) 
shall investigate the grounds on which the seaman is to be discharged or the seaman or apprentice left 
behind  and may in his discretion grant or refuse to grant such authority : 
Provided that he shall not refuse to grant his authority if he is satisfied that the seaman has 
without reasonable cause — 
(a) failed or refused to join his ship or to proceed to sea therei n; or 
(b) been absent from his ship without leave, either at the commencement or during the 
progress of a voyage for a period of more than forty -eight hours.  65 
 (3) The officer aforesaid shall keep a record of all seamen or apprentices discharged or left behi nd 
with his authority; and whenever any charge is made against a seaman or apprentice under section 
191, the fact that no such authority is so recorded shall be prima facie  evidence that it was not 
granted.  
122. Wages and other property of seaman or appren tice left behind .―(1) If a seaman or 
apprentice is left behind, the master shall enter in the official logbook a statement of the amount due 
to the seaman or apprentice in respect of wages at the time when he was left behind and of all property 
left on board by him, and sh all take such property into his charge.  
(2) Within forty -eight hours after the arrival of the ship at the port in India at which the voyage 
terminates, the master shall deliver to the shipping master — 
(a) a statement of the amount due to the seaman or app rentice in respect of wages, and of all 
property left on board by him; and  
(b) a statement, with full particulars, of any expenses that may have been caused to the master 
or owner of the ship by the absence of the seaman or apprentice, where the absence is  due to a 
contravention by the seaman or apprentice of section 191; and, if required by the shipping master 
to do so shall furnish such vouchers as ar e reasonably required to verify the statements.  
(3) The master shall at the time when he delivers the stat ements referred to in sub -section ( 2) to 
the shipping master also deliver to him the amount due to the seaman or apprentice in respect of 
wages and the property that was left on board by him, and the shipping master shall give to the master 
a receipt there for in the prescribed form.  
(4) The master shall be entitled to be reimbursed out of the wages or property referred to in  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) such expenses shown in the statement referred to in clause ( b) of that                    
sub-section a s appear to the shipping master to be properly chargeable.  
123. Repatriation of seamen or termination of service at foreign port .―(1) When the service 
of a seaman or apprentice terminates without the consent of the said seaman or apprentice at a port 
outside India, and before the expiration of the period for which the seaman was engaged or the 
apprentice was bound, the master or ow ner of the ship shall, in addition to any other relative 
obligation imposed on either of them by this Act, make adequate provision for the maintenance of the 
seaman or apprentice according to his rank or rating, and for the return of that seaman or apprent ice to 
a proper return port.  
(2) If the master or owner fails without reasonable cause to comply with sub -section ( 1), the 
expenses of maintenance and of the journey to the proper return port shall, if defrayed by the seaman 
or apprentice, be recoverable a s wages due to him, and if defrayed by an Indian consular officer, be 
regarded as expenses falling within the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 161.  
Explanation .—Inability to provide the said expenses shall not, for the purposes of this                    
sub-section, be regarded as reasonable cause.  
124. Discharge of seamen on change of ownership .―(1) If an Indian ship is transferred or 
disposed of while she is at or on a voyage to any port outside India, every seaman or apprentice 
belonging to that ship shall be discharged at that port, unless he consents in writing in the presence of 
the Indian c onsular officer to complete the voyage in the ship if continued.  
(2) If a seaman or apprentice is discharged from an Indian ship in terms of sub -section ( 1), the 
provisions of section 123 shall apply as if the service of the seaman or apprentice had termin ated 
without his consent and before the expiration of the period for which the seaman was engaged or the 
apprentice was bound.  
(3) Every seaman or apprentice discharged in terms of sub -section ( 1) shall, if the voyage for 
which he was engaged is not contin ued, be entitled to the wages to which he would have been entitled 
if his Service has been wrongfully terminated by the owner before the expiration of the period for 
which the seaman was engaged or the apprentice was bound.  66 
 Payment of wages  
125. Master to deliver account of wages .―(1) The master of every ship shall, before paying off 
or discharging a seaman under this Act deliver at the time and in the manner provided by this Act a 
full and true account in the form prescribed of the seaman's wages and of nil deductions to be made 
therefrom on any account whatever.  
(2) The said account shall be delivered, either to the seaman himself, at or before the time of his 
leaving the ship, or to the shipping master not less than twenty -four hours before the discharge or 
payment off.  
126. Disrating of seamen .―(1) Where the master of a ship disrates a seaman, he shall forthwith 
enter of cause to be entered in the official log book, a statement of the disrating, and furnish the 
seaman with a copy of the entry; and any reduction of wages consequent on the disrat ing shall not 
take effect until the entry has been so made and the copy so furnished.  
(2) Any reduction of wage's consequent on the disrating of a seaman shall be deemed to be a 
deduction from wages within the meaning of sections 125 and 127.  
127. Deductio ns from wages of seamen .―(1) A deduction from the wages of a seaman shall not 
be allowed unless it is included in the account delivered in pursuance of this Act except in respect of a 
matter happening after such delivery.  
(2) The master shall during the voyage enter the various matters in respect of which the 
deductions are made, with the amount of the respective deductions as they occur, in a book to be kept 
for that purpose, and shall, if required, produce the book at the time of t he payment of wages and also 
upon the  hearing b efore any competent authority of any complaint or question relating to that 
payment.  
128. Payment of wages before shipping master .―(1) Where a seaman is discharged in India 
before a shipping master , the shall receive his wages through, or in the presence of, the shipping 
master unless a competent Court otherwise directs.  
(2) If the master or owner of a home -trade ship of less than tw o hundred tons gross so desires the 
seamen of that ship may receive their wages in the same manner as seamen discharged from a foreign -
going ship, or from a home -trade ship of two hundred tons gross or more.  
129. Time of payment of wages .―(1) The master, o wner or agent of every ship shall pay to 
every seaman his wages within four days after the seaman's discharge, and the seaman shall at the 
time of his discharge be entitled to be paid on account a sum equal to one -fourth part of the balance 
due to him.  
(2) If a master, owner or agent fails without reasonable cause to make payment at that time, he 
shall pay to the seaman such sum not exceeding the amount of two day ‟s pay for each of the days 
commencing from the day of discharge, during which payment is delay ed as the shipping master may 
in each case decide, but the sum so payable shall not exceed ten days' double pay.  
(3) Any sum payable under this section may be recovered as wages.  
130. Settlement of wages .―(1) Where a seaman is discharged and the settlement  of his wages 
completed before a shipping master, the seaman, shall sign in the presence of the shipping master a 
release in the form, prescribed of all claims in respect of the past voyage or engagement, and the 
release shall also be signed by the master,  owner or agent of the ship and attested by the shipping 
master.  
(2) The release so signed and attested shall be retained by the shipping master and shall operate as 
a mutual discharge and settlement of all demands between the parties thereto in respect of  the past 
voyage or engagement but shall not debar a claim, to compensation for personal injury caused by 
accident arising out of and in the course of employment.  67 
 (3) A copy of the release, certified under the hand of the shipping master to be a true copy,  shall 
be given by him to any party thereto requiring the same and such copy shall be receivable in evidence 
upon any question touching such claims, and shall have all the effect of the original of which it 
purports to be a copy.  
(4) No payment, receipt or  settlement of the  wages of a seaman made otherwise than in 
accordance with this Act shall operate or be admitted as evidence of the release or satisfaction of any 
claim in respect of such wages.  
(5) Upon any payment being made by a master before a shippin g master, the shipping master 
shall, if required, sign and give to the master a statement of the whole amount so paid, and the 
statement shall as between the master and his employer, be admissible as evidence that the master has 
made the payments therein m entioned.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub -sections a seaman may except from 
the release signed by him any specified claim or demand against the master or owner of the ship, and 
a note of any claim or demand so excepted shall be entered upon the release; and the release shall not 
operate as a discharge and settlement of any claim or demand so noted, nor shall sub -section ( 4) apply 
to any payment, receipt or settlement made with respect to any such claim or demand . 
1[130A. Certain undisbursed amounts to be utilised for welfare of seamen .―Subject to the 
provisions of section 160 and to such restriction and conditions as may be prescribed any amount 
deposited with or recovered by the shipping master for making payment in accordance wi th the 
allotment note made by a seaman or for being paid to a seaman or his nominee may, if such amount 
remains unclaimed with the shipping master for a period of not less than six years be utilised for the 
welfare of seamen in such manner as the Central G overnment may direct.]   
131. Master to give facilities to seaman for remitting wages .―Where a seaman expresses to 
the master of the ship his desire to have facilities afforded to him for remitting any part of the balance 
of the wages due to him to a savings bank or to a near relative, the master shall give to the seaman all 
reasonable faci lities for so doing so far as regards so much of the balance as is within the limits, if 
any, specified  in this behalf by the Central Government, but shall be under no obligation to give those 
facilities while the ship is in port if the sum will become pay able before the ship leaves port or 
otherwise than conditionally on the seaman going to sea in the ship.  
 132. Decision of questions by shipping masters .―(1) Where under the agreement with the 
crew any dispute arises at any port in India between the master, owner or agent of a ship and any of 
the crew of the ship, it shall be submitted to the shipping master, ― 
2[(a) where the amount in dispute is up to fiv e lakh rupees or such higher amount not 
exceeding ten lakh rupees, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, at the 
instance of either party to the dispute;]  
(b) in any other case, if both parties to the dispute agree in writing to submit th e dispute to the 
shipping master.  
3[(1A) Any complaint of dispute received by the shipping master from an Indian seaman, on a 
vessel registered in a country other than India, in Indian territorial waters, wi th the master, owner or 
agent. ] 
(2) The shipping master shall hear and decide the dispute so submitted and an award made by him 
upon the submission shall be conclusive as to the rights of the parties, and any document purporting to 
be such submission or award shall be prima facie  evidence thereof.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f.15 -7-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 12, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 1998, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -9-1997).  68 
 (3) An  award made by a shipping master under this section may be enforced by  1[a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be,] in the same manner as 
an order for the payment of wages made by such Magistrate under this Act. 
(4) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940  (10 of 1940) , shall apply to any matter submitted to a 
shipping master for decision under this section.  
 133. Power of shipping master to require production of ship's papers .―In any proceedings 
under this Act b efore a shipping master relating to the wages, claims or discharge of a seaman, the 
shipping master may require the owner, master or agent or any mate or other member of the crew to 
produce any logbooks, papers, or other documents in his possession or powe r relating to any matter in 
question in the proceedings, and may require the attendance of and examine any of those persons 
being then at or near the place on the matter . 
134. Rule as to payment to seamen in foreign currency .―Where a seaman or apprentice has 
agreed with the master of a ship for payment of his wages in Indian or other currency, any payment 
of, or on account of, his wages, if made in any currency other than that stated in the agreement , shall, 
notwithstanding a nything in the agreement, be made at the rate of exchange for the time being current 
at the place where the payment is made.  
Advance and allotment of wages  
135. Advance of wages .―(1) Any agreement with the crew may contain a stipulation for 
payment to a se aman, conditional on his going to sea in pursuance of the agreement of a sum not 
exceeding the amount of one month's wages payable to the seaman under the agreement.  
(2) Save as aforesaid, an agreement by or on behalf of the employer of a seaman for the pa yment 
of money to or on behalf of the seaman, conditional on his going to sea from any port in India shall be 
void, and no money paid in satisfaction or in respect of any such agreement shall be deducted from 
the seaman ‟s wages, and no person shall have an y right of action, suit or set -off against the seaman or 
his assignee in respect of any money so paid or purporting to have been so paid.  
(3) No seaman, who has been lawfully engaged and has received under his agreement an advance 
payment, wilfully or thro ugh misconduct shall fail to attend his ship or desert there from before the 
payment becomes really due to him.  
(4) Where it is shown to the satisfaction of a shipping master that a seaman lawfully engaged has 
willfully or through misconduct failed to atte nd his ship, the shipping master shall report the matter to 
the Director -General who may direct that any of the seaman's certificates of discharge referred to in 
sections 119 and 120 shall be withheld for such period as he may think fit; and while a seaman 's 
certificate of discharge is so withheld, the Director -General or any other person having the custody of 
the necessary documents may, notwithstanding anything in this Act, refuse to furnish copies of any 
such certific ate or certified extracts there from.  
136. Allotment notes respecting seaman's wages .―(1) A seaman may require that a stipulation 
be inserted in the agreement for the allotment, by means of an allotment  note, of any part (not 
exceeding three -fourths) of the amount of the monthly wages payable to him in favour of any such 
member of his family or any such relative or for any such purpose approved in this behalf by the 
Central Government by general or special order, as may be specified in the note.  
(2) Every shipping master or other officer before  whom the seaman is engaged shall, after the 
seaman has signed the agreement, inquire from the seaman whether he requires such a stipulation for 
the allotment of his wages by means of an allotment note.  
(3) Whenever a seaman requires such a stipulation, th e stipulation shall be inserted in the 
agreement of the crew, and such stipulation shall be deemed to have been agreed to by the master.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and Sch., for “a magistrate” (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  69 
 (4) An allotment note shall be in the prescribed form and shall be signed by the owner, master or 
agent of the ship and  by the seaman.  
137. Commencement and payment of sums allotted .―(1) A payment under an allotment note 
shall begin at the expiry of  1[one month from the date on which the seaman's right to wages begins] 
and shall be made at the expiration of every subsequent month after the first month and shall be made 
only in respect  of the wages earned before the date of payment.  
(2) The owner, master or agent who has authorised the drawing of an allotment note shall pay to 
the shipping master on demand the sums due under the note, and, if he fails to do so, the shipping 
master may s ue for and recover the same with costs : 
Provided that no such sum shall be recoverable if it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court trying 
the case that the seaman has forfeited or ceased to be entitled to the wages out of which the allotment 
was to hav e been paid but the seaman shall be presumed to be duly earning his wages unless the 
contrary is shown to the satisfaction of the Court either by the official statement of the change in the 
crew caused by his absence made and signed by the master as by thi s Act is required or by a certified 
copy of some entry in the official logbook to the effect that he has died or left the ship, or by a 
credible letter from the master of the ship to the same effect, or by such other evidence of whatever 
description, as th e Court may consider sufficient.  
(3) The shipping master on receiving any such sum as aforesaid shall pay it over to the person 
named in that behalf in the allotment note.  
(4) All such receipts and payments shall be entered in a book to be kept for the pur pose, and all 
entries in the said book shall be authenticated by the signature of the shipping master.  
(5) The said book shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the parties concerned.  
Rights of seamen in respect of wages  
138. Right to wa ges and provisions .―A seaman's right to wages and provisions shall be taken to 
being either at the time at which he commences work or at the time specified in the agreement for his 
commencement of work or presence on board, whichever first happens.  
2[138A.  Working hours of seamen .―The ordinary hours of work for all seamen shall not excee d 
forty -eight hours in a week. ] 
 139. Right to recover wages and salvage not to be forfeited .―(1) A seaman shall not by any 
agreement forfeit his lien on the ship or be depr ived of any remedy for the recovery of his wages to 
which, in the absence of the agreement, he would be entitled, and shall not by any agreement abandon 
his right to wages in case of loss of the ship or abandon any right that he may have or obtain in the 
nature of salvage, and every stipulation in any agreement inconsistent with any provisions of this Act 
shall be void.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to a stipulation made by the seamen belonging to any ship 
which according to the terms of the agree ment is to be employed on salvage service with respect to 
the remuneration to be paid to them for salvage service to be rendered by that ship to  any other ship.  
140. Wages not to depend on freight .―(1) The right to wages shall not depend on the earning of 
freight, and every seaman and apprentice who would be entitled to demand and recover any wages if 
the ship in which he has served had earned freight, shall, subject to all other rules of law and 
conditions applicable to the case, be entitled to demand and recover the same notwithstanding that 
freight has not been earned, but in all cases of wreck or loss of the ship, proof that the seaman has not 
exerted himself to the utmost to save the ship, cargo and stores shall bar his claim to wages.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 10, for “one month from the date of the agreement” (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 19 98, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -9-1997).  70 
 (2) Where a seama n or apprentice who would but for death be entitled by virtue of this section to 
demand and recover any wages dies before the wages are paid, they shall be paid and applied in 
manner provided by this Act with respect to the wages of a seaman who dies durin g a voyage.  
141. Wages on termination of service by wreck, illness, etc .―(1) Where the service of any 
seaman engaged under this Act terminates before the date contemplated in the agreement by reason of 
the wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship or by reason of his being left on shore at any place outside 
India under a certific ate granted under this Act of his unfitness or inability to proceed on the voyage 
the seam an shall be entitled to receive―  
(a) in the case of wreck, loss or abandonment of the ship ― 
(i) wages at the rate to which he was entitled at the date of termination of his service for 
the period from the date his service is so terminated until he is returned to and arrives at a 
proper return port;  
Provided that the period for which he shall be entitled to receive wages shall be not less 
than one month; and  
(ii) compen sation for the loss of his effects ― 
(a) in the case of a seaman employed on a home -trade ship, of not less than one 
month ‟s wages; and  
(b) in the case of a seaman employed on a foreign -going ship, of not less than three 
month ‟s wages;  
(b) in the case of unfitness or inability to proceed on  the voyage, wages for the period from 
the date his service is terminated until he is returned to and arrives at a proper return port.  
(2) A seaman shall not be entitled to receive wages under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of                  
sub-section ( 1) in respect of any period during which ― 
(a) he was, or could have been, suitably employed; or  
(b) through negligence he failed to apply to the proper authority for relief as a distressed or 
destitute seaman.  
(3) Any amount payable by way of compensation under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 1) shall be deposited with the shipping master at the port of engagement in India for payment 
to the seaman, or, in the case of a deceased seaman,1[to the person nominated by him in this behalf 
under section 159A or if he has not made any such  nomination or the nomination made by him is or 
has become void, to his legal heirs.]  
 142. Wages not to accrue during absence without leave, refusal to work or 
imprisonment .―(1) A seaman or apprentice shall not be entitled to wages — 
(a) for any period during which he is absent without leave from his ship or from his duty; or  
(b) for any period during which he unlawfully refuses or neglects to work when required; or  
(c) unles s the court hearing the case otherwise directs, for any period during which he is 
lawfully imprisoned.  
(2) A seaman or apprentice shall not be disentitled to claim wages for any period during which he 
has not performed his duty if he proves that he was inc apable of doing so by reason of illness, hurt or 
injury, unless it be proved that — 
(a) his illness, hurt or injury was caused by his own willful act or default or his own                   
misbehavior ; or 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 41of 1984,  s. 11, for “to his legal  heirs ” (w.e.f. 15-7-1985). 
 71 
 (b) his illness was contracted or his hurt or injur y was sustained at a proper return port and 
was not attributable to his employment; or  
(c) he has unreasonably refused to undergo medical or surgical treatment for his illness, hurt 
or injury involving no appreciable risk to his life.  
143. Compensation to seamen for premature discharge .―(1) If a seaman having signed an 
agreement is discharged, otherwise than in accordance with the terms thereof, without fault on his part 
justifying the discharge and without his consent, he shall be entitled to receive from the master, owner 
or agent, in addition to any wages he may have earned, as due compensation for the damage caused to 
him by the discharge, such sum as the shipping master may fix having regard to the circumstances 
relating to the discharge:  
Provided that the compensation so payable sha ll not exceed — 
(a) in the case of a seaman who has been discharged before the commencement of a voyage, 
one month's wages; and  
(b) in the case of a seaman who has been discharged after the commencement of a voyage, 
three months' wages.  
(2) Any compensatio n payable under this se ction may be recovered as wages.  
144. Restriction on sale of and charge upon wages .―(1) As respects wages due or accruing to a 
seaman or apprentice — 
(a) they shall not be subject to attachment by order of any court;  
(b) an assignment  thereof made prior to the accruing thereof shall not bind the person making 
the same;  
(c) a power of attorney or authority for the receipt thereof shall not be irrevocable;  
(d) a payment of wages to a seaman or apprentice shall be valid in law notwithstan ding any 
previous assignment of those wages or any attachment thereof or encumbrance thereon.  
(2) The provisions of clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to so much of the 
wages of a seaman as have been or are hereafter assigned by way of contribution to any fund or 
scheme approved in this behalf by the Central Government, the main purpose of which is the 
provision for seamen of health or social insurance benefits and the provisions of clauses  (a) and ( d) of 
sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to anything done or to be done for giving effect to such an assignment.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force with respect to allotment notes.  
Mode of recovering wages  
145. Summary proceedings for wages .―(1) A seaman or apprentice or a person duly authorised 
on his behalf may, as soon as any wages due to him become payable, apply to  1[any Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be,] exer cising 
jurisdiction in or near the place at which his service has terminated or at which he has been discharged 
or at which any person upon whom the claim is made is or resides, and  2[such Magistrate] shall try the 
case in a summary way and the order made by 2[such Magistrate] in the matter shall be final.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may also be made by any officer authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf by general or special order.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and Sch edule,  for “any magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17  and Schedule,  ibid., for “the magistrate ” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  72 
 146. Restrictions on suits for wages .―A proceeding for the recovery of wages due to a seaman 
or apprentice shall not be instituted by or on behalf of any seaman or apprentice in any civil court 
except where ― 
(a) the owner of the ship has been declared insolvent;  
(b) the ship is under arrest o r sold by the authority of any Court;  
(c) 1[a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate as the case may be,] 
refers a claim to the Court.  
147. Wages not recoverable outside India in certain cases .―Where a seaman is engaged for a 
voyage which is to terminate in India, he shall not be entitled to sue in any court outside India for 
wages unless he is discharged with such sanction as is required by this Act, and with the written 
consent of the master, or proves such ill -usage on the pa rt, or by the authority, of the master, as to 
warrant a reasonable apprehension of danger to his life if he were to remain on board.  
148. Remedies of master for wages, disbursements, etc .―(1) The master of a ship shall, so far 
as the case permits, have the same rights, liens and remedies for the recovery of his wages as a 
seaman has under this Act or by any law or custom.  
(2) The master of a ship and every person lawfully acting as a maste r of a ship by reason of the 
decease or incapacity from illness, of the master of the ship shall, so far as the case permits, have the 
same rights, liens and remedies for the recovery of disbursements or liabilities properly made or 
incurred by him on acco unt of the ship as a master has for recovery of his wages.  
(3) If in any proceeding in any court touching the claim of a master in respect of such wages, 
disbursements or liabilities any set -off is claimed or any counter -claim is made, the court may enter 
into, and adjudicate upon, all questions and settle all accounts then arising or outstanding and 
unsettled between the parties to the proceeding and may direct payment of any balance found to be 
due. 
Power of courts to rescind contracts  
149. Power of Court  to rescind contract between master, owner or agent and seaman or 
apprentice .―Where a proceeding is instituted in any court in relation to any dispute between master, 
owner or agent of a ship and a seaman or apprentice, arising out of or incidental to their relation as 
such, or instituted for the purpose of this section, the court,  if having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case, it thinks it, just to do so, may rescind any contract between the master, owner or agent and 
the seaman or apprentice, upon such terms as the court may think just, and this power shall be in 
addition to any other jurisdiction which the court can exercise independently of this section.  
Disputes between seamen and employers  
150. Power to refer disputes between seamen and their employers to tribunals .―(1) Where 
the Central Government is of opinion that any dispute between seamen or any class of seamen or of 
any union of seamen and the owners of ships in which such seamen are employed or are likely to be 
employed and exists or is apprehended and such di spute relates to any matter connected with or 
incidental to the employment of the seamen, the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute a tribunal consisting of one or more persons, and refer the dispute to the 
tribunal fo r adjudication.  
(2) The tribunal so constituted shall have power to regulate its own procedure and shall have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , when 
trying a suit in respect of the following  matters: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Sch edule , for the words “a magistrate ” (w.e.f. 19 -5-1983).  
 73 
 (b) compelling the production of documents;  
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
(d) any other  matter which may be prescribed,  
and any proceeding before t he tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(3) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any 
proceeding before the tri bunal except with the consent of the other part y or parties to the proceeding 
and with the leave of the tribunal.  
(4) The tribunal shall dispose of the reference expeditiously and shall, as soon as practicable on 
the conclusion of the proceedings, submit i ts award to the Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of the award  the Central Government shall cause it to be published and the award 
shall become enforceable on the expiry of thirty days fr om the date of such publication:  
Provided that where the Central Gov ernment is of opinion that it will be inexpedient on public 
grounds to give effect to the award or any part of it, it may before the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days by order in the Official Gazette either reject the award or modify it , and where t he Central 
Government do es so, the award shall not become enforceable or shall become enforceable subject to 
the modifications, as the case may be.  
(6) An award which has become enforceable under this section shall be binding on — 
(a) all parties to the dis pute;  
(b) where any party to the dispute is the owner of the ship, his heirs, successors, or assigns.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in the award, an award shall remain in operation for a period of 
one year from the date on which it becomes enforceable and  shall thereafter continue to remain in 
operation until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which notice is given by any 
party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its intention to terminate the award.  
(8) Any money d ue to a seaman from the owner of a ship under an award may be recovered as 
wages.  
(9) Nothing contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , shall apply to any dispute 
between seamen or any class of seamen or any union of seamen and the owner s of ships in which such 
seamen are employed or are likely to be employed.  
151. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged during pendency of proceedings before 
tribunal .―During the pendency of proceedings under section 150 — 
(a) no seamen or class of seamen or union of seamen shall go or remain on strike or otherwise 
act in a manner prejudicial to the normal operation of the ships in which the seamen are employed 
or are li kely to be employed; and  
(b) no owner of a ship shall — 
(i) alter to the prejudice of the seamen concerned in the dispute, the conditions of service 
applicable to them immediately before the commencement of such proceedings; or  
(ii) discharge or punish any seaman in respect of any matter connected with the dispute . 
Property of deceased seamen and apprentices  
152. Master to take charge of the effects of deceased seamen .—(1) If any seaman or apprentice 
engaged on any ship, the voyage of which is to terminate i n India, dies during that voyage, the master 
of the ship shall report the death to the next -of-kin of the seaman or apprentice and to the shipping 
master at his port of engagement and shall take charge of any money or effects belonging to the 
seaman or app rentice which are on board the ship.  74 
 (2) The master shall thereupon enter in the official log book the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) a statement of the amount of money and a detailed description of the other effects;  
(b) a statement of the sum due to  the deceased for wages and of the amount of deduction, if 
any, to be made from the wages.  
(3) The said money, balance of wages and other effects are in this Act referred to as the property 
of the seaman or apprentice.  
153. Dealing with and account of prop erty of seamen who die during voyage .―(1) If any 
seaman or apprentice engaged on any ship, the voyage of which is to terminate in India, dies during 
that voyage and the ship before coming to a port in India touches and remains for forty -eight hours at 
some port elsewhere, the master shall rep ort the case to the Indian consular officer at such port and 
shall give to the officer any information he requires as to the destination of the ship and probable 
length of the voyage.  
(2) The Indian consular officer may, if he thinks it expedient, require the property of the seaman 
or apprentice to be delivered and paid to him and shall thereupon giv e to the master a receipt there for 
and endorse under his hand upon the agreement with the crew such particulars with respect thereto as 
the Central Government m ay require.  
(3) The receipt shall be produced by the master to the shipping master within forty -eight hours 
after his arrival at his port of destination in India.  
(4) Where a seaman or apprentice dies as aforesaid and the ship proceeds at once to a port in  India 
without touching and remaining as aforesaid at a port elsewhere or the Indian consular officer does 
not require the delivery and payment of the property  as aforesaid, the master shall  within forty -eight 
hours after his arrival at his port of destina tion in India, pay and deliver the property to t he shipping 
master at that port.  
(5) A deduction claimed by the master in such account shall not be allowed unless vertified by an 
entry in the Official log book, and also by such other vouchers, if any, as m ay be reasonably required 
by the shipping master.  
(6) A shipping master in India shall grant to a master upon due compliance with such provisions 
of this section as relate to acts to be done at the port of destination a certificate to that effect.  
154. Mas ter to pay and deliver property of deceased seamen .―(1) If the master of a ship fails 
to comply with the provisions of this Act with respect to taking charge of the property of the deceased 
seaman or apprentice, or to making in the official log book the pr oper entries relating thereto, or to the 
payment or delivery of such property, he shall be accountable for such property to the ship ping master 
as aforesaid, and shall pay and deliver the same accordingly.  
(2) The property may be recovered in the same Cour t and manner in which the wages of seamen 
may be recovered under this Act.  
155. Property of deceased seaman left abroad but not on board ship .―If any seaman or 
apprentice on an Indian ship, or engaged in India on any other ship, the voyage of which is to 
terminate in India, dies at any place outside India leaving any money or effects not on board the ship, 
the Indian consular officer at or near the place shall claim and take charge of such money and other 
effects (hereinafter referred to as the property of a deceased seaman or apprentice).  
156. Dealing with property of deceased seamen .―(1) An Indian consular officer or a shipping 
master to whom t he effects of a deceased seaman or apprentice are delivered or who takes charge of 
such effects under this Act may, if he thinks fit, sell the effects, and the proceeds of any such sale 
shall be deemed to form part, of the property of the deceased seaman o r apprentice.  
(2) Before selling any valuables comprised in the said effects, such officer of shipping master 
shall endeavour to ascertain the wishes of the next -of-kin of the deceased seaman or apprentice as to 
the disposal of such valuables and shall, if  practicable and lawful, comply with such wishes.  75 
 (3) An Indian consular officer to whom any property of a deceased seaman or apprentice is 
delivered or who takes charge of any such property under this Act shall remit the property to the 
shipping master at  the port of engagement of the deceased seaman or apprentice in such manner and 
shall render such accounts in respect thereof as may be prescribed.  
157. Recovery of wages, etc., of seamen lost with their ship .―(1) Where a seaman or 
apprentice is lost with the ship to which he belongs, the Central Government or such officer as the 
Central Govern ment may appoint in this behalf  may recover the wages and the compensation due to 
him from the owner, master or agent o f the ship in the same Court and in the same manner in which 
seamen's wages are recoverable, and shall deal with those wages in the same manner as with the 
wages and compensation due to other deceased seamen or apprentices under this Act.  
(2) In any procee dings for the recovery of the wages and compensation, if it is shown by some 
official records or by other evidence that the ship has, twelve months or upwards before the institution 
of the proceeding, left any port, she shall, unless it is shown that she h as been heard of within twelve 
months after the departure be deemed to have been lost with all hands on board either immediately 
after the time she was last heard of or at such later time as the Court hearing the case may think 
probable.  
158. Property of s eamen dying in India .―If a seaman or apprentice dies in India and is at the 
time of his death entitled to claim from the master or owner of the ship in which he has served any 
effects or unpaid wages, the master, owner or agent shall pay and deliver or account for such propert y 
to the shipping master at the port where the seaman or apprentice was discharged or was to have been 
discharged or to such other officer as the Central Government may direct.  
159. Payment over of property of deceased seamen by shipping master .―Where any property 
of a deceased seaman or apprentice is paid or delivered to a shipping master, the shipping master, 
after deducting for expenses incurred in respect of that seaman or apprentice or of his property  1[such 
sums as he thinks proper to allow, shall pay  and deliver the residue to the person nominated by the 
seaman or apprentice in this behalf under section 159A and if he has not made any such nomination or 
the nomination made by him is or has become void, the shipping master may ―] 
(a) pay and deliver the residue to any claimants who can prove themselves to the satisfaction 
of the said shipping master to be entitled thereto, and the said shipping master shall be thereby 
discharged from all further liability in respect of the resid ue so paid or delivered; or  
(b) if he thinks fit so to do, require probate or letters of administration or a certificate under 
the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925)  2[or a certificate under s ection 29 of the 
Administrators -General Act, 1963  (45 of 1 963)], to be taken out, and thereupon pay and deliver 
the residue to the legal representatives of the deceased.  
3[159A. Nomination .―(1) A seaman may, for the purposes of sub -section ( 3) of section 141 and 
clause ( b) of section 159 and an apprentice may, for the purposes of clause ( b) of section 159, 
nominate any person or persons:  
Provided that if the seaman or the apprentice has a fa mily, he may nominate for the purposes 
aforesaid any one or more members of his family only and if a seaman or an apprentice acquires a 
family after he has made any such nomination, the nomination shall become void.  
(2) The form in which any nomination may  be made under  sub-section ( 1), the cancellation or 
variation of any such nomination (including the making of a fresh nomination) and all other matters 
connected with such nominations shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
160. Disposal of unclaimed property  of deceased seamen .―(1) Where no claim to the property 
of a deceased seamen or apprentice received by a shipping master is substantiated within one year 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s.12, for “such sums as he thinks proper to allow , may―” (w.e.f.15 -7-1985).   
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  76 
 from the receipt thereof by such shipping master, the shipping master shall cause such property to be 
sold and pay the proceeds of the sale into the public account of India.  
(2) If, after the proceeds of the sale having been so paid, any claim is made thereto, then , if the 
claim is established to the satisfaction of the shipping master, the amount or so mu ch thereof as shall 
appear to him to be due to the claimant, shall be paid to him, and if the claim is not so established, the 
claimant may appl y by petition to the High Court,  and such Court, after taking evidence either orally 
or on affidavit, shall make  such order on the petition as shall seem just:  
Provided that, after the expiration of six years from the receipt of such property by the shipping 
master, no claim to such property shall be entertained without the sanction of the Central Government.  
1[Prov ided further that if, before the expiration of six years after the proceeds of the sale have 
been so paid, no claim is made thereto the amount or any part thereof may be utilised for the welfare 
of seamen in such manner as the Central Government may direct .] 
Distressed seamen  
161. Relief and maintenance of distressed seamen .―(1) The Indian consular officer at or near 
the place where a seaman is in distress shall, on application being made to him by the distressed 
seaman, provide in accordance with the rules  made under this Act for the return of that seaman to a 
proper return port, and also for the said seaman's necessary clothing and maintenance until his arrival 
at such port.  
(2) A distressed seaman shall not have any right to be maintained or sent to a pro per return port 
except to the extent and on the conditions provided for in the rules.  
(3) All repatriation expenses, other than excepted expenses, incurred by or on behalf of the 
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall consti tute a debt due to the 
Central Government for which the owne r or agent of the ship to which  the seaman in respect of whom 
they were incurred belonged at the time of his discharge or other event which resulted in his becoming 
distressed seaman shall be liab le; and the owner or agent shall not be entitled to recover from the 
seaman any amount paid by him to the Central Government in settlement or part settlement of such 
debt.  
(4) All excepted expenses incurred by or on behalf of the Central Government in acco rdance with 
the provisions of this Act shall constitute a debt due to the Central Government for which the seaman 
in respect of whom they were incurred and the owner o r agent o r the ship to which that seaman 
belonged at the time of his discharge o r other e vent which resulted in his becoming a distressed 
seaman shall be jointly and severally liable;  and the owner or agent shall be entitled to recover from 
the seaman any amount paid by him to the Central Government in settlement or part settlement of 
such deb t, and may apply to the satisfaction of his claim so much as may be necessary of any wages 
due to the seaman.  
(5) All excepted expenses incurred in accordance with the provisions of this Act in respect of any 
distressed seaman by the owner or agent of the ship to which he belonged at the time of his discharge 
or other event which resulted in his becoming a distressed seaman shall constitute a debt due to the 
owner or agent for which the seaman shall be liable; and the owner or agent may apply to the 
satisfa ction of his claim so much as may be necessary of any wages due to the seaman; but he shall 
not be entitled to recover from the seaman any repatriation expenses other than excepted expenses.  
(6) In any proceedings for the recovery of any expenses which in terms of sub -section ( 3) or sub -
section ( 4) are a debt due to the Central Government, the production of an y account of the expenses 
and proof of payment thereof by or on behalf of or under the direction of the Central Government 
shall be prima facie  eviden ce that the expenses were incurred in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act by or on behalf of the Central Government.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  77 
 (7) Any debt which may be due to the Central Government under this section may be recovered 
by any officer authorised by it in writi ng in this behalf from the person concerned in the same manner 
as wages arc recoverable under section 145.  
162. Mode of providing for return of seamen to proper return port .―(1) A seaman may be 
sent to a proper return port by any reasonable route either by sea or land or if necessary by air or 
partly by any one and partly by any other of these modes.  
(2) Provision s shall be made for the return of the seaman as to the whole of  the route if it is by sea 
or as to any part of the route which is by sea by placing the seaman on board an Indian ship which is 
in want of men to make up its complement, or, if that is not practicable, by providing the seaman with 
a passage in any ship, I ndian or foreign, or with the money for his passage and, as to any part of the 
route which is by land or air, by paying the expenses of his journey and of his maintenance during the 
journey or providing him w ith means to pay those expenses.  
(3) Where the m aster of a ship is required under this Part to provide for the return of a discharged 
seaman to a proper return port, the master may, instead of providing the seaman's passage or the 
expenses of his journey or of providing the seaman with means to pay his passage or those expenses, 
deposit with the proper officer such sum as that officer considers sufficient to defray the expenses of 
the return of the seaman to a proper return port.  
163. Receiving distressed seamen on ships .―(1) The master of an Indian ship shall receive on 
board his ship and afford passage and maintenance to all distressed seamen whom he is required by 
the Indian consular officer to take on board his ship, and shall during the passage provide every such 
distressed seaman with accommodation equal to that normally provided for the crew of the ship and 
subsistence, proper to the rank or rating of the said distressed seaman.  
(2) The master of a ship shall not be required to receive on board his ship a distressed seaman in 
terms of this section, if the Indian consular officer is satisfied that accommodation is not and cannot 
be made available for such seaman.  
164. Provisions as to taking distressed seamen on ships .―(1) Where a distressed seaman is for 
the purpose of his return to a proper return port placed on board an Indian ship, the Indian consular 
officer by whom the seaman is so placed shall endorse on the agreement with the crew of the ship 
particulars of the seaman so placed on board.  
(2) On the production of a certificate signed by the Indian consular officer by whose directions 
any such distressed seamen were received on board, specifying the number and names of the 
distressed seamen and the time when each o f them was received on board, and on a declaration made 
by the master stating the number of days during which each distressed seaman has received 
subsistence and stating the full complement of his crew and the actual number of seamen employed 
on board his ship and every variation in that number, whilst the distressed seamen received 
maintenance, the master shall be entitled to be paid in respect of the subsistence and passage of every 
seaman so conveyed and provided for by him, exceeding the number, if any,  wanted to make up the 
complement of his crew, such sum for each day as the Central Government may by rules made in this 
behalf allow.  
165. What shall be evidence of distress .―In any proceeding under this Part a certificate of the 
Central Government or of such officer as the Central Government may specify in this behalf to the 
effect that any seaman named therein is distressed shall be conclusive evidence that such seaman is 
distressed within the meaning of this Act.  
166. Indian consular office r to decide return port to which or route by which seaman is to be 
sent.―If any question arises as to what return port a seaman is to be sent in any case or as to the route 
by which he sho uld be sent, that question shall be decided by the Indian consular officer concerned, 
and in deciding an y question under this provision  the Indian consular officer shall have regard both to 
the convenience of the seaman and to the expense involved, and als o, where that is the case, to the fact 
that an Indian ship which is in want of men to make up its co mplement is about to proceed to a proper 
return port.  78 
  
167. Power to make rules with respect to distressed seamen .―The Cen tral Government may 
make rules with respect to the relief, maintenance and return to a proper return port of seamen found 
in distress in any place out of India and with respec t to the circumstances in which  and the conditions 
subject to which, seam en may be relieved and provided with passages under this Part, and generally to 
carry out the provisions of this Part relating to distressed seamen.  
Provisions, health and accommodation  
168. Ships to have sufficient provisions and water .―(1) All Indian shi ps and all ships upon 
which seamen have been engaged shall have on board sufficient provisions and water of good quality 
and fit for the use of the crew on the scale specified in the agreement with the crew.  
(2) If any person making an inspection under sec tion 176 finds the provisions or water to be of 
bad quality and unfit for use or deficient in quantity, he shall signify it in writing to the master of the 
ship and may, if he thinks fit, detain the ship until the defects are remedied to his satisfaction.  
(3) The master shall not use any provisions or water so signified to be of bad quality and shall in 
lieu of such provisions or water, provide other proper provisions or water and he shall, if the 
provisions or water be signified to be deficient in quantity , procure the requisite quantity o f any 
provisions or water to cov er the deficiency.  
(4) The person making the inspection shall enter a statement of the result of the inspection in the 
official log book, and shall, if he is not the shipping master, send a report thereof to the shipping 
master and that report shall be admissible in evidence in any legal proceeding.  
(5) If the inspection was made in pursuance of a request by the members of the crew and the 
person making the inspection certifies in the stateme nt of the result of the inspection that the 
complaint was false and either frivolous or vexatious, every member of the crew who made the 
request shall be liable to forfeit to the owner out of his wages a sum  not exceeding one week‟s wages.  
(6) The master o f the ship and any other person having charge of any provisions or water liable to 
inspection under this section shall give the person making the inspection every reasonable facility for 
the purpose.  
1[(7) The master of the ship or any person having charge  over the ship shall maintain such 
standards, in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, for the quantity and 
quality of food and drinking water, and the catering standards applicable to food provided to the 
seamen on ships, as ma y be prescribed.  
(8) The master of the ship or any person having charge over the ship shall undertake educational 
activities to promote awareness and implementation of the standards referred to in sub -section ( 7).] 
169. Allowances for short or bad provisio ns.―(1) In either of the following cases, that is to 
say,― 
(a) if during the voyage the allowance of any of the provisions for which a seaman has by his 
agreement stipulated is reduced, or  
(b) if it is shown that any of those provisions are or have during the  voyage been bad in 
quality or unfit for use,  
the seaman shall receive by way of compensation for that reduction or bad quality according to the 
time of its continuance, sums in accordance with such scale as may be prescribed, to be paid to him in 
additio n to, and to be recoverable as, wages.  
(2) If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court before which the case is tried that any provisions, 
the allowance of which has been reduced, could not be procured or supplied in proper quantities, and 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  79 
 that proper and equivalent substitutes were supp lied in lieu thereof, the court  shall take those 
circumstances into consideration in making an order.  
170. Foreign going Indian ship to carry duly certificated cook .―(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Governme nt may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify, every                
foreign -going Indian ship of such tonnage as may be prescribed shall be provided with, and shall 
carry, a cook duly certificated under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may m ake rules specifying the qualifications, experience or sea 
service which may be required from persons who wish to obtain certificates of competency as cooks 
under this Act, and the conditions under which any such certificate may be granted, cancelled or 
suspended.  
171. Weights and measures on board .―The master of a ship shall keep on board proper 
weights and measures for determining the quantities of the several provisions and articles served out 
and shall allow the same to be used at the time of serving ou t the provisions and articles in the 
presence of witnesses whenever any dispute arises about the quantities.  
172. Beddings, towels, medicines, medical stores, etc., to be provided and kept on board 
certain ships .―(1) The owner of every ship of over five hu ndred tons gross shall supply or cause, to 
be supplied to every seaman for his personal use, bedding, towels, mess utensils and other articles 
according, to such scale as may be prescribed;  and different scales may be prescribed in respect of 
different cla sses of ships.  
(2) All foreign -going Indian ships and all home -trade ships of two hundred tons gross or more 
shall have always on board a sufficient supply of medicines, medical stores, appliances and first aid 
equipment suitable for diseases and accidents  likely to occur on voyages according to such scale as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the port health officer or such other person as the Central Government 
may appoint in this behalf to inspect the medicines, medical stores and appliances with which a ship is 
required to be provided.  
173. Certain ships to carry medical officer .―1[(1) Every foreign -going ship carrying ― 
(a) more than the prescribed number of persons (including the crew), shall have on board as 
part of her complement a medical officer possessing such qualifications; and  
(b) less than the prescribed number of person s shall have such medical facilities,  
as may be prescribed, in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention.]  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to 2[a special trade passenger ship] or a pilgrim ship.  
 174. Expenses of medical atte ndance in case of illness .―(1) If the master of an Indian ship, or 
a seaman or apprentice, receives any hurt or injury or suffers from any illness (not being a hurt, injur y 
or illness due to his own wil ful act or default or to his own misbehaviour), resulting in his being 
discharge d or left behind at a place other than his proper return port, the expenses of providing the 
necessary surgical kind medical advice, attendance and treatment and medicine, and also the expenses 
of the maintenance of the master, seaman or apprentice until h e is cured, or dies, or is brought back to 
the port from which he was shipped or other port agreed upon after receiving the necessary medical 
treatment and of his conveyance to that port, and, in case of death, the expenses, if any, of his burial 
or, crema tion shall be defrayed by the owner of the ship without any deduction on that account from 
his wages.  
(2) If the master, seaman or apprentice is on account of any illness or injury temporarily removed 
from his ship, at a port other than his proper return, port, for the purpose of preventing infection, or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 14, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
2. Subs. by Act  69 of 1976, s. 2, for “an unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  80 
 otherwise for the convenience of the ship, and subsequently returns to his duty, the expenses of 
removal and of providing the necessary surgical and medical advice, attendance and treatment and 
medicine and  of his maintenance while away from the ship, shall be defrayed in like manner.  
(3) The expenses of all medicines, and surgical and medical advice, attendance and treatment, 
given to a master, seaman or apprentice while on board his ship, shall be defrayed  in like manner.  
(4) In all other cases any reasonable expenses duly incurred by the owner for any master, seaman 
or apprentice in respect of illness, shall, if proved to the satisfaction of the Indian consular officer or a 
shipping master, be deducted fro m the wages of the master, seaman or apprentice.  
(5) Where any expenses referred to in this section have been paid by the master, seaman or 
apprentice himself, the same may be recovered as if they were wages duly earned, and , if any such 
expenses are, paid  by the Government, the amount shall be a charge upon the ship and may be 
recovered with full costs of suit by the Central Government.  
175. Accommodation for seaman .―(1) The Central Government may, subject to the conditio n 
of previous publication, make  rules with respect to the crew accommodation to be provided in ships of 
any class specified in the rules.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of t he foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the minimum space for each person which must be provided in any ship to which the rules 
apply by way of sleeping accommodation for seamen and apprentices and t he maximum number 
of persons by whom any specified part of such sleeping accommodation may be used;  
(b) the position in any such ship in which the crew accommodation or any part thereof may be 
located and the standards to be observed in the construction, e quipment and furnishing of any 
such accommodation;  
(c) the submission to such authority as may be specified in this behalf of plans and 
specifications of any works proposed to be carried out for the provision or alteration of any such 
accommodation and the  authorisation of that authority to inspect any such works.  
(d) the maintenance and repair of any such accommodation and the prohibition or restriction 
of the use of any such accommodation for purposes other than those for which it is designed;  
(e) the man ner as to how ships registered or under construction at the commencement of any 
rules made under this section may be dealt with after such commencement;  
1[(f) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspection of crew spaces and for scrutiny of 
plans  of crew accommodation spaces and the manner in which such fees may be collected.]  
and such rules may make different provisions in respect of different classes of ships and in respect of 
crew accommodation provided f or different classes of persons.  
 (3) If any person making an inspection under section 176 finds that the crew accommodation is in 
sanitary or is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he shall signify it in writing to the 
master of the ship and may, if he thinks fit, detain the ship  until the defects are remedied to his 
satisfaction.  
Explanation .―In this section, the expression “crew accommodation ” includes sleeping rooms, 
mess rooms, sanitary accommodation, hospital accommodation, recreation accommodation, store 
rooms and catering a ccommodation provided for the use of seamen and apprentices, not being 
accommodation which is also used by, or provided for the use of passengers.  
176. Inspection by shipping master, etc., of provisions, water, weights and measures and 
accommodation .―A shi pping master, surveyor, seamen's welfare officer, port health officer, Indian 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 7 (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  81 
 consular officer or any other officer at any port duly authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government ― 
(a) in the case of any ship upon which seamen have been shipped at tha t port, may at any 
time, and  
(b) in the case of any Indian ship, may at any time, and if the master or three or more of the 
crew so request, shall,  
enter on board the ship and inspect — 
(i) the provisions and water,  
(ii) the weights and measures,  
(iii) the accommodation for seamen,  
with which the ship is required to be provided by or under this Act and also the space and equipment 
used for the storage and handling of food and water and the galley and other equipment used for the 
preparation and service of m eals. 
1[176A. Ships to possess Maritime Labour Certificate and Declaration of Maritime Labour 
Compliance. ―(1) All ships of five hundred tons gross or more and engaged in international voyage 
or operating from a port, or between ports, in another country, s hall possess a Maritime Labour 
Certificate and a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance.  
(2) Ships not covered under sub -section ( 1) shall, unless, exempted by the Central Government, 
possess such certificate in such manner and form, as may be prescribe d. 
(3) The shipping master, surveyor, seamen's welfare officer, port health officer, Indian consular 
officer, or any other officer at any port duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, may 
inspect any ship, in such manner as may be prescrib ed, and the master of the ship or any person 
having charge over the ship shall make available to such inspecting officer, the Maritime Labour 
Certificate and the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance.]  
 177. Inspection by master of provisions, water an d accommodation at sea .―The master of 
an Indian ship which is at sea shall, at least once in every ten days, cause an inspection to be made of 
the provisions and water provided for the use of the seamen and apprentices and the crew 
accomodation, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same are being maintained in accordance 
with the requirements of this Act, and the person making the inspection shall enter a statement of the 
result of the inspection in a book specially kept for the purpose.  
2[177A. Power to make rules to pre vent accidents, etc .―(1) The Central Government may , 
having regard to the provisions of the Convention concerning the Prevention of Occupational 
Accidents to Seafarers adopted by the General Conference of the International Labour Organisation 
on the 30th day of October, 1970,  make rules so as to ensure safe working conditions for Indian ships 
and for preventing accidents and different rules may be made for different classes of ships and for 
ships of the same class in different circumstances.  
(2) In particular and without preju dice to the generality of the foregoing powers , such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the manner in which any equipment or gear may be maintained, inspected or tested and 
conditions as to such maintenance, inspection and testing;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).   82 
 (b) the manner in which the use of any material or process shall be regulated for the 
manufactur e of any s uch equipment or gear;  
(c) the provision of safe means of access to such equipment or gear for the use of seamen and 
provision of protective clothing for seamen where necessary;  
(d) restriction on the hours of employment of seamen in any specified operatio n or under any 
specified circumstances; and  
(e) the manner and form in which and the persons to whom any accident occurring on board a 
ship shall be reported.]  
Special provisions for the protection of seamen in respect of litigation  
178. Meaning of serving  seaman .―A seaman shall, for the purposes of these provisions, be 
deemed to be a serving seaman during any period commencing on the date of the agreement with the 
crew and ending thirty days after the date on which the seaman is finally discharged from suc h 
agreement.  
179. Particulars to be furnished in plaints, etc .―(1) If any person presenting any plaint, 
application or appeal to any Court has reason to believe that any adverse party is a serving seaman, he 
shall make a statement accordingly in the plaint , application or appeal.  
(2) If any collector has reason to believe that any seaman who ordinarily resides or has property in 
his district and who is a party to any proceedings pending before any Court is unable to appear therein 
or is a serving seaman, th e collector may certify the facts to the Court.  
 180. Notice to be given in case of unrepresented seaman .―(1) If a collector has certified under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 179, or if a Court has reason to believe that a seaman who is a party to any 
proceeding before the Court, is unable to appear therein or is a serving seaman, the Court shall 
suspend the pro ceeding and shall give notice thereof to the shipping master:  
Provided that the Court may refrain from suspending the proceeding and giving the notice — 
(a) if the proceeding is one instituted or made by the seaman, alone or conjointly with others, 
with the  object of enforcing a right of pre -emption, or  
(b) if the interests of the seaman in the proceeding are, in the opinion of the Court, either 
identical with those of any other party thereto and adequately represented by such other party, or 
merely of a for mal nature.  
(2) If it appears to the Court before which any proceeding is pending that a seaman though not a 
party to the proceeding is materially concerned in the outcome of the proceeding and that his interests 
are likely to be prejudiced by his inabilit y to attend, the Court may suspend the proceeding and shall 
give notice thereof to the shipping master.  
(3) If on receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the shipping master certifies 
to the Court, that the seaman is a serving seaman,  the Court shall thereupon postpone the proceeding 
in respect of the seaman for such period as it thinks fit:  
Provided that if by reason of the continued absence of the seaman the question of any further 
postponement of the proceeding in respect of the sea man arises, the court shall in deciding the 
question have regard to the purposes of the provisions of this Act conferring special protection on 
seaman in respect of litigation.  83 
 (4) If the shipping master either certifies that the seaman is not for the time  being a serving 
seaman or fails within two months from the date of the receipt of the notice under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) as the case may be, to certify that the seaman is a serving seaman, the Court may, if it 
thinks fit, continue the proceed ing. 
181. Power to set aside decrees and orders passed against serving seaman .―(1) Where in any 
proceeding before  a court, a decree or order has been passed against any seaman while he was a 
serving seaman, the seaman, or if he dies while he is a serving seaman, his legal representative, may 
apply to the said court to have the decre e or order set aside, and if the court after giving an 
opportunity to the opposite party of being heard, is satisfied that the interests of justice require that the 
decree or order should be set aside as against the seaman, the court , shall subject to such  conditions, if 
any, as it thinks fit to impose, make an order accordingly, and may, if it appears that any opposite 
party in the proceeding has failed to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 179, 
award, subject to such conditions as it  thinks fit to impose, damages against such opposite party.  
(2) The period of limitation for an application under sub -section ( 1) shall be sixty days from the 
date on which the seaman first ceases to be a serving seaman after the passing of the decree or o rder, 
or where the summons or notice was not duly served on the seaman in the proceeding in which the 
decree or order was passed, from the date on wh ich the applicant had knowledge  of the decree or 
order , whichever is later; and the provisions of section 5  of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908                       
(9 of 1908) , shall apply to such applications.  
(3) Where the decree or order in respect of which an application under sub -section ( 1) is made is 
of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as agains t the seaman only, it may be set aside as against all 
or any of the parties against whom it was made.  
(4) Where a court sets aside a decree or order under this section, it shall appoint a day for 
proceeding with the suit, appeal or application , as the case  may be, in respect of which  the decree or 
order was passed.  
182. Modification of law of limitation where seaman is a party .―In computing the period of 
limitation provided in the foregoing provisions or in the Indian Limitation Act, 1908  (9 of 1908),  or in 
any other law for the time being in force, for any suit, appeal or application to a court to which a 
seaman is a party, the period or periods during which the seaman has been a serving seaman, and if 
the seaman has died while he was a serving seaman, the period from the date of his death to the date 
on which his next -of-kin was first informed, by the shipping master or otherwise, of his death, shall be 
excluded : 
Provided that this section shall not apply in the case of any suit, appeal or application insti tuted or 
made with the object of enforcing a right of pre -emption except in such areas and in such 
circumstances as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.  
183. Reference in matters of doubt to shipping masters .―If any court is in doubt whether, for 
the purposes of section 180 or section 181, a seaman is or was at any particular time or during any 
particular period a serving seaman, it may refer the question to the shipping master, and the certificate 
of the ship ping master shall be conclusive evidence on the question.  
Provisions for the protection of seamen in respect of other matters  
184. Facilities for making complaints .―If a seaman or apprentice states to the master that he 
desires to make a complaint to 1[a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, 
as the case may be] or other proper officer against the master or any of the crew, the master shall, ― 
(a) if the ship is then at a place where there is  1[a Judicial Magistrate of the first  class or a 
Metropolitan  Magistrate, as the case may be, ] or other proper officer, as soon after such statement 
as the service of the ship will permit, and  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 12 of 1983 , s. 17 and the Sch edule,  for “a magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
 84 
 (b) if the ship is not then at such place, as soon after her first arrival at such place as the 
service of the ship will permit.  
allow the complainant to go ashore or send him ashore under proper protection so that he may be 
enabled to make the complaint.  
185. Assignment or sale of salvage invalid .―Subject to the provisions of this Act, an 
assignment of salvage payable to a seaman or apprentice made prior to the accruing thereof shall not 
bind the person making the same, and a power -of-attorney or authority for the receipt of any such 
salvage shall not be irrevocable.  
186. No debt recoverable till end of voyage .―A debt incurred by any seaman after he has to 
serve shall not be recoverable until the service agreed for is concluded.  
187. Seam en’s property not to be detained .―(1) Any person who receives or takes into his 
possession or under his control any money or other property of a seaman or apprentice shall return the 
same or pay the value thereof when required by the seaman or apprentice subject to deduction of such 
amounts as may be justly due to hi m from the seaman or apprentice in respect of board or lodging or 
otherwise.  
(2) Where  1[a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate as the case may 
be,] imposes a fine for a contravention of this section, he may direct the amount  of such money or the 
value of the property subject to such deduction as aforesaid, if any, or the property itself to be 
forthwith paid or delivered to the seaman or apprentice.  
188. Prohibition against solicitation by lodging house keepers .―No person shal l, while a ship 
is at any port or place in India — 
(a) solicit a seaman or apprentice to become a lodger at the house of any person letting 
lodgings for hire; or  
(b) take out of the ship any property of the seaman or apprentice except under the direction of  
the seaman or apprentice and with the permission of the master.  
189. Ship not to be boarded without permission before seamen leave .―Where a ship has 
arrived at a port or place in India at the end of a voyage and any person, not being in the service of the 
Government or not being duly authorised by law for the purpose, goes on board the ship without the 
permission of the master before the seamen lawfully leave the shi p at the end of their engagement or 
are discharged (whichever happens last), the master of the ship may take such person into custody and 
deliver him up forthwith to a police officer to be taken before  1[a Judicial Magistra te of the first class 
or a Metropolitan Magistrate as the case may be,] to be dealt with according to the provisions of this 
Act. 
Provisions as to discipline  
190. Misconduct endangering life or ship .―No master, seaman, or apprentice belonging to an 
Indian ship, wherever it may be, or to any other ship, while in India, shall knowingly — 
(a) do anything tending to the immediate loss or destruction of, or serious damage to, the ship, 
or tending immediatel y to endanger the life of, or to cause injury to any person belonging to or on 
board the ship; or  
(b) refuse or omit to do any lawful act proper and requisite to be done by him for preserving 
the ship from immediate loss, destruction or serious damage, or for preserving any person 
belonging to or on board the ship from danger to life or from injury.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s.  17 and the Schedule, for “a magistrate ” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
 85 
 191. Desertion and absence without leave .―(1) No seaman lawfully engaged and no 
apprentice — 
(a) shall desert his ship; or  
(b) shall neglect or refuse, without reasonable cause, to join the ship or to proceed to sea in his 
ship or be absent without leave at any time within twenty -four hours of the  ship's sailing from a 
port either at the commencement or during the progress of a voyage, or be absent at any time 
without leave and without sufficient reason from his ship or from his duty.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the fact that the ship,  on which the seaman or apprentice is 
engage d or to which he belongs is unse aworthy shall be deemed to be a reasonable cause:  
Provided that the seaman or apprentice has, before failing or refusing to join his ship or to proceed 
to sea in his ship or before  absenting himself or being absent from the ship, as the case may be, 
complained to the master or a shipping master, surveyor, seamen ‟s welfa re officer, port health officer,  
Indian consular officer or any other officer at any port duly authorised in this b ehalf by the Central 
Government, that the ship is unseaworthy.  
192. Power to suspend deserter's certificate of discharge .―If it is shown to the satisfaction of 
a proper officer that a seaman has deserted his ship or has absented himself  without leave and without 
sufficient reason from his ship or from his duty, the proper officer s hall forthwith make a report to that 
effect  to the Director -General who may thereupon direct that the seaman's certificate of discharge or 
continuous certificate of discharge shall be with held for such period as may be spec ified in the 
direction.  
193. Conveyance of deserter or imprisoned seaman on  board ship .―(1) If a seaman or 
apprentice deserts his ship or is absent without leave and without sufficient reason from his ship or 
from his duty, the master, any mate, the owner or agent of the owner of the ship may, without 
prejudice to any other action that may b e taken against the seaman or apprentice under this Act, 
convey him on board his ship and may for that purpose cause to be used such force as may be 
reasonable in the circumstances of the case.  
(2) If, either at the commencement or during the progress of a ny voyage, a seaman or apprentice 
engaged in an Indian ship commits outside India, the offence of desertion or absence without leave o r 
any offence against discipline, the master, any mate, the owner or agent of the owner may, if and so 
far as the laws in force in the place will permit, arrest him without first procuring a warrant.  
(3) No person shall convey on board or arrest a seaman or apprentice on improper or insufficient 
grounds.  
(4) Where a seaman or apprentice is brought before a court on the ground  of desertion or of 
absence without leave or of any offence against discipline, and the master or the owner, or his agent, 
so requires, the court, may, in lieu of committing and sentencing him for the offence, cause him to be 
conveyed on board his ship for  the purpose of proceeding on the voyage, or deliver him to the master 
or any mate of the ship or the owner or his agent, to be by them so conveyed, and may in such case 
order any costs and expenses properly incurred by or on be half of the master or owner  by reason of 
the conveyance to be paid by the offender and, if necessary, to be deducted from any wages which he 
has then earned or by virtue of his then existing engagements may afterwards be earned.  
194. General offences against discipline .―A seaman lawfully engaged or an apprentice shall be 
guilty of an offence against discipline if he commits any  of the following acts, namely:―  
(a) if he quits the ship without leave after her arrival at her port of delivery and before she is 
placed in secu rity; 
(b) if he is guilty of wilful disobedience to any lawful command or neglect of duty;  
(c) if he is guilty of continued wil ful disobedience to l awful commands or continued wil ful 
neglect of duty;  86 
 (d) if he assaults the master or any other  1[officer of or a seaman or an apprentice belonging 
to, the ship];  
(e) if he combines with any of the crew to disobey lawful commands or to neglect duty or to 
impede the navigation of the ship or retard the progress of the voyage;  
(f) if he willfully damages his ship o r commits criminal misappropriation or breach of trust in 
respect of, or willfully damages any of, her stores or cargo.  
195. Smuggling of goods by seamen or apprentices .―(1) If a seaman lawfully engaged or an 
apprentice is convicted of an offence of smuggl ing any goods whereby loss or damage is occasioned 
to the master or owner of the ship, he shall be liable to pay to that master or owner a sum sufficient to 
reimburse the loss or damage and the whole or a part of his wages may he retained in satisfaction o n 
account of that liability without prejudice to any other remedy.  
(2) If a seaman lawfully engaged is convicted of an offence of smuggling opium, hemp or any 
other narcotic drug or narcotic, the Director -General may direct that the seaman's certificate of  
discharge or continuous certificate of discharge shall be cancelled or shall be suspended for such 
period as may be specified in the direction.  
196. Entry of offences in official logs .―If any offence within the meaning of this Act of 
desertion or absence without leave or against discipline is committed, or if any act of misconduct is 
committed for which the offender's agreement imposes a fine, and it is intended to enforce the fine, — 
(a) an entry of the offence or act shall be made in the official log book  and signed by the master, 
the mate and one of the crew; and  
(b) the offender, if still in the ship, shall, before the next subsequent arrival of the ship at any, 
port, or, if she is at the time in p ort, before her departure there from, be furnished with a copy of the 
entry and have the same read over distinctly and audibly to him and may thereupon make such reply 
thereto as he thinks fit; and  
(c) a statement of a copy of the entry having been so furnished and the entry having been so read 
over and the reply , if any, made by the offender shall likewise be entered and signed in manner 
aforesaid; and  
(d) in any subsequent legal proceedings the entries by this section required shall , if practicable, be 
produced or proved, and, in default of such production or pr oof, the court hearing the case may in its 
discretion, refuse to receive evidence of the offence or act of misconduct.  
197. Report of desertions and absence without leave .―Whenever any seaman engaged outside 
India on an Indian ship deserts or otherwise abs ents himself in India without leave, the master of the 
ship shall, within forty -eight hours of discovering such desertion or absence, report the same to the 
shipping master or to such other officer as the Central Government specifies in this behalf, unless  in 
the meantime, the deserter or absentee returns.  
198. Entries and certificates of desertion abroad .―(1) In every case of desertion from an 
Indian ship whilst such ship is at any place out of India, the master shall produce the entry of 
desertion in the official log book to the Indian consular officer at the place, and that officer shall 
thereupon, make and certify a copy of the entry.  
(2) The master shall forthwith transmit such copy to the shipping master at the port at which the 
seaman or apprentice was shipped, and the shipping master shall, if required, cause the same to be 
produced in any legal proc eeding.  
(3) Such copy, if purporting to be so made and certified as aforesaid, shall, in any legal 
proceeding relating to such desertion, be admissible in evidence.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 16, for “officers of the ship” (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  87 
 199. Facilities for proving desertion in proceedings for forfeiture of wages .―(1) Whenever a 
question arises whether the wages of any seaman or apprentice are forfeited for desertion from a ship, 
it shall be sufficient for the person insisting on the forfeiture to show that the seaman or apprentice 
was duly engaged in or belonged t o the ship, and either that he left the ship before the completion of 
the voyage or engagement or, if the voyage was to terminate in India and the ship has not returned, 
that he is absent from her and that an entry of his desertion has been duly made in th e official log 
book.  
(2) The desertion shall thereupon, so far as relates to any forfeiture of wages under this Part, be 
deemed to be proved, unless the seaman or apprentice can produce a proper certificate of discharge or 
can otherwise show to the satisfa ction of the court that he had sufficient reasons for leaving his ship.  
200. Application of forfeiture .―(1) Where any wages or other property are under this Act 
forfeited for desertion from a ship, they shall be applied towards reimbursing the expenses cau sed by 
the desertion to the master or the owner of the ship, and subject to that reimbursement, shall be paid to 
the Central Government.  
(2) For the purposes of such reimbursement the master or the owner or his agent may, if the 
wages are earned subsequent  to the desertion, recover them in the same manner as the deserter could 
have recovered them if not forfeited; and the court in any legal proceeding relating to such wages may 
order the m to be paid accordingly.  
201. Decision of questions of forfeiture and deduction in suits for wages .―Any question 
concerning the forfeiture of or deductions from the wages of a seaman or apprentice may be 
determined in any proceeding lawfully instituted with respect to those wages, notwithstanding that the 
offence in respect of which the question arises, though by this Act made punishable by imprisonment 
as well as forfeiture, has not been made the subject of any criminal proceeding.  
202. Payment of fines imposed under agreement to shipping master .―(1) Every fine imposed 
on a seaman for any act of misconduct under this agreement shall be deducted a nd paid over as 
follows, namely :― 
(a) if the offender is discharged at any port or place in India and the offence and such entries 
in respect thereof as aforesaid are proved to the sa tisfaction of the shipping master before whom 
the offender is discharged, the master or owner shall deduct such fine from the wages of the 
offender and pay the same over to such shipping master; and  
(b) if the seaman is discharged at any port or place outs ide India and the offence and such 
entries as aforesaid are proved to the satisfaction of the Indian consular officer, by whose sanction 
he is so discharged, the fine shall thereupon be deducted as aforesaid, and an entry of such 
deduction shall then be ma de in the official log book, if any, and signed by such officer and on the 
return of the ship to India, the master or owner shall pay over such fine to the shipping master 
before whom the crew is discharged.  
(2) An act of misconduct for which any such fine  has been inflicted and paid shall not be 
otherwise punishable under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The proceeds of all fines received by a shiping master under this section shall be utilised for 
the welfare of seamen in such manner as the Central Governm ent may direct.  
203. Seaman or apprentice not to be enticed to desert .―No person shall by any means 
whatever persuade or attempt to persuade a seaman or apprentice to neglect or refuse to join or 
proceed to sea in or desert from his ship, or otherwise to a bsent himself from his duty.  
 204. Deserters not to be harboured .―No person shall harbour or secrete a se aman or, 
apprentice who has wil fully neglected or refused to join or has deserted from his ship, knowing or 
having reason to believe the seaman or appr entice to have so done.  88 
 1[Provided that the provisions of this section shall not extend to the case in which the  harbour or 
secreting is by the spouse of the seaman or apprentice.]  
205. Stowaways and seamen carried under compulsion .―(1) No person shall sec rete himself 
and go to sea in a ship without the consent of either the owner, agent or master or of a mate, or of the 
person in charge of the ship or of any other person entitled to give that consent.  
(2) Every seafaring person to whom the master of a ship , is under the authority of this Act or any 
other law compelled to take on board and convey and every person who goes to sea in a ship without 
such consent as aforesaid , shall, so long as he remains in the ship, be subject to the same laws and 
regulations for preserving discipline and to the same fines and punishments for offences constituting 
or tending to a breach of discipline as if he were a member of, and has signed the agreement with, the 
crew.  
(3) The master of any Indian ship arriving at any port or  place in or outside India and the master 
of any ship other than an Indian ship arriving at any port or place in India shall, if any person has gone 
to sea on that ship without the consent referred to in sub -section ( 1), report the fact in writing to the 
proper officer as soon as may be after the arrival of the ship.  
206. Procedure where seaman not shipped in India is imprisoned on complaint of master or 
owner .―If any seaman engaged outside India is imprisoned on complaint made by or on behalf of the 
master  or owner of the ship or for any offence for which he has been sentenced to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding one month, then — 
(a) while such imprisonment lasts , no person shall , without the previous sanction in writing of 
the Central Government or of such officer as it may specify in this behalf, engage in India any 
person to serve as a substitute for such seaman on board the ship; and  
(b) the Central Government or such officer as it may specify in this behalf may tender such 
seaman to the master or ow ner of the ship in which he is engaged to serve, and if such master or 
owner, without assigning reasons satisfactory to the Central Government or to such officer as 
aforesaid, refuses to receive him on board , may require such master or owner to deposit in the 
local shipping office — 
(i) the wages due to such seaman and his money and other property , and 
(ii) such sum as may, in the opinion of the Central Government or such officer as 
aforesaid, be sufficient to defray the cost of the passage of such seaman to  the port at which 
he was shipped according to the scale of costs usual in the case of distressed seamen.  
207. Power to send on board seaman not shipped in India who is undergoing 
imprisonment .―If any seaman engaged outside India is imprisoned for any offe nce for which he has 
been sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, and if, during such 
imprisonment and before his engagement is at an end, his services are required on board his ship, any 
magistrate may, at the request of the maste r or owner or his agent, cause the seaman to be conveyed 
on board the ship for the purpose of proceeding on the voyage or to be delivered to the master or any 
mate of the ship or to the owner or his agent to be by them so conveyed, notwithstanding that the  
period for which he was sentenced to imprisonment has not terminated.  
208. On change of master, documents to be handed over to successor .―(1) If during the 
progress of a voyage the master of any Indian ship is removed or superseded or for any other reason  
quits the ship and is succeeded in the command by some other person, he shall deliver to his successor 
the various documents relating to the navigation of the ship and the crew thereof which are in his 
custody.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 4 1 of 1984, s. 17 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
 89 
 (2) Such successor shall immediately on assu ming the command of the ship enter in the official 
log book a list of the documents so delivered to him.  
209. Transmission of documents on transfer of seaman from one ship to another .―Where a 
seaman is transferred under his agreement from one ship to another, the master of the ship from which 
the seaman is transferred  shall, as soon as practicable, transmit to the master of the other ship all 
documents in his possession relating to the  seaman.  
210. Leaving behind in India of seaman or apprentice engaged abroad .―(1) The master of a 
ship shall not discharge at any place in India , a seaman or apprentice engaged outside India unless he 
previously obtains the sanction in writing of such offi cer as the Central Government appoints in this 
behalf; but such sanction shall not be refused when the seaman or apprentice is discharged on the 
termination of his service.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the sanction under that  sub-section shall 
be given or withheld at the discretion of the officer so appointed, but whenever it is withheld, the 
reasons for so withholding it shall be recorded by him.  
 211. Deserters from foreign ships .―(1) Where it appears to the Central Government that due 
facilities are or will be given by the Government of any country outside India for recovering and 
apprehending seamen who desert from Indian ships in that country, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, stating that such facilities are or will be given, declare that this 
section shall apply to seamen belonging to ships of such country, subject to such limitations or 
conditions as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Where this section applies to seamen belonging to ships of any country and a seaman deserts 
from any such ship, when within India, any court that would have had cognizance of the matter if the 
seaman or apprentice had deserted from an Indian ship shall, on  the application of a consular officer 
of that country, aid in apprehending the deserter and for that purpose may, on information given on 
oath, issue a warrant for his apprehension and on proof of the desertion order him to be conveyed on 
board his ship o f delivered to the master or mate of his ship or to the owner of the ship or his agent to 
be so conveyed and any such warrant or order may be executed accordingly.  
Official logs  
212. Official logs to be kept and to be dated .―(1) An official log shall be kept in the prescribed 
form in every Indian ship except a home -trade ship of less than two hundred tons gross.  
(2) The official log may, at the discretion of the master or owner, be kept distinct from or united 
with the ordina ry ship ‟s log so that in all cases the spaces in the official long book be duly filled up.  
213. Entries in official log books how and when to be made .―(1) An entry required by this 
Act in the official log book shall be made as soon as possible after the oc currence to which it rela tes, 
and, if not made on the s ame day as that occurrence, shall be made and dated so as to show the date of 
the occurrence and of the entry respecting it and if made in respect of an occurrence happening before 
the arrival of the s hip at her final port of discharge, shall not be made more than twenty -four hours 
after that arrival.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every entry in the official log book shall be signed by 
the master and by the mate or some other member of the  crew and also — 
(a) if it is an entry of injury or death, shall be signed by the medical officer on board, if any;  
(b) if it is an entry of wages due to or the property of a seaman or apprentice who dies , shall 
be signed by the mate and by some member of t he crew besides the master.  
(3) Every entry made in an official log book s, in the manner provided by this Act shall be 
admissible in evidenced.  90 
 214.  Entries required to be made in official log books .―(1) The master of a ship for which an 
official log is required shall enter or cause to be entered in the official log bo ok the following matters 
namely :― 
(a) every conviction by a legal tribunal of a member of his crew and the punishment inflicted;  
(b) every offence committed by a member of his crew for which it is intended to prosecute or 
to enforce a forfeiture or exact a fine, together with such statement concerning the reading over of 
that entry and concerning the reply (if any) made to the charge as is by this Act required;  
(c) every offence for which punishment is inflicted on board and the punishment inflicted;  
(d) a report on the quality  of work of each member of his crew, or a statement that the master 
declines to give an  opinio n thereon with stat ement o f his reasons for so declining;  
(e) every case of illness, hurt or injury happening to a member of the crew with the nature 
thereof and the medical treatment adopted (if any);  
(f) every case of death happening on board and the cause thereof, togethe r with such 
particulars; as may be prescribed;  
(g) every birth happening on board, with the sex of the infant, the names of the parents and 
such other particulars as may be prescribed;  
(h) every marriage faking place on board with the names and ages of the  parties;  
(i) the name of every seaman or apprentice who ceases to be a member of the crew otherwise 
than by death, with the place, time,  manner and cause thereof;  
(j) the wages due to any seaman or apprentice who dies during the voyage and the gross 
amoun t of all deductions to be made there from;  
(k) the money or other property taken over of any seaman or apprentice who dies during the 
voyage;  
(l) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed for entry in the official log.  
(2) The master of every suc h ship, upon its arrival at any port in India or at such other time and 
place as the Central Government may with respect to any ship or class of ships direct, shall deliver or 
transmit, in such form as the Director -General may specify, a return of the fact s recorded by him in 
respect of the birth of a child, or the death of a person on board the ship to the Director -General.  
(3) (a) The Director -General shall send a certified copy of such of the returns received by him 
under sub -section ( 2) as relate to cit izens of India, to such officer as may be specified in this behalf by 
the Central Government; and such officer shall cause the same to be preserved in such manner as may 
be specified in this behalf by the Central Government. .  
(b) Every such copy shall be deemed to be a certified copy of the entry with respect to the person 
concerned, registered under any law in force for the time being relating to the registration of births 
and deaths.  
 215. Offences in respect of official logs .―(1) An official log book shall be kept in the manner 
required by this Act, and an entry directed by this Act to be made therein shall be made at the time 
and in the manner directed by this Act.  
(2) No person shall make or procure to be made or assist in m aking any entry in any official log 
book in respect of any occurrence happening previously to the arrival of the ship at her final port of 
discharge more than twenty -four hours after such arrival.  91 
 216. Delivery of official logs to shipping masters .―The mas ter of every ship for which an 
official log book is required to be kept under this Act shall, within forty -eight hours after the ships's 
arrival at her final port of destination in India or upon the discharge of the crew, whichever first 
happens, deliver t he official log book of the voyage to the shipping master before whom the crew is 
discharged.  
217. Official logs to be sent to shipping master in c ase of transfer of ship or loss .―(1) If for 
any reason the official log ceases to be required in respect of an Indian ship, the master or owner of 
the ship shall, if the ship is then in India within one month, and if she is elsewhere within six months, 
after the cessation, deliver or tra nsmit to the shipping master at the port to which the ship belonged the 
official log book duly completed up to the time of cessation.  
(2) If a ship is lost or abandoned, the master or owner thereof shall, if practicable and as soon as 
possible, deliver or transmit to the shipping master at her port of registry the official log book , duly 
completed up to the time of the loss or abandonment.  
National Welfare Board for Seafarers  
218. Functions of National Welfare Board for Seafarers .―(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an advisory board to be called the National Welfare 
Board for Seafarers (hereinafter referred to as the Board) for the purpose of advising the Central 
Government on the me asures to be taken for promoting the welfare of sea men (whether ashore or on 
board ship) generally and in particular the following :— 
(a) the establishment of hostels or boarding and lodging houses for seamen;  
(b) the establishment of clubs, canteens, librar ies and other like amen ities for the benefit of 
seamen;  
(c) the establishment of hospitals for seamen or the provision of medical treatment, for 
seamen;  
(d) the provision of educational and other facilities for seamen.  
(2) The Central Government may make  rules providing for — 
(a) the composition of the Board and the term of office of members thereof;  
(b) the procedure to be followed in the conduct of business by the Board  
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Board;  
(d) the levy o f fees payable by owners of ships at such rates as may be prescribed (which may 
be at different rates for different classes of ships) for the purpose of providing amenities to 
seamen and for taking other measures for the welfare of seamen;  
(e) the procedur e by which any such fees may be collected or recovered and the manner in 
which the proceeds of such fees, after deduction of the cost of collection, shall be utilised for the 
purpose specified in clause ( d). 
1[218A. Power to make rules for purposes of Mari time Labour Convention. ―(1) The Central 
Government may, having regard to the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention, and in 
consultation with such organisations in India as the Central Government may, by order, notify to be 
the most representative of the employers of seame n and of seamen, make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(i) the hours of work and re st in a week under clause ( cc) of sub -section ( 2) of section 101;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 2014, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  92 
 (ii) the entitlement for leave under clause ( ff) of sub -section ( 2) of section 101;  
(iii) the period of night work under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 109;  
(iv) standards for the quantity and quality of food and drinking water, including the catering 
standards that apply to food provided to the seamen on ships, under sub -section ( 7) of section 
168; 
(v) the qualifications of medical officer under clause ( a) and the medical facilitie s under 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 173;  
(vi) the manner and form of certificate to be provided to ships under sub -section ( 2) of section 
176A;  
(vii) the manner of conducting inspection in a ship to verify possession of the Maritime 
Labour Cer tificate and the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 176A;  
(viii) any other matter which may be or is to be prescribed relating to the Maritime Labour 
Convention.]  
 
PART VIII  
PASSENGER SHIPS  
Survey of passenger ships  
 219. Application of Part .―This Part applies only to sea -going passenger ships fitted with 
mechanical means of propulsion, but the provisions of this Part relating to  1[special trade passenger 
ships] shall not apply ― 
(a) to any such ship not carrying mor e than thirty 2[special trade passengers ]; or 
(b) to any such ship not intended to carry  2[special trade passengers] to or from any port or 
place in India.  
220. No ship to carry passengers without a certificate of survey .―(1) No ship shall carry more 
than twelve passengers between ports or places in India or to or from any port or place in India from 
or to any port or place outside India, unless she has a certificate of survey under this Part in force and 
applicable to the voyage on which she is about to pr oceed or the service on wh ich she is about to be 
employed : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any ship which has been granted a certificate 
under section 235, unless it appears from the certificate that it is inapplicable to the voyage on  which 
the ship is about to proceed or the service on which she is about to be employed, or unless there is 
reason to believe that the ship has, since the grant of the certificate, sustained injury or damage or 
been found unseaworthy or otherwise inefficie nt. 
(2) No Customs Collector shall grant a port clearance, nor shall any pilot be assigned, to any ship 
for which a certificate of survey is required by this Part until after the production by the owner, agent 
or master thereof of a certificate under this Part in force and applicable to the voyage on which she is 
about to proceed or the service on which she is about to be employed.  
(3) If any ship for which a certificate of survey is required by this Part, leaves or attempts to leave 
any port of survey with out a certificate, any Customs Collector or any pilot on board the ship may 
detain her until she obtains a certificate.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passenger ships ”(w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs . by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
 93 
 221. Power of surveyor .―(1) The owner or agent of every passenger ship for which a certificate 
of survey is required under this Part shall cause it to be surveyed in the prescribed manner.  
(2) For the purposes of a survey under this Part, a surveyor may, at any reasonable time, go on 
board a ship, and may inspect the Ship and any part thereof, and the machinery, equipme nt or articles 
on board thereof : 
Provided that he does not unnecessarily hinder the loading or unloading of the ship, or 
unnecessarily detain or delay her from pro ceeding on any voyage.  
(3) The owner, agent, master and every officer of the ship shall afford to the surveyor all 
reasonable facilities for a survey, and all such information respecting the ship and her machinery and 
equipment, or any part thereof, respec tively, as the surveyor reasonably requires.  
 222. Fees in respect of survey .―Before a survey under this part is commenced, the owner, 
agent or master of the ship to be surveyed shall pay to such officer as, the Central Government may 
appoint in this beha lf— 
(a) a fee calculated on the tonnage of the ship according to the prescribed rates;  
(b) when the survey is to be made in any port of survey other than Bombay, Calcutta or 
Madras, such additional fee, in respect of the expense (if any) of the journey of t he surveyor to the 
port, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
223. Declaration of survey .―When a survey under this Part is completed, the survey or making 
it shall forthwith, if satisfied that he can with propriety do so, deliver to the owner, agent or master of 
the ship surveyed a declaration of survey in the prescribed form containing the fo llowing particulars, 
namely: ― 
(a) that the hull and machinery of the ship are sufficient for the service intended and in good 
condition;  
(b) that the equipment of the ship is in such condition and that the certificates of the master, 
mates, engineers or en gine-drivers and of the radio telegraphy operators, are such, as are required 
by this Act or any other law for the time being in force and applicable to the ship;  
(c) the time (if less than one year) for which the hull, machinery and equipment of the ship 
will be sufficient;  
(d) the voyages or class of voyages, on which, as regards construction, machinery and 
equipment, the ship is the surveyor ‟s opinion fit to ply;  
(e) the number of passengers which the ship is in the opinion of the survey, fit to carry, 
distinguishing, if necessary, between the respective numbers to be carried on the deck and in the 
cabins and in different parts of the deck and cabins; the number to be subject to such conditions 
and variations, according to the time of year, the nature of the voyage the cargo carried or other 
circumstances as the case requires; and  
(f) any other prescribed particulars.  
224. Sending of declaration by owner, agent or master to Central Government .―(1) The 
owner, agent or master to whom a declaration of survey is given shall, within fourteen days after the 
dale of the receipt thereof, send the declaration to such officer as the Central Government may appoint 
in this behalf.  
(2) If the owner, agent or master fails to do so, he shall forfeit a sum not exceeding five rupees for 
every day during which the sending of the declaration is delayed and shall pay any sum so forfeited 
on the delivery of the certificate of survey.  94 
  225. Grant of certificate of s urvey by Central Government .―(1) Upon receipt of a 
declaration of survey, the Central Government shall, if satisfied that the provisions of this Part have 
been complied with, cause a certificate, in duplicate, to be prepared and delivered, through such 
officer at the port at which th e ship was surveyed as the Central Government may appoint in this 
behalf, to the owner, agent or master of the ship surveyed, on his applying and paying the sums (if 
any) mentioned in section 224 as payable on the delivery of a certificate.  
(2) A certifica te granted under this section shall be in the prescribed form; shall contain a 
statement to the effect that the provisions of this Part with respect to the survey of the ship and the 
transmission of the declaration of survey in respect thereof have been co mplied with; and shall also 
set forth.  
(a) the particulars concerning the ship which clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of section 223 require the 
declaration of survey to contain; and  
(b) any other prescribed particulars.  
 226. Power of Central Government to order a second survey .―(1) If a surveyor making a 
survey under this part refuses to give a declaration of survey under section 223 with regard to any ship 
or gives a declaration with which the owner or agent or master of the ship surveyed is dissatisfied, the 
Central Governmen t may, on the application of the owner, agent or master,  and the payment by him 
of such fee, not exceeding twice the amount of the fee for the previous survey, as the Central 
Government may require, direct any other surveyor to survey the ship.  
(2) The sur veyor so directed shall forthwith survey the ship, and may, after the survey, either 
refuse to give a declaration or give such declaration as under the circumstances seems to him proper, 
and his decision shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, be fi nal. 
227. Duration of certificates of survey .―(1) A certificate of survey granted under this Part shall 
not be in force — 
(a) after the expiration of one year from the date of issue; or  
(b) after the expiration of the period, if less than one year, for whic h the hull, boilers, engines 
or any of the equipment have been stated in the certificate to be sufficient; or  
(c) after notice, has been given by the Central Government to the owner, agent or master of 
the ship to which the certificate relates that the Cen tral Government has cancelled or suspended it.  
(2) If a passenger ship is absent from India at the time when her certificate expires the provisions 
of this Part relating to certificate of survey shall not be deemed to be contravened unless she first 
begins  to ply with passengers after her next return to India.  
228. Cancellation or suspension of certificate of survey by Central Government .―(1) Any 
certificate of survey granted under this Part may be cancelled or suspended by the Central 
Government if it has reason to believe — 
(a) that the declaration by the surveyor of the sufficiency of the hull, boilers, engines or any 
of the equipment of the ship has been fraudulently or erroneously made; or  
(b) that the certificate has otherwise been issued upon false of erroneous information.  
(2) Before any certificate of survey is cancelled or suspended under sub -section ( 1), the holder of 
the certificate shall be given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the certificate should not 
be cancelled or suspended, a s the case may be : 
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply where the Central Government is satisfied that for 
some reason to be recorded in writing it is not reasonably practicable to give to the holder of the 
certificate an opportunity of showing ca use. 
229. Alterations in ships subsequent to grant of certificate of survey, and additional 
surveys .―(1) The owner, agent or master of a ship in respect of which a certificate of survey granted 
under this Part is in force, shall, as soon as possible after any alteration is made in the ship ‟s hull, 95 
 equipment or machinery which affects the efficiency ther eof or the seaworthiness of the ship , give 
written notice to such person as the Central Government may direct containing full particulars of the 
alteration.  
(2) If the Central Government has reason to believe that since the making of the last declaration o f 
survey in respect of a ship — 
(a) any such alteration as aforesaid has been made in the hull, equipment or machinery of the 
ship; or  
(b) the hull, equipment or machinery of the ship have sustained any injury or are otherwise 
insufficient;  
the Central Gov ernment may require the ship to be again surveyed to such extent as it may think fit, 
and, if such requirement is not complied with, may cancel any certificate of survey issued under this 
Part in respect of the said ship.  
230. Power to require delivery of expired or cancelled certificate of survey .―Every 
certificate of survey granted under this Part which has expired, or has been cancelled or suspended, 
shall be delivered to such person as the Central Government may direct.  
 
231. Certificate of survey to be affixed in conspicuous part of ship .―The o wner or master of 
every ship for which a certificate of survey has been granted under this Part shall forthwith, on the 
receipt of the certificate cause one of the duplicates thereof to be affixed, and kept affixed so long as 
the certificate remains in for ce and the ship is in use on some conspicuous part of the ship where it 
may be easily read by all persons on board thereof.  
232. Ship not to carry passengers in contravention of Act .―(1) No ship on any voyage shall 
carry or attempt to carry passengers in contravention of section 220 or shall have on board or in any 
part thereof a number of passengers which is greater than the number set forth in the certificate of 
survey as the numbe r of passengers which the ship or the part thereof is fit to carry on that voyage.  
(2) If the master or any other officer of any ship which carries or attempts to carry passengers in 
contravention of section 220 is a licensed pilot, he shall be liable to h ave his licence as a pilot 
cancelled or suspended for such period as the Central Government may, by order, specify.  
Keeping Order in Passenger ships  
233. Offences in connection with passenger ships .―(1) If, in the case of a ship for which a 
certificate of survey has been granted under this Part, ― 
(a) any person being drunk or disorderly has been on that account refused admission thereto 
by the owner or any person in his employ and, after having the amount of his fare (if he has paid 
it) returned or tendered to him, nevertheless persists in attempting to enter the ship;  
(b) any person being drunk or disorderly on board the ship is requested by the owner or any 
person in his employ to leave the ship at  any place in India at which he can conveniently do so, 
and after having the amount of his fare (if he has paid it) returned or tendered to him, does not 
comply with the request;  
(c) any person on board the ship after warning by the master or other officer  thereof, molests 
or continues to molest any passenger;  
(d) any person having gone on board the ship at any place and being requested, on account of 
the ship being full, by the owner or any person in his employ to leave the ship, before it has 
departed fro m that place, and having had the amount of his fare (if he has paid it) returned or 
tendered to him, does not comply with that request;  
(e) any person travels or attempts to travel in the ship without first paying his fare and with 
intent to avoid payment thereof;  
(f) any person on arriving in the ship at the place for which he has paid his fare knowingly and 
wilfully refuses or neglects to quit the ship;  96 
 (g) any person on board the ship fails when requested by the master or other officer thereof 
either to pay his fare or to exhibit such ticket or other receipt, if any, showing the payment of his 
fare as is usually given to persons travelling by and paying fare for the ship;  
he shall be guilty of an offence under this sub -section.  
(2) No person on board any  such ship shall wil fully do or cause to be done anything in such a 
manner as to obstruct or injure any part of the machinery or tackle of the ship or to obstruct, impede 
or molest the crew or any of them in the navigation or management of the ship or othe rwise in the 
execution of their duty on or about the ship.  
(3) The master or other officer of any such ship and all persons called by him to his assistance 
may, without warrant, detain any person who commits any offence under this section and whose name 
and address are unknown to the master or officer and convey the offender with all convenient dispatch 
before the  1[nearest Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate as the case 
may be ,] to be dealt with according to law.  
234. Powe r to exclude drunken passengers from passenger ships .―The master of any 
passenger ship may refuse to receive on board thereof any person who by reason of drunkenness or 
otherwise is in such a state, or misconducts himself in such a manner, as to cause annoyance or injury 
to passengers on board, and if any su ch person is on board, may put him on shore at any convenient 
place; and a person so refused admittance or put on shore shall not be entitled to the return of any fare 
he has paid  
235. Ships with certificates of survey or certificates of partial survey gra nted outside 
India .―(1) When a ship requires to be furnished with a certificate of survey under this Part and the 
Central Government is satisfied — 
(a) by the production of a certificate of survey that the ship has been officially surveyed at a 
port in a country outside India ; 
(b) that the requirements of this Act ar e proved by that survey to have been substantially 
complied with; and  
(c) that certificates of survey granted under this Part are accepted in such country in lieu of 
the corresponding certificates required under th e laws in force in that country;  
the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, dispense with any further survey of the ship in respect of 
the requirements so complied with, and give a certificate which shall have the same effect as a 
certificate given afte r survey under this Part.  
(2) When the Central Government has, by notification in the Official Gazette, declared that it is 
satisfied that an official survey at a port in a country outside India specified in the declaration is such 
as to prove that the req uirements of this Act have been substantially complied with, any person 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf may exercise the power to dispense with a survey 
and to give a certificate conferred on the Central Government by sub -section (1) in  the case of any 
ship furnished with a valid certificate of survey granted at such port.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be applicable in the case of ships furnished with valid 
certificates of partial survey including docking certificates, as i f they were ships furnished with like 
certificates granted at ports in countries outside India subject to the modification that the powers of 
the Central Government under the said sub -section may be exercised by any person authorised by the 
Central Governm ent in this behalf.  
 236. Power to make rules as to surveys .―(1) The Central Government may, subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules to regulate the making of surveys under this Part and the 
provisions to be made for the safety of life  at sea.  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule , for “nearest magistrate ”(w.e.f. 18-5-1983).  
 97 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely :― 
(a) the times and places at which, and the manner in which, surveys are to be made;  
(b) the  requirements as to construction, machinery, equipment and marking of sub -division 
load lines, which ar e to be fulfilled by ships generally or by any class of ships in particular before 
a declaration of survey may be granted;  
(c) the survey of ships by two  or more surveyors;  
(d) the duties of the surveyor making a survey and, where two or more surveyors are 
employed, the respective duties of each of the surveyors employed;  
(e) the form in which declarations of survey and certificates of survey under this Pa rt are to be 
made and the nature of the particulars to be stated therein respectively;  
(f) the rates according to which the fees payable in respect of surveys are to be calculated in 
the case of all or any of the ports of survey;  
(g) the closing of, and ke eping closed, the openings in ships ‟ hulls and in water -tight bulk-
heads;  
(h) the securing of, and keeping in place and the inspection of contr ivances for closing any 
such openings as aforesaid;  
(i) the o peration of mechanisms of contri vances for closing a ny such openings as aforesaid 
and the drills in connection with the operation thereof; and  
(j) the entries to be made in the official log book or other record to be kept of any of the 
matters aforesaid.  
1[Special trade passenger ships ] and pilgrim ships  
237. Ports or places where  special trade passengers  or pilgrims may embark or be 
discharged .―(1) Neither  2[a special trade passenger ship] nor a pilgrim ship shall depart or proceed 
from on discharge   3[special trade passengers] or pilgrims, as the case may be, at any port or place 
within India other than a port or place appointed in this behalf by the Central Government for  
1[special trade passenger ships] or pilgrim ships, as the case may be.  
(2) After a ship has departed or proceeded on a voyage from a port or place so appointed, a person 
shall not be received on board as  4[a special trade pass enger] or pilgrim, as the case may be, except at 
some other port or place so appointed.  
238. Notice to be given of day of sailing .―(1) The master, owner or agent of  2[a special trade 
passenger ship] or a pilgrim ship so departing or proceeding shall give notice to an officer appointed 
in this behalf by the Central Government that the ship is to carry  3[special trade passengers] or 
pilgrims and of her destination and of the proposed time of sailing.  
(2) The notice shall be given ― 
(a) in the case of  2[a special trade passenger ship ], not less than twenty -four hours before that 
time;  
(b) in the case of a pilgrim ship at the original por t of departure, if in India, and in any other 
case at the first port at which she touches in India, not less than three days, and at all other ports 
not less than twenty -four hours, before that time.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passenger ships”  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ an unbertherd passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unbertherd passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “an unbertherd passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  98 
 239. Power to enter on and inspect ship .―After receiving  the notice under section 238 the 
officer appointed under that section or a person authorised by him in this behalf shall be at liberty at 
all times to enter on the ship and inspect her and her fittings and the provisions and stores on board.  
240. Ship not  to sail without certificates A and B .―1[(1) A ship intended to carry special  trade 
passengers between ports or places in India shall not commence a voyage from any port or place 
appointed under sub -section (1) of section 237, unless the master holds certificates to the effect 
mentioned in sec tions 241 and 242.  
(1A) A ship intended to carry special trade passengers from or to a port or place in India to or 
from a port or place outside India shall not commence a voyage from any port or place appointed 
under sub -section  (1) of section 237, unles s the master holds ― 
(i) a passenger ship safety certificate;  
(ii) an exemption certificate;  
(iii) a special trade passenger ship safety certificate;  
(iv) a special trade passenger ship space certificate; and  
(v) a certificate referred to in section 242.]  
(2) The customs Col lector whose duty it is to grant a port clearance for the ship shall not grant 
it 2[unless the master holds the appropriate certificate for the voyage specified in sub -section ( 1), or as 
the case may be in sub -section ( 1A).] 
3[241. Contents of certificate A.―(1) The first of the certificates referred to in sub -
section ( 1) of section 240 (hereinafter called certificate A) shall be in the prescribed form and 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, certificate 
A shall contain the following sta tements and particulars, namely :― 
(i) that the ship is seaworthy;  
(ii) that the ship is properly equipped, fitted and ventilated;  
(iii) the number of special trade passengers the ship is  certified to carry; and  
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Certificate A shall remain in force for a period of one year from the date of issue or for such 
shorter period as may be specified therein.]  
242. Contents of certificate B .―The second of the certificates (hereinafter called certificate B) 
shall be in the prescribed form and shall state ― 
(a) the voyage which the ship is to make, and the intermediate ports  (if any) at which she is to 
touch;  
(b) that she has the proper complement of  officers and seamen;  
4[(c) that the master holds ― 
(i) a certificate of survey and certificate A; or  
(ii) a passenger ship safety certificate accompanied by an exemption certificate, a special 
trade passenger ship safety certificate and a special trade pas senger ship space certificate; or  
(iii) a nuclear passenger ship safety certificate;]  
                                                      
1. Subs. Act 69 of 1976, by  s. 4,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by, s. 4,  ibid.,  for “unles s the master holds the aforesaid certificates ” (w.e.f.1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for section 241 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  99 
 (d) that she has on board such number of medical officers licensed in the prescribed manner 
and such number of attendants, if any, as may be prescribed;  
(e) that food, fu el and pure water over and above what is necessary for the crew, and the other 
things (if any) prescribed for  1[special trade passenger ships] or pilgrim ships, have been placed 
on board, of the quality prescribed, properly packed, and sufficient to supply  the 2[special trade 
passengers] or pilgrims on board during the voyage which the ship is to make (including such 
detention in quarantine as may be probable) according to the prescribed scale;  
(f) in the case of   3[a special trade passenger ship ], if the s hip is to make a voyage in season of 
foul weather specified as such in the rules made under section 262, and to carry upper -deck 
passengers, that she is furnished with substantial bulwarks and a double awning or with other 
sufficient p rotection against the  weather;  
(g) in the case of  3[a special trade passenger ship ], the number of cabin and   2[a special trade 
passengers] embarked at the port of embarkation;  
(h) such other particulars, if any, as may be prescribed for   1[special trade passenger ships] or 
pilgrim ships, as the case may be.  
243. Officers entitled to grant certificates .―The person by whom certificate A and certificate B 
are to be granted shall be the officer appointed under section 238 who is hereinafter referred to as the 
certifying officer.  
244. Survey of ship .―After receiv ing the notice required by section 238, the ce rtifying officer 
may, if he thinks fit, cause the ship to be surveyed at the expense of the master or owner by a 
surveyor, who shall report to him whether the ship is, in his opinion, seaworthy and properly 
equipped, fitted and ventilated for the service o n which she is to be employed : 
4[Provided that he shall not cause a ship holding a valid certificate referred to in sub -clause ( i) or 
sub-clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of section 242 to be surveyed unless, by reason of the 
ship having met w ith damage or having undergone alterations, or on other reasonable grounds, he 
considers it likely that she may be found unseaworthy or not properly equipped, fitted or ventilated for 
the service on which she is to be employed.]  
245. Discretion as to grant  of certificate B .―(1) The certifying officer shall not grant a 
certificate B if he has reason to believe that the leather conditions are likely to be adverse or that the 
ship has on board any cargo likely from its quality, quantity or mode of stowage to prejudice the 
healt h or safety of the  5[special trade passe nger] or pilgrims.  
(2) Save as aforesaid , and subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), it shall be in the discretion 
of the certifying officer to grant or withhold the certificate, and when he withholds the cert ificate, the 
reasons for so doing shall be communicated to the person concerned.  
(3) In the exercise of that discretion that officer shall be subject to the control of the Central 
Government or of such authority as the Central Government  may appoint in thi s behalf.  
246. Copy of certificate A to be exhibited .―The master or owner shall post up in a conspicuous 
part of the ship, so as to be visible to the persons on board thereof, a copy of certificate A granted 
under this Part in respect of the ship and shall  keep that copy so posted up as long as it is in force.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passenger ships”  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “un unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. The proviso subs. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “un berthed passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  100 
 247. Special trade passengers or pilgrims to be supplied with prescribed provisions .―(1) 
The master of  1[a special trade passenger ship] or any contractor employed by him for the purpose 
shall not, wi thout reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which shall lie upon him, omit to supply 
to any  2[special trade passenger] the prescribed allowance of food, fuel and water, and the master of a 
pilgrim ship, or any contractor employed by him for the purpose shall not, without reasonable excuse, 
the burden of proving which shall lie upon him, omit to supply to any pilgrim the prescribed 
allowances of food and of water as required by the provisions of this Part.  
(2) Where, under the terms of the ticket issued t o 3[a special trade passenger ] he is not entitled to 
the supply of food by the master or owner or agent of the ship, sub -section ( 1) shall, in the case of 
such passenger, have effect as if the reference to “food” in that sub -section were omitted.  
248. Numb er of passengers on board not to exceed that allowed by or under this Part .―(1) 
1[a special trade passenger ship] or a pilgrim ship shall not carry a number of  4[special trade 
passengers] or pilgrims, which is greater than the number allowed for the ship by or under this Part.  
(2) Any officer authorised in this behalf by the Cent ral Government may cause all  4[special trade 
passengers] or pilgrims over and above the number allowed by or under this Part to disembark, and 
may forward them to any port at which they may have contracted to land, and recover the cost of so 
forwarding the m from the master, owner or agent of the ship as if the cost were a fine imposed under 
this Part, and a certificate under the hand of that officer shall be conclusive proof of the amount of the 
cost aforesaid.  
249. Speci al trade passenger or pilgrim not to  be landed at a place other than that at which 
he has contracted to land .―No master, owner or agent of  1[a special trade passenger ship] or a 
pilgrim ship shall land any  2[special trade passenger] or pilgrim at any port or place other than the port 
or plac e at which the  2[special trade passenger] or pilgrim may have contracted to land, unless with his 
previous consent, or unless the landing is made necessary by perils of the sea or other unavoidable 
accident.  
250. forwarding of passengers by Indian consular  officers .―(1) If any  2[special trade 
passenger] from a ship which is on a voyage from any port or place in India finds himself without any 
neglect or default of his own at any port or place outside India other than the port or place for which 
the ship was originall y bound or at which he has contracted that he should land; the Indian consular 
officer at or near that port or place may forward the passenger to his intended destination, unless the 
master, owner or agent of the ship within forty -eight hours of the arriva l of the passenger gives to that 
officer a written undertaking to forward the passenger within six weeks thereafter to his original 
destination and forwards him accordingly within that period.  
(2) A passenger so forwarded by or by the authority of an India n consular officer shall not be 
entitled to the return of his passage money or to any compensation for loss of passage . 
251. Recovery of expenses incurred in forwarding passengers .―(1) All expenses incurred 
under section 250 by an Indian consular officer i n respect of the forwarding of a passenger to his 
destination including the cost of maintaining the passenger until forwarded to his destination shall be 
a debt due to the Central Government jointly and severally from the owner, charter, agent and master 
of the ship on board which the passenger had embarked.  
(2) In any proceeding for the recovery of that debt a certificate purporting to be under the hand of 
the Indian consular officer and stating the circumstances of the case and the total amount of the 
expenses shall be prima facie  evidence of the amount of the expenses and of the facts that the same 
were duly incurred.  
252. Ship not to make voyage in contravention of contract .―The master, owner or agent of  1[a 
special trade passenger ship] or a pilgrim shi p shall not, otherwise than by reason of perils of the sea 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “an unberthed passenger ship”  (w.e.f.1 -12-1976 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “an unberthed passenger” (w.e. f. 1-12-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  101 
 or other unavoidable accident, allow the ship to touch at any port or place in contravention of any 
express or implied contract or engagement with the  1[special trade passenger s] or pilgrims with 
respect to the voyage which the ship was to make and the time which that voyage was to occupy, 
whether the contract or engagement was made by public advertisem ent or otherwise.  
253. Information to be sent to ports of embarkation and discharge .―(1) The officer 
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf at any port or place within India at which  2[a 
special trade passenger ship] or a pilgrim ship touches o r arrives, shall send any particulars which he 
may deem important respecting the  3[special trade passenger ship] or pilgrim ship, and the  1[special 
trade passengers] or pilgrims carried therein, to the officer at the port or place from which the ship 
comme nced her voyage, and to the officer at any other port or place within India where the  1[special 
trade passengers] or pilgrims or any of them embarked or are to be discharged.  
(2) The officer aforesaid may go on board any ship referred to in sub -section ( 1) and inspect her 
in order to ascertain whether the provisions of this Act as to the number of  1[special trade passengers] 
or pilgrims and other matters have been complied with.  
254. Reports , etc., under section 253 to be admissible in evidence .―In any proc eeding for the 
adjudication of any penalty incurred under this Part, any document purporting to be a report of such 
particulars as are referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 253, or a copy of the proceedings of any 
court of justice duly authenticated, a nd also any like document purporting to be made and signed by 
an Indian consular officer shall be received in evidence, if it appears to have been officially 
transmitted to any officer at or near the place where the proceeding under this Part is held.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
255. Destination of ship, time of sailing , etc., to be advertised .―(1) The master, owner or agent 
of a 2[a special trade passenger ship] departing or proceeding from any port or place in India 
appointed  in this behalf by the Central Governme nt under sub -section ( 1) of section 237 shall issue at 
such port or place in the prescribed manner an advertisement, containing the particulars required to be 
stated in the notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 238; and such advertisement shall be issued  before 
such reasonable and sufficient inter val as may be prescribed before the date of sailing of any such ship 
from such port or place.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order in writing, exempt any class of ships from the 
operation of sub -section ( 1). 
5[(3) The master, owner or agent of any ship which is intended to sail on a voyage as a pilgrim 
ship from any port or place in India shall, before advertising such ship for the conveyance of pilgrims 
or offering to convey any pilgrim by such ship or sellin g or promising or permitting any person to sell 
a passenger ticket to any pilgrim for conveyance by such ship, supply to the officer appointed in this 
behalf (hereinafter referred to as the pilgrim officer) at the port or place from which the ship is to 
commence the voyage, and at each port or place in India at which she is to touch for the purpose of 
embarking pilgrims, full particulars as to the name, tonnage and age of the ship, the maximum number 
of passage tickets of each class to be issued, the maximu m price of each class of passage tickets, the 
probable date on which the ship is to sail from that port or place, the ports, if any, at which she is to 
touch, the place of her destination, and the probable date of her arrival thereat.  
(4) The master, owner  or agent of the ship shall supply to the pilgrim officer, within three days 
from the date of demand, such further information in regard to the matters mentioned in                          
sub-section ( 3) as that officer  may in writing demand from him.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “an unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. The heading “special provisions relating to unberthed passenger ships ” omitted by  s.  8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  102 
 (5) (a) The master, owner or agent of the ship shall advertise at such port or place and in such 
manner as may be prescribed ― 
(i) the place of destination of the ship,  
(ii) the price of each class of passage tickets which shall not be in excess of the price 
communicated to the pilgrim officer under sub -section ( 3), and  
(iii) the provisional date of sailing from that port or pla ce. 
(b) The master, owner or agent of the ship shall also advertise the final date of sailing not less 
than fifteen days before such date.  
(6) No master, owner or agent shall ― 
(a) without reasonable cause, the burden of proving which shall lie upon him, fa il or refuse to 
supply any particulars or information which he is by or under this section required to supply or 
supply false particulars or information; or  
(b) advertise any ship for the conveyance of pilgrims, or offer to convey pilgrims by any ship, 
or sell or promise or permit any person to sell passage tickets to pilgrims for conveyance by  any 
ship, without having first supplied the particulars required by sub -section ( 3) and in accordance 
with the provisions of that sub -section ( 3); or 
(c) advertise a  price for passage tickets at the port or place in excess of the price 
communicated to the pilgrim officer under sub -section ( 3); or 
(d) offer to convey pilgrims by any ship from any port or place in India or sell or promise or 
permit any person to sell pa ssage tickets to pilgrims for conveyance by a ship from any such port 
or place without having advertised as required by clause ( a) of sub -section ( 5), the matters 
specified in that clause; or  
(e) sell or permit any person to sell to any pilgrim any passage  ticket at a price in excess of the 
price communicated to the pilgrim officer under sub -section ( 3).] 
256. Ship taking additional passengers at intermediate place .―1[(1) If any  2[special trade 
passenger ship] performing a voyage between ports or places in India takes additional  3[special trade 
passengers] on board at an intermediate port or place, the master shall obtain from the certifying 
officer  4[or such other officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf] at the port or 
place a supplemen tary certificate stating ― 
(a) the number of  3[special trade passengers] so taken on board; and  
(b) that food, fuel and pure water over and above what is necessary for the crew, and the other 
things, if any, prescribed for the ship, have been placed on board, of the quality prescr ibed, 
properly packed and sufficient to supply the  3[special trade passengers] on board during the 
voyage which the ship is to make (including such detention in quarantine as may be probable) 
according to the scal e for the time being prescribed : 
Provided t hat, if the certificate B held by the master of the ship states that food, fuel and pure 
water over and above what is necessary for the crew, and the other things, if any, prescribed for her, 
have been placed on board, of the quality prescribed, properly p acked and efficient  to supply the full 
number of 3[special trade passengers] which she is capable of carrying, the master shall not be bound 
to obtain any such supplementary certificate, but shall obtain from the certifying officer an 
endorsement on the ce rtificate B showing the number of passengers taken on board, and the number 
of passengers discharged, at that port or place.  
3[(2) In either of the fol lowing cases, namely :― 
(a) if after a pilgrim ship has departed or proceeded on her voyage any additional pilgrims are 
taken on board at a port or place within India appointed under this Part for the embarkation of 
pilgrims, or  
                                                      
1. Section 256 renumbered as  sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act  69 of 1976, s.10 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).    
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passenger ship”  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  103 
 (b) if a pilgrim ship upon her voyage touches or arrives at any such port or place, having 
previously received on board additional pilgrims at any port or place outside India,  
the master shall obtain a fresh certificate B from the certifying officer or such other officer as the 
Central Government may app oint in this behalf at that port or place, and shall make an additional 
statement specifying the number and the respective sexes of all the additional pilgrims.]  
 257. Statements concerning passengers .―(1) The master of  1[a special trade passenger ship] 
departing or proceeding on a voyage from a port or place in India to a port or place outside India shall 
sign a statement in duplicate, specifying the number and the respective sexes of all the  2[special  trade 
passengers ], and the number of the crew, and shall deliver both copies to the certifying officer,  3[or 
such other officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf] who shall thereupon, after 
having first satisfied himself that the entrie s are correct, countersign and return to the m aster one copy 
of the statement.  
(2) In either of the following cases, namely: ― 
(a) if after the ship has departed or proceeded on such a voyage any additional  2[special trade 
passengers] are taken on board at a port or place within India appointed under this Part for the 
embarkation of  2[special trade passengers;] or  
(b) if the shi p upon her voyage touches or arrives at any such port or place, having previously 
received on board additional  2[special trade passengers] at any port or place outside India;  
the master shall obtain a fresh certificate to the effect of certificate B from t he certifying officer  4[or 
such other officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf] at that port or place, and 
shall make an additional statement specifying the number and the respective sexes of all the additional 
passengers.  
4[(3) The mas ter of every pilgrim ship departing or proceeding from any port or place in India 
shall sign a statement in duplicate in the prescribed form specifying the total number of all the 
pilgrims embarked and the number of pilgrims of each sex embarked and the nu mber of the crew and 
such other particulars as may be prescribed and shall deliver both copies to the certifying officer or 
such other officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf at the port or place and such 
officer shall thereupon, after  having first satisfied himself that the entries are correct, countersign and 
return to the master one copy of the statement.  
(4) The master of every pilgrim ship arriving at any port or place in India at which it may  be 
intended to discharge pilgrims, sha ll, before any pilgrims disembark, deliver a statement signed by 
him specifying the total number of all the pilgrims on board and the number of pilgrims of each sex 
and the number of the crew, and such other particulars as may be prescribed to the certifyi ng officer 
or such other officer as the Central Government may appoint in thi s behalf at the port or place.]  
258. Death of  2[special trade passengers ] on voyage .―(1) The master of any   5[special trade 
passenger ship] performing a voyage between ports or pl aces in India, shall, on arrival at her port of 
destination, notify to the certifying officer or such other officer as the Central Government may 
appoint in this behalf, the date and supposed cause of death of every  6[special trade passenger ] who 
may die o n the voyage.  
(2) The master of any  2[special trade passenger  ship] performing a voyage between a port or place 
in India and a port or place outside India, shall note in writing on the statement or the additional 
statement referred to in section 257 the da te and supposed cause of death of any   6[special trade 
passenger s] who may die on the voyage, and shall, when the ship arrives at her port or place of 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “an unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passenegers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed pass enger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  104 
 destination or at any port or place where it may be intended to land  1[special trade passengers ], and 
before, any passenger leaves the ship, produce the statement with any additions made thereto ― 
(a) where such port or place is in India, to the certifying officer or such other officer as the 
Central Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(b) where such port or place is outside India, to the Indian consular officer.  
2[(3) The master of every pilgr im ship shall note in writing on the copy of the additional statement 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 256 or of the statement referred to in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) 
of section 257, the date and supposed cause of death of any pilgrim who may die on the voyage, and 
shall, when the pilgrim ship arrives at her port or place of destination or at any port or place where it 
may be intended to discharge pilgrims, and before any pilgrims disembark, produce the statement, 
with any additions made thereto, ― 
(a) where such port or place is in India, to the certifying officer or such other officer as the 
Central Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(b) where such port or place is outside India, to the Indian consular officer.]  
 259. Certain ships to carry m edical officer and attendants .―(1) Every ship carrying  1[special 
trade passengers] and crew not exceeding one thousand in number, shall have on board as part of her 
complement at least one medical officer possessing such qualification as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every ship carrying  1[special trade passengers] and crew exceeding one thousand in number 
shall, in addition to a medical officer, have on board as part of her complement such number of 
medical attendants as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every ship carrying  1[special trade passengers] shall be provided with a hospital with such 
medical stores and equipment as may be prescribed.  
 2[(4)(a) Every pilgrim ship carrying pilgrims and crew not exceeding one thousand in number 
shall have on board a medical officer po ssessing such qualifications as may be prescribed, and, if the 
number of pilgrims and crew carried exceeds one thousand, a second medical officer similarly 
qualified and also in all cases such medical attendants as may be prescribed.  
(b) A medical officer of every pilgrim ship shall perform such duties and functions, keep such 
diaries and submit such reports or other returns as may be prescribed.  
(c) No medical officer or attendant on a pilgrim ship shall charge any pilgrim on such ship for his 
services.]  
260. Bringing passengers from foreign port in excess of authorised number prohibited .―No 
owner, agent or master of  3[special trade passenger ship] shall carry or cause to be carried from any 
port or place outside India to any port or place in India a number  of passengers greater than―  
(a) the number allowed for the ship by or under this Part, or  
(b) the number allowed by the licence or certificate, if any, granted in respect of the ship at 
her port or place of departure, whichever number is less.  
261. [Passe nger welfare cess .] Rep. by the Finance Act,  2016 (28 of 2016), s. 239 and the 
Fifteenth Schedule  (w.e.f . 14-5-2016).     
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “an unberthed passenger ship”  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).   105 
 1[261A. Bunks to be provided for passengers .―Every special trade passenger ship making a 
voyage the duration of which, in ordinary ci rcumstances, may extend to seventy -two hours or more 
shall provide for each passenger on board a bunk of the prescribed size and partic ulars.  
261B. Space to be provided for passengers when bunks are not provided .―Every special 
trade passenger ship making  a voyage the duration of which in ordinary circumstances  may not extend 
to seventy -two hours  shall provide space for each pas senger at the prescribed scale.  
261C. Airing space to be provided for passengers .―Every special trade passenger ship shall 
have rese rved as airing space for the use of passengers on board, gratuitously by day and by night, so 
much of the upper deck as is not required for the airing space of the crew or for permanent structure:  
Provided that the upper deck space so provided for passenge rs shall in no case be less than 0.37 
square meter for each passenger.]  
262. Power to make rules as to 2[special trade passenger ships ].―The Central Government 
may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to regulate, in the case of a   2[special 
trade passenger ships] or any class of such ships, all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the classification of v oyages with reference to the distance between the port of departure 
and the port of destination, the duration of the voyage, or any other consideration which the 
Central Government may think fit to take into account for the purpose;   
(b) the seasons of fai r weather and seasons of foul weather for purposes of any voyage;   
(c) the space to be allowed for  3[special trade passengers] in respect of different classes of 
voyages and for seasons of fair and foul weather;   
(d) the disallowance of any space considere d unsuitable by the surveyor for the carriage of   
3[special trade passengers;]   
(e) the space to be set apart for alleyways, passages and the like;   
(f) the provision of airing space for  3[special trade passengers;]   
(g) the scale according to which dining  rooms, latrines, wash place s, baths, dressing rooms 
and other amenities are to be provided;   
(h) the provision of separate accommodation for women and children;   
(i) the prohibition or regulation of the carriage of cargo in any space reserved for passenge rs;  
(j) where the deck on which  3[special trade passengers] are accommodated is not covered with 
wood, the nature of the sheathing to be provided in the spac e reserved for passengers;   
(k) the disposal of baggage of passengers on board ship and the provisions of separate space 
in between -decks for the storage of light baggage;   
(l) the conditions under which passengers may be allowed to be carried in the upper  deck in 
seasons of foul weather;   
(m) the provision of bunks for  3[special trade passengers] or for any proportion of such 
passengers on any specified classes of voyages, and the size and other particulars relating to the 
bunks to be so provided;   
(n) the scale on which food, fuel and water are to be supplied to passengers or to any class of 
passengers, and the quality of the food, fuel and water;   
(o) the nature and extent of hospital accommodation and the medical stores and other 
appliances and fittings to be provided on board for maintaining health, cleanliness and decency;   
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passenger ships” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  106 
 (p) the licensing and appointment of medical officers and attendants in cases where they are 
required by this Part to be carried;   
(q) the boats, anchors and cables to be provided on  board;   
(r) the instruments for purposes of navigation to be supplied;   
(s) the functions of the m aster, medical officer (if any) and other officers of the ship during 
the voyage;   
(t) the access of between -decks passengers to the upper deck;   
(u) the loc al limits within which, and the time and mode at and in which, passengers are to be 
embarked or discharged at any port or place appointed under this Part in that behalf;   
(v) the time within which any ship of a specified class is to depart or proceed on he r voyage 
after commencing to take passengers on board;   
(w) the conditions under which live -stock may be allowed to be carried;   
(x) the licensing, supervision and control of persons engaged in assisting persons to obtain   
1[special trade passenger] accomm odation in ships departing or proceeding from any port or place 
in India and the prohibition of unlicensed persons from being so engaged;   
2*   *   *   *  * 
 (z) generally to carry out the purposes of this Part relating to   [special trade passenger ships.]   
3*** 
263. [Banks to be provided for pilgrims.] Omitted by the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 
1976 (69 of 1976), s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) . 
4[264. Hospital accommodation .―Every special trade passenger ship certified to carry 
more than one hundred passengers on a voyage the duration of which, in ordinary 
circumstances, may extend to forty -eight hours or more, shall provide on board a hospital 
offering such conditions relati ng to security, space, health and sanitation and capable of 
accommodating such proportion of the maximum number of passengers the ship is certified 
to carry, as may be prescribed.]  
265. [Statements concerning pilgrims to be delivered before ship departs .] Omitted by the 
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1976 (69 of 1976), s. 1 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) . 
266. [Pilgrim ships taking additional pilgrims at intermediate places .] Omitted by the Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1976 (69 of 1976), s. 1 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976). 
267. [Particulars relating to deaths of pilgrims on voyage. ] Omitted by the Merchant Shipping 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (69 of 1976), s. 1 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) . 
268. [Statement concerning pilgrims to be delivered before pilgrims disembark in India. ] Omitt ed 
by the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1976 (69 of 1976), s. 1 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) . 
269. [Certain pilgrim ships to carry medical officers and attendants. ] Omitted by the Merchant 
Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1976 (69 of 1976), s. 1 7 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976) . 
270. Bond where pilgrim ship proceeds on outward voyage .―(1) Port clearance shall not be 
granted from any port in India to any pilgrim ship unless the master, owner or agent and two sureties 
resident in India have executed, in favour of the Central Governm ent, a joint and several bond for the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Clause ( y) repealed Act  28 of 2016, s. 239 and the Fifteenth Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
3. The heading “ Special provisions rega rding pilgrim ships ” omitted by Act 69 of 1976, s. 15                  
(w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4.  Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for section 264 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  107 
 sum of ten thousand rupees or has given such other guarantee or security as may be acceptable to that 
Government covering all voyages which may be made by the ship in the current pilgrim season, 
conditioned that — 
(a) the master and medical officer shall comply with the provisions of this Part and the rules 
made there under, and  
(b) the master, owner or agent shall pay any sum claimed by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 277,  
(2) A bond, guarantee o r security may be given under this section covering any or all of the 
pilgrim ships owned by one owner, and in such cases the amount of the bond, guarantee or security 
shall be ten thousand rupees for each ship covered.  
 271. Medical inspection and permiss ion required before embarkation of pilgrims .―(1) No 
pilgrim shall be received on board any pilgrim ship at any port or place in India unless and until he 
has been medically inspected, at such time and place, and in such manner, as the Central Government 
may fix in this behalf, nor until the certify ing officer has given permission for the embarkation of 
pilgrims to commence.  
(2) The medical inspection of female pilgrims shall, subject to any rules which may be made 
under this Act and as far as may be practicable, be carried out by women.  
(3) No pilgr im shall be received on board any pilgrim ship unless he produces the medical 
certificate signed by a person who is duly qualified to grant such certifi cate, showing that such 
pilgrim ― 
(a) has been inoculated against cholera within such period before the inspection , as may be 
prescribed; and  
(b) has been vaccinated against small -pox within such period before the inspection as may  be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the officer making the insp ection may dispense with the certificate of vaccination, if 
in his opinion the pilgrim has marks showing that he has had small -pox. 
(4) If, in the opinion of the officer making an inspection under this section, any pilgrim is 
suffering from cholera or chol eraic indisposition, or any dangerously infectious or contagious disease, 
or shows any signs of the same or any other suspicious symptoms, such pilgrim shall not be permitted 
to embark.  
(5) All articles which have been contaminated by persons suffering fro m cholera or choleraic 
indisposition, or any dangerously infectious or contagious disease, or are suspected having been so 
contaminated shall, before being taken on board a pilgrim ship, be disinfected, under the supervision 
of a medical officer appointed by the Central Government for the purpose, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
272. Medical inspection after embarkation in certain cases .―(1) If in any case a pilgrim ship 
does not proceed on her voyage within forty -eight hours after all the pilgrims have been received on 
board, and there is reason to suspect that any person on board is suffering from cholera or choleraic 
indisposition or any dangerously infectious or contagious disease, a medical inspection of all persons 
on board may be held in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
(2) If on such inspection any person is found to be suffering from cholera or choleraic 
indispos ition or any dangerously infectious or contagious disease, or shows any signs of the same or 
any other suspicious symptoms, he shall, together with all articles belonging to him, be at once 
removed from the ship.  
273. Pilgrims to arrange return passages .―No pilgrim shall be received on board any pilgrim 
ship at any port or place in India unless he — 
(a) is in possession of a return ticket, or  108 
 (b) has deposited with the officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government such 
sum for the purpose of  defraying the cost of a return ticket as that Government may specify by 
notification in the Official Gazette:  
Provided that the authorised officer may exempt any pilgrim from all or any of the aforesaid 
requirements, if he is satisfied that it is inexpedi ent, in the special circumstances of the case, to 
enforce them.  
 274. Issue or production of tickets .―(1) Every pilgrim travelling on a pilgrim ship shall be 
entitled, on payment of his passage money and fulfillment of other prescribed conditions, if any, to 
receive a ticket in the prescribed form, and shall be bound to produce it to such officers and on  such 
occasions as may be prescribed and otherwise to deal with it in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that no pilgrim, who has not been exempted under the proviso to section 273, shall be 
given a ticket other than a return ticket unless he has made the dep osit required by that section.  
(2) Any ticket issued to a pilgrim for a voyage on a pilgrim ship shall entitle him to receive food 
and water, on the scale and of the quality prescribed and medicines free of further charge, throughout 
the voyage.  
 275. Refu nd of passage money and deposits .―(1) Every pilgrim prevented from embarking 
under section 271, or removed from the ship under section 272, or otherwise prevented from 
proceeding shall be entitled to the refund of any passage money which he may have paid, and of any 
deposit which he may have made under section 273.  
(2) Any pilgrim who, within one year of his sailing from India, satisfies the Indian consular 
officer at Jeddah that he intends to return to India by a route other than the route by which he came  
from India, shall be entitled to a refund of any deposit made by him under section 273, or, if he is in 
possession of a return ticket, to a refund of half the passage money paid by him.  
(3) Where any pilgrim dies in the Hedjaz or on the voyage thereto, an y person nominated by him 
in this behalf in writing in the prescribed manner, or, if no person has been so nominated , the legal 
representative of the pilgrim , shall be entitled to a refund of any deposit made by the pilgrim under 
section 273, or, if the pi lgrim was in possession of a return ticket, to a refund of half the passage 
money paid by him.  
(4) Where any pilgrim fails to return to India from the Hedjaz within one year of his sailing from 
India, or returns to India by a route other than the route by which he came from India, he or any 
person nominated by him in this behalf in writing in the prescribed manner shall be entitled to a 
refund of any deposit made by such pilgrim under section 273, or, if such pilgrim was in possession of 
a return ticket, to  a refund of half the passage money paid by such pilgrim, except where such deposit 
or passage money has already been refunded under this section.  
(5) Refunds under this section of deposits shall be subject to such conditions and of passage 
money to such d eductions and conditions as may be prescribed.  
276. Disposal of unclaimed passage money and deposit .―If any pilgrim, — 
(a) who is entitled to a refund of passage money under sub -section ( 1) of section 275 does not 
claim such refund within the prescribed per iod, or  
(b) who has purchased a return ticket, does not on the basis of such ticket obtain a return 
passage from the Hedjaz within the prescribed period and the value of the return half of such 
ticket has not been refunded under section 275, or  
(c) who is entitled under section 275 to a refund of any deposit made under section 273 does 
not claim such refund within the prescribed period,  
such passage money or value or deposit shall, subject to the exercise of the rights conferred by               
sub-section  (4) of section 275, be made over to such authority administering any fund maintained for 109 
 the assistance of pilgrims as the Central Government may, by general or special order, designate in 
this behalf.  
 277. Cost of return journey of pilgrims on ships oth er than those for which return ticket is 
available .―(1) The master, owner or agent of every pilgrim ship shall make all arrangements for 
ensuring the return of all pilgrims in possession of a return ticket issued in India who are carried to the 
Hedjaz by such ship, within a period of ninety days after the  Haj day in a year:  
Provided that, for the purpose of computing the said period of ninety days, no period shall be 
taken into account during which the ship is prevented from carrying pilgrims on the return passage by 
reason of the port of Jeddah having bee n declared by proper authority to be infected or by reason of 
war, disturbance or any other clause not arising from any act or default of the master, owner or agent.  
(2) Where any such pilgrim who has notified to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner 
his desire to embark for the return voyage is, owing to his inability to obtain accommodation within 
the period of ninety days aforesaid in a ship for which the return ticket is available, detained at Jeddah 
beyond the said period, the master, owner  or agent of the ship in which such pilgrim was carried to the 
Hedjaz shall pay to the Central Government in respect of such pilgrim such sum not exceeding double 
the sum received by the master, owner or agent  in respect of the return ticket as the Central  
Government claims as the costs of repatriating the pilgrim, together with a sum of rupees five for each 
day after the expiry of the period aforesaid during which the pilgrim has been detained at Jeddah.  
(3) A certificate of such detention purporting to be  made and signed by the Indian consular officer 
at Jeddah shall be received in evidence in any court in India without proof of the signature or of the 
official character of the person who has signed the same.  
278. [Notice of sailing of pilgrim ship .] Omitt ed by Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act,  1976 
(69 of 1976),  s.17 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976). ] 
279. Compensation for delay in sailing .―(1) If a pilgrim ship  fails to proceed from any port  or 
place on the date advertised under  1[clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) of secti on 255] as the final date of 
sailing there from, the master, owner or agent shall become liable to pay as compensation to each 
pilgrim who has paid his passage money on or before such date the sum of three rupees for each 
completed day during which the sai ling of the ship is delayed after that date:  
Provided that such compensation shall not be payable in respect of any period during which the 
departure of the ship is impossible owing to any cause not arising from the act or default of the 
master, owner or a gent, and the burden of proving such cause shall lie on such master, owner or agent:  
Provided further that where compensation has been paid or has become payable to any pilgrim in 
respect of delay in the sailing of the ship from any port or place and the s ailing of the ship from any 
other port or place is thereafter delayed beyond the date advertised in that behalf, the pilgrim shall be 
entitled to compensation only in respect of any period by which the duration of such further delay 
exceeds the duration of  the delay in respect of which he has already received or become entitled to 
compensation.  
(2) In the event of such failure the master, owner or agent shall be bound forthwith to inform the 
pilgrim officer at the port or place at which the delay occurs of the number of passage tickets of each  
class  which have been issued for the voyage on or before the advertised final date of sailing.  
(3) Any sum payable as compensation under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid on behalf of the 
pilgrims entitled thereto to the p ilgrim officer at the port or place at which the delay occurs on receipt 
by the master, owner or agent of a notice from that officer specifying the sum payable, and that officer 
shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, pay to each such pilgrim the compe nsation paid in respect 
of his detention:  
Provided that, if an objection is made by the master, owner or agent that the sum specified in any 
such notice or any part of such sum is not payable by him, the sum paid or, as the case may be, the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 18, for “clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 278” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976 ). 110 
 balance thereof  remaining after payment to the pilgrim entitled thereto of compensation the right to 
which is not in dispute, shall be held in deposit until  the objection has been decided : 
Provided further that, if for any reason the compensation due to any pilgrim canno t be paid to him 
at the time of embarkation or at or before the time of his disembarkation at the port of his destination, 
the sum so remaining unpaid shall be made over to such authority administering any fund maintained 
for the assistance of pilgrims as the Central Government may, by general or special order, designate in 
this behalf.  
(4) If the master, owner or agent objects that the sum specified in the notice issued under sub -
section ( 3) or any part thereof is not payable by him, he may, at the time of  payment of such sum, give 
to the pilgrim officer notice of his objection , together with a statement of the grounds thereof, and the 
pilgrim officer shall thereupon either cancel or modify the aforesaid notice in accordance with the 
objection and refund th e sum -held in deposit under sub -section ( 3), or refer the objection for decision 
to a 1[Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] exercising jurisdiction at the 
port or place at which the ship is delayed, whose decision on such r eference shall be final; and there 
shall be refunded to the master, owner or agent any amount allowed to him by such decision.  
(5) On the failure of any pilgrim ship to proceed from any port or plac e on the date advertised 
under 2[clause ( b) of sub -section  (5) of section 255] as the date of final sailing there from, the pilgrim 
officer at that port or place shall forthwith give notice of such failure to the officer authorised to grant 
port clearance to ships thereat, and such officer shall refuse port clear ance to the pilgrim ship until the 
master, owner or agent produces to him a certificate of the pilgrim officer that all sums payable by 
way of compensation under this section up to the day on which the ship is to proceed have been paid.  
280. Substitution o f ships .―Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3[255] or section 
279; where any ship has been advertised under section 3[255] for the conveyance of pilgrims has been 
or is likely to be delayed beyond the advertised final date of sailing, the owner or agent may, with the 
permission in writing of the pilgrim officer, substitute for it any other ship which is capable of 
carrying not less than the same number of pilgrims of each class, and on such permission being given 
the advertisement shall be deemed  to have been made in respect of the ship so substituted , and all the 
provisions of those sections shall apply accordingly in respect of such ship.  
 281. Sanitary taxes payable by master of pilgrim ship .―The master of every pilgrim ship 
shall be bound to pay the whole amount of the sanitary taxes imposed by lawful authority at 
the ports visited and such amount shall be included in the cost of the tickets issued to the 
pilgrims.  
 282. Powers to make rules  relating to pilgrim ships .―The Central Government may, subject 
to the condition of previous publication, make rules to regulate all or any of the following matters, 
namely: ― 
(a) the boats, anchors and cables to be provided on board pilgrim ships;  
(b) the instruments to be supplied for purposes of navigation;  
(c) the fittings and other appliances to be provided in the upper and between decks for the 
comfort and convenience of pilgrims;  
(d) the s cale on which, and the manner in which, cooked and uncooked foo d and water arc to 
be supplied to pilgrims , and the quality of such food and water;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Sch edule,  for “Presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class ”             
(w.e.f.18 -5-1983).   
2. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 18, for “clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of section 278” (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).   
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “278” (w.e.f.1 -12-1976).  111 
 (e) the kinds of food to be provided for pilgrims on payment, in addition to the food to be 
supplied in accordance with the rules made under clause ( d), and the charges whi ch may be made 
for the same;  
(f) the quality, quantity and storage of the cargo to be carried;   
(g) the allotment of the upper deck space between the various classes of pilgrims;   
(h) the distribution or disposal of the baggage of pilgrims on board ship;  
(i) the nature and extent of the hospital accommodation and the medical stores, disinfectants, 
and other appliances and fittings to be provided on board free of charge to pilgrims for 
maintaining health, cleanliness and decency;  
(j) the form of the statemen ts to be furnished by the master under  1[section 257] and the 
particulars to be entered therein;  
(k) the appointment of medical officers, and other attendants in cases where they are required 
by the provisions of this Part relating to pilgrim ships to be c arried , and the diaries, reports and 
other returns to be kept or submitted by such medical officers;  
(l) the manner in which contaminated articles shall be disinfected before being taken on board 
a pilgrim ship;  
(m) the manner in which, and the persons by whom, the medical inspection of women shall be 
carried out;  
(n) the manner in which deposits shall be made for the purposes of section 273, and any 
matter in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government, necessary or 
expedient fo r the purp ose of giving effect to the pro visions of that section;  
(o) the manner in which provisional bookings may be made, the acceptance of deposits for 
such bookings and the forfeiture of any part of the deposit in cases in which any such bookings 
are c ancelled;  
(p) the supply of tickets to intending pilgrims, the form of such tickets and the conditions and 
other matters to be specified thereon, and the amount of the sanitary taxes to be included in the 
cost thereof;  
(q) the refund of passage money and d eposits under section 275 and the manner in which 
persons shall be nominated under that section for the purpose of entitling them to a refund;  
(r) the period after which unclaimed passage money and deposits liable to be refunded shall 
be disposed of in the  manner specified in section 276;  
(s) the manner in which the dates of sailing shall be advertised under  2[section 255;] the 
appointment of pilgrim officers for the purposes of that section and sections 279 and 280; the 
manner in which payment shall be mad e under section 279 to pilgrims and to the pilgrim officer; 
and the procedure to be followed by masters, owners or agents and by pilgrim officers 
and 3[Metropolitan Magistrates or Judicial Magistrates of the first class, as the case may be] in 
proceedings under that section;  
(t) the functions of the master, medical officer and other ship's officers during the voyage;  
(u) the local limits within which, and the time and mode at and in which, pilgrims shall be 
embarked or discharged at any port or place appoin ted under this Part in that behalf;  
(v) the time within which a pilgrim ship shall depart or proceed on her voyage after 
commencing to take pilgrims on board;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 20, for "sections 265 and 268" (w.e.f.1 -12-1976).   
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “section 278” (w.e.f.1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and th e Schedule, for “magistrates”  (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  112 
 (w) providing that a pilgrim shall not be received on board any pilgrim ship, unless he is in 
possession of a passport or a pilgrim's pass regulating the issue of pilgrims passes and prescribing 
the form of and fees which may be charged for such passes;  1*** 
2[(ww) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspection of pilgrim ships with respect to 
sanitary conditions, provision of stores, medical facilities available on such ships and such other 
purposes that may be relevant for compliance with the provisions of this Part relating to pilgrim 
ships and the manner in which such fees may be collecte d;] 
(x) generally , to carry out the provisions of this Part relating  to pilgrim ships.  
PART IX  
SAFETY  
283. Countries to which Load Line Convention or Safety Convention applies .―3***The 
Central Government, if satisfied, ― 
(a) that the Government of any count ry has accepted or denounced the Load Line Convention 
or, as the case may be, the Safety Convention;  or 
(b) that the Load Line Convention or, as the case may be, the Safety Convention extends, or 
has ceased to extend to any territory;  
may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, make a declaration to that effect.  
4*   *   *   *   *    
5[283A. Definitions .―(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “existing ship ” or “existing vessel ” means a ship or vessel which is not a new ship or a 
new vessel,  
(b) “new ship ” or “new vessel ” means a ship or vessel whose keel is laid or which is at a 
similar stage of construction on or after the material date as defined in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1) “material date ”;― 
(i) in relation to an Indian ship, means the 21st July, 1968;  
(ii) in relation to a foreign ship belonging to  a country to which the Load Line Convention 
applies, means the date as from which it is declared under section 283 that the Government of 
such country has accepted the Load Line Convention or, as the case may be, that the said 
Convention has been applied to such country.]  
Construction of ships  
284. Construction rules .― (1) The Central Government may make rules (in this Act called the 
construction rules), prescribing the requirements that the hull, equipment and machinery of Indian  
6[passenger or cargo ships] shall comply with.  
(2) The rules made under sub -section ( 1) shall include such requirements as appear to the Central 
Government to implement the provisions of the Safety Convention prescribing the requirements that 
the hull, equipment and machinery of  1[passenger or cargo ships] shall comply with, except so far as 
those provisions are implemented by the rules for life saving appliances, the radio rules, the rules for 
direction finders or the collision regulations.  
7[Provided that different requirements may be specified for special trade passenger ships]  
                                                      
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 12 of 1983, s. 8 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983)    
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).    
3. The brackets and figure  “(1)” omitted by Act 25 of 1970,  s. 3 (w.e.f.21 -7-1968).   
4. Omitted by s. 3,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.21 -7-1968).  
6. Subs . by Act 21 of 1966, s. 7, for “passenger ships ” (w.e.f. 28-5-1966).   
7. Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s . 21 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).  
 113 
 (3) The powe rs conferred on the Central Government by this section shall be in addition to the 
powers conferred by any other provision enabling it to prescribe the requirements that  1[passenger or 
cargo ships] shall comply with.   
Prevention of collisions  
285. Collisio n regulations .―(1) The Central Government may make regulations for the 
prevention of collisions at sea and may thereby regulate the lights and shapes to be carried and 
exhibited, the fog and distress signals to be carried and used, and the steering and sailing rules to  be 
observed by Indian ships and sailing vessels registered in India.  
(2) The collision regulations, together with the provisions of this Part relating thereto or otherwise 
relating to collisions, shall be observed by all foreign ships and sailing vessels within Indian 
jurisdiction, and in any case arising in any Court in India concerning matters arising within Indian 
jurisdiction, such ships and sailing vessels shall, so far as respects the collision regulations and the 
said provisions of this Act, be trea ted as if they were Indian ships or sailing vessels registered in India, 
as the case may be.  
286. Observance of collision regulations .―(1) The owner or master of every ship and the owner 
or tindal of every sailing vessel to which section 285 applies shall obey the colli sion regulations, and 
shall not carry or exhibit any lights or shapes or use any fog or distress signals, other than those 
required by the said regulations.  
(2) If any damage to person or property arises from the non -observance by any such sh ip or 
sailing vessel of any of the collision regulations, the damage shall be deemed to have been occasioned 
by the willful default of the person in charge of the ship or the sailing vessel, as the case may be, at 
the time unless it is shown to the satisfa ction of the court that the circumstances of the case made a 
departure from the regulations necessary.  
287. Inspectors of lights and shapes and fog and distress signals .―(1) The Central 
Government may appoint persons to inspect in any port ships or sailing  vessels to which the collision 
regulations apply, for the purpose of seeing that such ships or sailing vessels ar e properly provided 
with lights and shapes and with the means of making fog and distress signals, in pursuance of such 
regulations.  
(2) If an inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) finds that any ship or sailing vessel is not so 
provided, he shall give to the owner, master or tindal, notice in writing pointing out the deficiency, 
and also what, in his opinion, is requisite in order to remedy the same.  
(3) Every notice so given shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to the customs 
collector at any port from which such s hip or sailing vessel may seek to clear; and no customs 
collector to whom such communication is made shall grant such s hip a port clearance or allow her to 
proceed to sea without a certificate under the hand of some person appointed as aforesaid, to the effect 
that the said ship or sailing vessel is properly provided with lights and shapes and with the means of 
making fog and distress signals in pursuance of the said regulations.  
Life saving appliances and fire appliances  
288. Power to make rules as to life saving appliances .―(1) The Central Government may, 
subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules prescr ibing the life saving appliances to 
be carried by every Indian ship going to sea from any port or place in India.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matte rs namely :― 
(a) the arranging of ships into classes, having regard t o the services in which they are  
employed, the nature and duration of the voyage and the number of persons carried;  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 21 of 1966, s. 7, for “passenger ships ” (w.e.f. 28-5-1966).  114 
 (b) the number, description and mode of construction of the boats, life -rafts, line throwing 
appliances, life -jackets and life -buoys to be carried by ships according to the classes in which the 
ships are arranged;  
(c) the equipment to be carried by any such boats and rafts and the method to be provided to 
get the boats and other  life sa ving appli ances into the water, including oil for use in stormy 
weather;  
(d) the provision in ships of a proper supply of lights inextinguishable in water and fitted for 
attachment to life -buoys;  
(e) the quantity, quality and description of buoyant apparat us to be carried on board ships 
either in addition to or in substitution for boats, life -rafts, life -jackets and life -buoys;  
(f) the position and means of securing the boats, life -rafts, life -jackets, life -buoys and buoyant 
apparatus;  
(g) the marking of bo ats, life -rafts, and buoyant apparatus so as to show their dimensions and 
the number of persons authorised to be carried on them;  
(h) the meaning of life -boats and the qualifications and certificates of life -boatmen;  
1[(hh) the training of crew in launchin g and using life -rafts;]  
(i) the provision to be made for mustering  the persons on board and for embarking them in 
the 2[boats or rafts] (including provision for the lighting of, and the means of ingress to and egress 
from, different parts of the ship);  
(j) the provision of suitable means situated outside the engine room whereby any discharge of 
water into the  2[boats or rafts] can be prevented;  
(k) the assignment of specific duties to each member of the crew in case of emergency;  
(l) the manner in which a notice given under section 287 or section 290 shall be 
communicated to the customs collector;  
(m) the practice in ships of boat drills, and fire drills;  
(n) the provision in ships of means of making effective distress signals by day and by night;  
(o) the provision in ships, engaged on voyages in which pilots are likely to be embarked, of 
suitable pilot ladders  and of ropes, lights and other appliances designed to make the use of such 
ladders safe;  
(p) the periodical examination of any appliances or equipme nt required by any rules made 
under this Act to be carried by ships; and  
(q) the fees to be charged for the grant of any certificate under sub -section ( 3) of section 290.  
289. Rules relating to fire appliances .―The Central Government may make rules 
prescri bing the methods to be carried and the appliances to be carried by every Indian ship 
going to sea from any port or place in India for the prevention, detection and extinction of fire 
on the ship (hereinafter referred to as fire appliances).  
290. Inspection  of life saving appliances and fire appliances .―(1) A surveyor may, at any 
reasonable time, inspect any ship for the purpose of seeing that she is properly provided with life 
saving and fire appliances in conformity with the rules made under this Act.  
(2) If the said surveyor finds that the ship is no t so provided he shall give to the master or owner 
notice in writing pointing out the deficiency, and also pointing out what in his opinion is requisite to 
remedy the same.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 8 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “boats” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  115 
 (3) Every notice so given shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to the cus toms 
collector of any port at which the ship may seek to obtain a clearance and the ship shall be detained 
until a certificate signed by such surveyor is produced to the effect that the ship is properly provided 
with life saving and fire appliances in conf ormity with the said rules.  
Installation of Radio Telegraphy, Radio Telephony and Direction Finders  
291. Radio requirements .―1[(1) Every Indian passenger ship and every Indian cargo ship of 
three hundred tons gross tonnage or more, shall in accordance with  the rules made under section 296, 
be provided with a radio installation and shall maintain a radio telegraph service or a radio telephone 
service of the prescribed nature and shall be provided with such certificated operators as may be 
prescribed.]  
(2) The radio installation required under the said rules to be provided for a passenger ship or 
for 2[any cargo ship of sixteen hundred tons gross or more shall be a radio telegraph installation; and 
that required to be provided for a cargo ship of less than six teen hundred tons gross] shall be either a 
radio telegraph installation or a radio -telephone installation at the option of the owners.  
3[(3) The Central Government may, having regard to the length of the voyage or voyages on 
which a ship or a class of ship s is engaged and the maximum distance of such ship or class of ships 
will be from the shore during such voyage or voyages, exempt, by order in writing and subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, any ship or class of ships f rom compliance 
with all or any of the obligations imposed by or under this section if that Government is satisfied that 
such compliance would be unreasonable or unne cessary : 
Provided that an exemption from the obligation to provide with radio telegraph ins tallation in 
respect of any passenger ship or in respect of any cargo ship of sixteen hundred tons gross tonnage or 
more shall be subject to the condition that she shall have on board a radiotelephone installation :  
Provided further that no exemption shall  be granted under this section, if it will have an adverse 
effect on the general efficiency of the distress service for the safety of ships.]  
 292. Radio direction finding apparatus .―4[(1)] Every Indian ship of sixteen hundred tons 
gross or more shall be p rovided with a radio direction finder of the prescribed description.  
5[(2) The Central Government may, by order in writing and subject to such conditions and 
restrictions as may be specified therein, exempt any ship under five thousand tons gross tonnage f rom 
the obligation imposed by sub -section ( 1), if that Government is satisfied, having regard to the area or 
areas in which the ship is engaged on a voyage or voyages and the value of radio direction finder as a 
navigational instrument and as an aid to loc ating ships, aircraft or survival craft, that such compliance 
would be unreasonable or unnecessary.]  
293.  Radio log .―(1) Every ship compulsorily equipped under the provisions of section 291 with 
a radio telegraph or radio telephone installation shall main tain in the radio telegraph or radio 
telephone room a radio log in which shall be entered such particulars relating to the operation of the 
radio telegraph or radio telephone installation and as to the maintenance of the radio telegraph or radio 
telephone service as may be prescribed.  
(2) The provisions of section 215 shall apply to the radio log kept under this section as if it were 
an official log.  
294. Powers of radio inspectors .―(1) A radio inspector may inspect any ship for the purpose of 
seeing that she is properly provided with a radio telegraph or radio telephone installation and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 9, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for "any other ship of si xteen hundred tons gross or more shall be a radio telegraph installation; 
and that required to be provided for a ship of less than sixteen hundred tons gross, other than a passenger ship ”  
(w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
4. Section 292 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by s. 10 , ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
5. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  116 
 certificated operators in conformity with this Part, and for this purpose may go on board any sh ip at 
all reasonable times and do all things necessary for the proper inspection of the ship for the purpose of 
the provisions of this Part relating to radio telegraphy or radio telephony and may also require the 
master of the ship to supply him with any i nformation which it is in the power of the master to supply 
for that purpose, including the production of any certificate granted under this Part in respect of the 
installation, and of the certificates of the operators  1*** on the ship :  
Provided that if a  valid safety convention certificate is produced in respect of any ship other than 
an Indian ship, the inspection shall be limited to seeing that the ship is provided with a radio telegraph 
or radio telephone installation and that the number of certified o perators corresponds substantially 
with the particulars stated in the certificate.  
(2) If a radio inspector finds that a ship is not so provided, he shall give to the master or owner 
notice in writing pointing out the deficiency, and also pointing out what  in his opinion is requisite to 
remedy the same.  
(3) Every notice given under sub -section ( 2) shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to 
the customs collector of any port at which the ship may seek to obtain port clearance who shall order 
that the s hip shall be detained until a certificate under the hand of a radio inspector is produced to the 
effect that the ship is properly provided with a radio telegraph or radio telephone installation and 
certified operators  1*** in conformity with this Part.  
295. Application of this Part to ships other than Indian ships .―The provisions of this Part 
relating to radio telegraphy, radio telephony and direction finders shall apply to ships other than 
Indian ships while they are within any port in India in like manner  as they apply to Indian ships.  
296. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may make rules  to carry out the 
purposes of this Part relating to radio telegraphy or radio telephony,  2[or radio direction finders.]  
(2) In particular and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
prescribe ― 
(a) the nature of the radio telegraph or radio telephone installation and radio direction finding 
apparatus to be provided and of the service to be maintained, the form of the radio log  and the 
particulars to be entered therein, and the number, grades and qualifications of certified operators 
to be carried;  
2[(aa) the nature of radio telegraph installation to be provided on motor life -boats and survival 
craft.]  
(b) the manner in which a notice given under section 294 shall be communicated to the 
customs collector.  
(c) the charging of fees for the grant of the certificate referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 
294, the amount of such fees and the manner in which they shall be recoverabl e. 
Signalling lamps  
297. Signalling lamps .―Every Indian ship exceeding one hundred and fifty tons gross shall, 
when proceeding to sea from any port or place in India to any port or place outside India, be provided 
with a  3[signalling lamp which shall not b e solely dependent upon the ship's main source of electrical 
power and whic h shall be of the type approved ]by the Central Government.  
                                                      
1. The words “and watche rs” omitted by Act 21 of 1966, S. 11 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “signalling lamp of the type approved ” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
 117 
 Stability Information  
298. Information about ship's stability .―(1) There shall be carried on board every Indian ship 
whos e keel was laid after the 15th day of June, 1953, such information in writing  1[as is necessary to 
enable the master by rapid and simple processes to obtain accurate guidance as to the stability of the 
ship under varying conditions of service.]  
2[(2) The i nformation shall be in such form as may be approved by the Central Government 
(which may approve the provision of the information in the form of a diagram or drawing only) and 
shall be suitably amended whenever any alterations are made to the ship so as to  materially affect 
such information.  
(2A) The information shall be based on the determination of the ship's stability by means of an 
inclining test of the ship and any amendment thereto shall be effected, if necessa ry, after re -inclining 
the ship : 
Provided  that the Central Government may, by a general or special order ― 
(a) in the case of any ship, allow the information or an amendment thereto to be based on a 
similar determination of the stability of a sister -ship;  
(b) in the case of a ship specially designed for the carriage of liquids or ore in bulk, or of any 
class of such ships, dispense with such tests if it is satisfied from the information available in 
respect of similar ship that the ship's proportions and arrangements are such as to ensure more 
than sufficient stability in a ll probable loading conditions.]  
(3) When any information  3[including any amendment thereto] under this section is provided for 
any ship, the owner shall send a copy thereof to the Director -General.  
(4) It is hereby declared that for the purpose of section 208 (which requires documents relati ng to 
navigation to be delivered by the master of a ship to his successor) information  3[including any 
amendment thereto] under this section shall be deemed to be a document relating to the navigation of 
the ship.  
Safety certificates, safety equipment cert ificates, safety radio certificates, exemption 
certificates, etc.  
299. Safety certificates and qualified safety certificates for passenger ships .―(1) Where, on 
receipt of a declaration of survey granted under Part VIII in respect of passenger ship, the Central 
Government  is satisfied that the ship complies with the construction rules and with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made there und er relating to life s aving and fire appliances and  4[radio 
installation ] applicable to such ship and is  provided with lights and shapes and the means of making 
fog and distress signals required by the collision regulations, the Central Government may issue  in 
respect of the ship a certificate in the prescribed form to be called a  5[passenger ship safety 
certificate.]  
(2) Where on receipt of a declaration of survey granted under Part VIII in respect of a passenger 
ship the Central Government is satisfied tha t there is in force in respect of the ship an exemption 
certificate granted under section 302 and that the ship complies with all the requirements referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) other than those from which the ship is exempt under that certificate, the Cen tral 
Government may issue in respect of the ship a certificate in the prescribed form to be called 
a 6[qualified passenger ship safety certificate].  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 14, for “about the ship ‟s stability as is necessary for the guidance of the master in loading 
and ballasting the ship” (w.e.f.  28-5-1966).   
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 8, for “radio telegraphy or radio telephony installation and radio direction finder ” 
(w.e.f.1 -2-2003).  
5.  Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 15, for “safety certificate” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “qualified safety ce rtificate”, (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  118 
 1[(3) Where on receipt of a declaration of survey granted under Part VIII in respect of a special 
trade pas senger ship  2***, the Central Government is satisfied that the ship complies with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made there under relating to construction, life saving appliances 
and space requirements, it may in addition to the certificates refe rred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), 
issue in respect of the ship a special trade passenger ship safety certificate and a special trade 
passenger ship space certificate.]  
3[(4) The certificates issued under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 300 
and section 301 shall be supplemented by a record of equipment in the prescribed form.]  
4[299A. Safety construction certificates and construction certificates for cargo ships .―(1) 
Where in respect of any Indian cargo ship  5*** 6[the Centra l Government or any person authorised by 
by it in this behalf] is satisfied that the ship has been surveyed in the manner prescribed under section 
299B and that she complies with the construction rules made under section 284,  6[that Government or 
the authoris ed person] may issue in respect of the ship ― 
(a) 7[if the ship is of five hundred tons gross or more and performs international voyages], a 
certificate in the prescribed form to be called a cargo ship safety construction certificate;  
(b) in other cases, a certificate in the prescribed form, to be c alled a cargo ship construction 
certificate.  
(2) Where in respect of any such ship as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) there is no force an 
exemption certificate granted under section 302  8[and the Central Government or any person 
authorised by it in this  behalf] is satisfied that the ship complies with all the requirements referred to 
in that sub -section other than those from which the ship is exempt under that certificate, the  6[that 
Government or the authorised person] may issue in respect of the ship a  certificate in the prescribed 
form to be called a qualified cargo ship safety construction certificate or a qualified cargo ship 
construction certificate.  
9[(3) The owner of every ship in respect of which a certificate is issued under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 300 or section 301 shall, so long as the 
certificate remains in force, cause the ship to be surveyed in the manner as specified in the Safety 
Convention or in cases where such specified manner i s not applicable, in such manner as the rules 
made in this behalf prescribe, as the case may be.]  
299B . Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules to regulate the making of surveys of c argo ships under this part.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely : — 
(a) the times and places at which, and the manner in which, surveys arc  to be made;  
(b) the requirements as to construction, machinery, equipment and marking of sub -division 
load-lines which are to be fulfilled by cargo ships generally or by any class of cargo ships in 
particular;  
(c) the duties of the surveyor making a surve y; 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 22 (w.e.f.1 -12-1976).   
2. The words “ or a pilgrim ship ” omitted by Act 63 of 2002 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
4. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 16 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
5. The w ords “of five hundred tons gross or more ” omitted by Act 41 of 198 4, s. 18  (w.e.f. 1 5-7-1985).  
6. Su bs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 9, for “the Central Government ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
7. Subs. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 18, for “if the ship performs international voyages” (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
8 Subs . by Act 63 of 2002 , s. 9, for “of the Act and the Central Governmen t” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
9. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-2003).  119 
 (d) the rates according to which the fees payable in respect of surveys are to be calculated in 
the case of all or any of the places or ports of survey;  
(e) the closing of and keeping closed, the openings in ships ‟ hulls and any water -tight 
bulkheads;  
(f) the securing of and keeping in place, and the inspection of , contrivances for closing any 
such openings as aforesaid;  
(g) the operation of mechanisms of contrivances for closing any such openings as aforesaid 
and the drills in connection with the operat ion thereof; and  
(h) the entries to be made in the official log book or other record to be kept of any of the 
matters aforesaid.]  
1[300. Cargo ship safety equipment and cargo ship equipment certificates for ships other 
then passenger ships .―(1) Where in re spect of an Indian cargo ship the Central Government or any 
person authorised by it in this behalf is satisfied that the ship complies with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder relating to life saving and fire appliances applicable to s uch ship and is 
provided with lights and shapes and the means of making fog and distress signals required by the 
collision regulations, that Government or the authorised person may issue in respect of the ship - 
(a) if the ship is of five hundred tons gross  or more and performs international voyages, a 
certificate in the prescribed form to be called a cargo ship safety equipment certificate;  
(b) in other cases, a certificate in the prescribed form to be called a cargo ship equipment 
certificate.  
(2) Where, i n respect of a ship referred to in sub -section ( 1), there is in force an exemption 
certificate granted under section 302 and the Central Government or any person authorised by it in 
this behalf is satisfied that the ship complies with all the requirements referred to in that sub -section, 
other than , those from which the ship is exempt under that certificate, that Government or the 
authorised person may issue a certificate in the prescribed form to be called a qualified cargo ship 
safety equipment certificat e or a qualified cargo ship equipment certificate, as the case may be.]  
2[301. Cargo ship safety radio certificate and qualified cargo ship safety radio certificate , 
etc.―The owner or master of any Indian cargo ship, which is required by the provisions of section 
291 to be provided with a radio installation shall, if the Central Government or any person authorised 
by it in this behalf is satisfied that the ship complies wi th all the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder relating to radio installation applicable to such ship, receive ― 
(a) in the case of a ship of three hundred tons gross or more, a certificate in the prescribed 
form to be called a cargo ship s afety radio certificate;  
(b) in the case of a ship of three hundred tons gross or more but less than three thousand tons 
gross performing voyages only between ports or places in India, a certificate in the prescribed 
form to be called a qualified cargo shi p safety radio certificate; and  
(c) in other cases, a certificate in the prescribed form to be called a cargo ship radio 
certificate.]  
 302. Exemption certificates .―The owner or master of an Indian ship which is exempt from any 
of the provisions of the construction rules or of this Act and the rules made thereunder relating to life 
saving and fire appliances and radio telegraphy or radio telephony installation shall , on application to 
the officer appointed  in this behalf by the Central Government receive from such officer a certificate 
in the prescribed form to be called an exemption certificate.   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 10, for section 300 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for section 301 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  120 
 1[303. Duration of certificates .―(1) A passenger ship safety certifica te, a qualified passenger 
ship safety certificate, a special trade passenger ship safety certificate and a special trade passenger 
ship space certificate issued under this Part shall be in force for a period of twelve months from the 
date of its issue or f or such shorter period as may be specified in the certificate.  
(2) A cargo ship safety equipment certificate, a qualified cargo ship safety equipment certificate, a 
cargo ship equipment certificate, a qualified cargo ship equipment certificate, a cargo shi p safety 
construction certificate, a qualified cargo ship safety construction certificate, a cargo ship construction 
certificate, a qualified cargo ship construction certificate, a cargo ship safety radio certificate, a 
qualified cargo ship safety radio ce rtificate and a cargo ship radio certificate issued under this Part 
shall be in force for a period of five years from the date of its issue or for such shorter period as may 
be specified in the certificate.  
(3) An exemption certificate issued under section  302 shall be in force for the period for which the 
certificate to which it relates remains in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the 
exemption certificate.  
(4) Notwithstanding the requirements of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) when the  survey is 
completed within three months before the expiry date of the existing certificate, the new certificate 
may be valid from the date of completion of the survey, ― 
(a) for a passenger ship, a date not exceeding twelve months; and  
(b) for a cargo ship, a date not exceeding five years,  
from the date of expiry of the existing certificate.  
(5) The Central Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf may gr ant an extension 
of any certificate issued under this Par t in respect of an Indian ship―  
(a) where the ship is not in a port in which it is to be surveyed, on the date when the 
certificate would, but for the extension, have expired, for such period not exc eeding three months 
from the said date as may be sufficient to enable the ship to complete its voyage to the port in 
which it is to be surveyed;  
(b) where the ship is engaged on a short voyage and whose certificate has not been extended 
under clause ( a), for a period up to one month from the date when the certificate would have 
expired:  
Provided that any extension granted under clause ( a) shall cease to be operative upon the ship's 
arrival at the port referred to in that clause:  
Provided further that no ext ension shall be granted under clause ( b) in respect of a certificate 
extended under clause ( a). 
(6) Where an existing certificate of a ship has been extended under sub -section (5) and when 
survey is completed, the new certificate shall be valid up to, ― 
(a) for a passenger ship, a date not exceeding twelve months; or  
(b) for a cargo ship, a date not exceeding five years,  
from the date of expiry of the existing certificate.  
(7) In special circumstances where the Central Government so determines, a new certif icate, need 
not be dated from the date of expiry of the existing certificate, shall be valid up to, ― 
(a) for a passenger ship, a date not exceeding twelve months;  
(b) for a cargo ship, a date not exceeding five years,  
from the date of completion of the survey.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 12, for section 303 (w.e.f . 1-2-2003).  121 
 (8) Where a certificate referred to in sub -section ( 2) is issued for a period of less than fi ve years, 
the Central Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf may extend the validity of the 
certificate beyond the expiry date to the maximum period specified in sub -section ( 2) if appropriate 
surveys, applicable when a certificate is iss ued for a period of five years, are carried out.  
(9) If a survey has been completed and a new certificate cannot be issued or placed on board the 
ship before the expiry date of the existing certificate, the Central Government or any person 
authorised by it  in this behalf may endorse the existing certificate and such certificate shall be in force 
for a further period which shall not exceed five months from the expiry date of the existing certificate.  
(10) If annual, intermediate or periodical surveys in the manner as specified in the Safety 
Convention or in cases where such specified manner is not applicable, in such manner as the rules 
made in this behalf prescribe, as the case may be, are completed before the pe riod stipulated therefore, 
then― 
(a) the anniversary date mentioned on the relevant certificate shall be amended by 
endorsement to a date which shall not be more than three months later than the date on which the 
survey was completed;  
(b) the subsequent surveys shall be completed at the  stipulated intervals using the new 
anniversary date so endorsed;  
(c) the expiry date may remain unchanged provided one or more annual, intermediate or 
periodical surveys, as the case may be, are carried out so that the maximum stipulated intervals 
between  the surveys are not exceeded.  
(11) A certificate issued under section 299A, section 300 or secti on 301 shall cease to be valid, ― 
(a) if the relevant surveys specified in the Safety Convention or in cases where such specified 
manner is not applicable, in such manner as the rules made in this behalf prescribe, as the case 
may be, are not completed within the stipulated period;  
(b) if the certificate is not endorsed; or  
(c) if the ship ceases to be an Indian ship.]  
304. Modification of safety convention certificates as respects life saving appliance s.―(1) If 
an Indian ship in respect of which  1[a passenger ship safety certificate]  2[or a special trade passenger 
ship safety certificate] issued under section 299 is in force has on board in the course of a particular 
voyage a total number of persons less than the number stated in the certificate to be the number for 
which the life saving appliances on the ship provide, the owner or master of the ship may obtain from 
the authority issuing the certificate, or any person , authorised by the authority for the purpose, a 
memorandum to be attached to the certificate stating the total number of pe rsons carried on the ship 
on that voyage, and the modifications which may be made for the purpose of that voyage in the 
particulars with respect to life saving appliances stated in the certificate.  
(2) Where a valid  3[passenger ship safety certificate or s pecial trade passenger ship safety 
certificate] is produced in respect of a passenger ship other than an Indian ship and there is attached to 
the certificate a memorandum which ― 
(a) has been issued by or under the authority of the Government of the country in which the 
ship is registered, and  
(b) modifies for me purpose of any particular voyage, in view of the number of persons 
actually carried on that voyage, the particulars st ated in the certificate with respect to life saving 
appliances,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966,  s. 20, for  “a safety certificate ” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
2.  Ins. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “safety convention certificate” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  122 
 the certificate shall have effect for the purpose of that voyage as if it  were modified in accordance 
with the memorandum.   
305. Recognition of certificates issued outside India .―A valid safe ty convention certificate 
issued in respect of a ship other than an Indian ship by the Government of the country to which the 
ship belongs shall, subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf , have the 
same effect in India as the corresponding certificate issued in respect of an Indian ship under this Part.  
306. Issue of certificates to foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign countries .―(1) 
The Central Government may, at the request of the Government of a country to which the Safety 
Convention applies, cause an appropriate safety convention certificate to be issued in respect of a ship  
1[registered or to be registered] in that country, if it is satisfied in like manner as in the case of an 
Indian ship that such certificate can properly be issued, and , where a certificate is issued at such a 
request, it shall contain a statement that it has been so is issued.  
(2) The Central Government ma y request the Government of a country to which the Safety 
Convention applies , to issue an appropriate safety convention certificate  2[in respect of a ship 
registered or to be registered in India] and a certificate issued in pursuance of such a request and 
containing a statement that it has been so issued shall have effect for the purpose of this Act as if it 
had been issued by the Central Government.  
307. Prohibition on proceeding to sea without certificates .―3[(1) No Indian passenger ship 
shall proceed on a voyage from any port or place in India to any port or place out side India ― 
(a) if the ship is a ship, other than a special trade passenger ship, unless there is in forc e in 
respect of the ship either―  
(i) a passenger ship safety certificate issued under  section 299; or  
(ii) a qualified passenger ship safety certificate issued under section 299 and an 
exemption certificate issued under section 302;  
(b) if the ship is a special trade passenger ship, unless there is in force in respect of the ship 
the certi ficate referred to in sub -clause ( i) of c lause ( a) or the certificates referred to in sub -clause 
(ii) of that clause and a special trade passenger ship safety certificate and a special trade passenger 
ship space certificate,  
being in each case a certificat e which by the terms thereof is applicable to the voyage on which the 
ship is about to proceed and to the trade in which she is for the time being engaged.]  
(2) No sea -going  4[Indian cargo ship, of five hundred tons gross or more,] shall proceed on a 
voyag e from any place in India to any place outside India unless there is in force in respect of the    
ship― 
(a) such certificate or certificates as would be required in her case by the provisions of             
sub-section ( 1) if she were a passenger ship, or  
5[(b) a cargo ship safety construction certi ficate issued under section 299 A, a cargo ship 
safety equi pment certificate issued under section 300 and a cargo ship safety  6[radio certificate] 
issued under section 301, or]  
(c) a 7[qualified cargo safety equipment certificate ] issued under section 300 and an 
exemption certificate issued under section 302 being  certificates which by the terms thereof are 
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 21 of  1966, s. 21, for “registered” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “in respect of an Indian ship” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2 4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 22, for “Indian s hip of five hundred tons gross or more, not being a passenger ship ” 
(w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
5. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 13, for “radio telegraphy certificate or a cargo ship safety radio telephony  certificate” 
(w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
7. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 22, for “qualified safety equipment certificate” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  123 
 applicable to the voyage on which the ship is about to proceed and to the trade in which she is for 
the time being engaged.  
1[(2A) No sea -going Indian cargo ship, less than five hundred tons gross, shall proceed  on a 
voyage from any port or place in India to any port or place in India or to any port or place outside 
India unless there is in force in respect of the ship a cargo ship construction certificate issued under 
section 299A and a cargo ship equipment cert ificate issued under section 300 and, ― 
(i) a cargo ship safety radio certificate if the ship is three hundred tons gross or more;   
(ii) a qualified cargo ship safety radio certificate if the ship is operating within ports or places 
in India and is of three hundred to five hundred tons gross; or  
(iii) a cargo ship radio certificate if the ship is less than three hundred tons gross,  
issued under section 301.]   
(3) No sea -going  2[Indian cargo ship of  the five hundred tons gross or more,] shall proceed on a 
voyage between ports or places in Indi a unless there is in force in respect of the ship ―  
(a) 3[a cargo ship  4[safety construction certificate or cargo ship construction certificate issued 
under section 299A]   
(b) a 5[cargo ship equipment certificate or a]  6[qualified cargo ship equipment certificate] 
issued under section 300 and an exemptio n certificate issued under section 302;   
(c) a 7[cargo ship]  8[safety radio certificate or a qualified cargo ship safety radio certificate, if 
the ship operates between ports or places in India and is between five hundred to three thousand 
tons gross]  issued under section 301 or an exemption certificate issued under section 302;   
being a certificate which by the terms thereof is applicable to the voyage on which the ship is about to 
proceed and to the trade in which she is for the time being engaged.   
(4) The master of every ship to which this section applies shall produce to the customs collector 
from whom a port clearance for the ship is demanded the certificate or certificates required by the 
foregoing provisions of this section to be in force when the sh ip proceeds to sea, and the port 
clearance shall not be granted and the ship may be detained until the said certificate or certificates are 
so produced.  
308. Production of certificates by ships other than Indian ships .―(1) The master of  9[every 
ship, being a passenger ship or being a cargo ship of three hundred tons gross or more,] belonging to a 
country to which the Safety Convention applies, shall produce a valid safety convention certificate to 
the customs collector  from whom a clearance for the ship is demanded in respect of a voyage from a 
port or place in India to a port or place outside India and a clearance shall not be granted and the ship 
may be detained until such a certificate is so produced.  
(2) Where a val id safety convention certificate is produced in respect of a ship,10*** the ship , 
not be deemed to be unsafe for the purpose of section 342 by reason of the defective condition of her 
hull, equipment or machinery unless it appears that the ship cannot  proceed to sea without danger to 
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 63 of 2002, s 13 , for sub -section ( 2A) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 22, for “Indian s hip of five hundred tons gross or more, not being a passenger ship,”                 
(w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs . by s. 22, ibid., for “an equipment certificate ” (w.e.f. 28-5-1966).   
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 13, for “equipment certif icate issued under , section 300”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
5. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
6. Subs . by Act 21 of 1966, s. 22, for “qualified equipment certificate ” (w.e.f. 28-5-1966).    
7. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-5-1966).    
8. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 22, f or “radio telegraphy certificate or a cargo ship radio telephony certificate ”             
(w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
9. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 23, for “every ship other than an Indian ship being a passenger ship of five hundred tons 
gross or more” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
10. The words “other than an Indian ship” omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  124 
 the passengers or crew owing to the fact that the actual condition of the ship does not correspond 
substantially with the particulars stated in the certificate.  
1[(3) Nothing in this section shall apply in respect of an In dian ship or a nuclear ship;]  
309. Application of certain sections to certificates .―The provisions of sections 228 to 231 
(inclusive) shall apply to and in relation to every certificate issued by the Central Government under 
sections 299,  2[299A], 300, 301 and 302 in the same manner as they apply to and in relation to a 
certificate of s urvey.  
3[309A . Alterations pending issue of a safely convention certificate .―Where any survey of a 
ship for the purpose of issue under this Part of a safety convention certificate has been completed, 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, th e owner, agent or master of the ship shall not, 
until such certificate has been issued, make, or cause to be made, any alteration in the structural 
arrangements, machinery, equipment and other matters covered by the survey without the prior 
written permiss ion of the Central Government or a person appointed by that Government in this 
behalf.]  
Load l ines 
 310. Ships exempt from provisions relating to load lines .―(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
this section, the provisions of this Part relating to load lines shall apply to all sailing vessels as they 
apply to ships, and accordingly, the expression “ship” in the said provisions of this Part shall be 
construed as  including a sailing vessel.  
(2) The provisions of this Part relating to load lines shall not apply to ― 
4[(a) any sailing vessel, being an existing vessel of less than one hundred and fifty tons gross, 
or a new vessel of less than twenty -four meters in len gth, and in either case employed in plying 
coastwise between ports situated within India, Pakistan, Burma and Ceylon;]  
(b) any ship solely engaged in fishing;  
(c) any pleasure yacht.  
(3) The Central Government may, on such conditions as it may think fit, e xempt from the 
provisions of t his Part relating to load lines ― 
(a) any ship plying between the near neighboring ports of two or more countries, if the 
Central Government and the Governments of those countries are satisfied that the sheltered nature 
and conditions of the voyages between those ports make it unreasonab le or impracticable to apply 
to ships so plying the provisions of this Part relating to load lines;  
(b) any ship plying between near neighbouring ports of the same country, if the Central 
Government is satisfied as aforesaid;  
(c) wooden ships of primitive build, if the Central Government considers that it would be 
unreasonable or impracticable to apply the said provisions to them;  
5[(d) any coasting ship, being an existing ship of less than one hundred and fifty tons gross or 
a new ship of less th an twenty -four meters in length : 
Provided that any such ship does not carry cargo;  
(e) any ship which embodies features of a novel kind, if the Central Government is satisfied 
that the application of the provisions of this Part relating to load lines to such a ship might 
seriously impede research into development of such features and their incorporation in ships and 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 23 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
3. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f.28 -5-1966).  
4. Subs. by Act 25  of 1970, s. 5, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  125 
 the Central Government and the Governments of the countries to be visited by the ship are 
satisfied that the ship complies with safety requirements which  are adequate for the purposes for 
which the ship is intended and are such as to ensure the overall safety of the ship;  
(f) any ship which is not normally engaged on voyages to ports outside India but which in 
exceptional circumstances is required to under take such voyage if the Central Government is 
satisfied that the ship complies with safety requirements which are adequate for such voyage.]  
311. Power to make rules as to load lines .―The Central Government may, subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules (hereafter in this Act referred to as the load line rules) 
regulating the survey of ships for the purpose of assignment and marking of load lines and prescribing 
the conditions (hereafter in this Act referred to as the conditions of assignment) on which load lines 
may be assigned.  
312. Marking of deck line and load lines .―(1) No Indian ship, being a ship of which the keel 
was laid  1[on or after the 21st day of July, 1 968], and not being exempt from the provisions of this 
Part relating to load lines, shall proceed to sea unless ― 
(a) the ship has been surveyed in accordance with the load line rules;  
(b) the ship complies wit h the conditions of assignment;  
(c) the ship is  marked on each side with a mark (hereafter in this Act referred to as a deck 
line) indicating the position of the uppermost complete deck as defined by the load line rules and 
with marks (hereafter in this Act referred to as load lines) indicating the sev eral maximum depths 
to which the ship can be safely located in various circumstances prescribed by the load line rules;  
(d) the deck line and load lines are of the description required by the load line rules, the deck 
line is in the position required by th ose rules, and the load lines are of the number required by 
such of those rules as are applicable to the ship; and  
(e) the load lines are in the position required by such of the load line rules as are applicable to 
the ship.  
(2) No Indian ship, being a shi p of which the keel was laid  2[before the 21st day of July, 1968,] 
and not being exempt from the provisions of this Part relating to load lines, shall proceed to sea 
unless ― 
(a) the ship has been surveyed and marked in accordance with clauses ( a), (c) and ( d) of sub -
section ( 1); 
(b) the ship complies with the conditions of assignment in principle and also in detail so far 
as, in the opinion of the Central Government, is reas onable and practicable having regard to the 
efficiency of the protection of openings, the guard rails, the freeing ports and the means of access 
to the crew's quarters provided by the arrangements, fittings and appliances existing on the ship at 
the time w hen she is first surveyed under this section; and  
3[(c) the load lines are in the position required by clause  (e) of sub -section ( 1).] 
(3) Any ship attempting to proceed to sea without being surveyed and marked as required by this 
section may be detained u ntil she has been surveyed and marked, and any ship which doe s not comply 
with the conditions of assignment to the extent required in her case by this section shall be deemed to 
be unsafe for the purpose of section 336.  
4[312A. Alterations after survey .―Where any survey under this Part of a ship for the purpose of 
assignment and marking of load lines has been completed then, notwithstanding anything contained in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 6, for “after the 30th day of June, 1932 ” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).   
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “before the 1 st day of  July 1932” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
4. Ins. by s.7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
  126 
 this Act, the owner, agent or master of the ship shall not make or cause to be made any alterati on in 
the structure, equipment,  arrangements,  material or scantlings covered by the survey without the prior 
written permission of the Central Government or a person authorised by that Government in this 
behalf.]  
313. Submersion of load lines .―(1) An Indian ship (not being exempt from the provisions of 
this Part relating to load lines) shall not be so loaded as to submerge in salt water, when the ship has 
no list, the appropriate load line on each side of the ship, that is to say, the load lin e indicating or 
purporting to indicate the maximum depth to which the ship is for the time being entitled under the 
load line rules to be loaded.  
(2) Without prejudice to any other proceedings under this Act, any ship which is loaded in 
contravention of th is section may be detained until she ceases to be so loaded.  
314. Maintenance of load line marks .―(1) No owner or master of an Indian ship which has 
been marked in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Part , shall without reasonable cause, 
fail to keep the ship so marked.  
(2) No person shall conceal, remove, alter, deface or obliterate, or  suffer any person under his 
control to conceal, remove, alter, deface or obliterate any mark placed on any such ship in accordance 
with the foregoing provisions of this Part except with the authority of a person entitled under the load 
line rules to autho rise the alteration of the mark or except for the purpose of escaping capture by an 
enemy or by a foreign ship of war in the exercise of some belligerent right.  
 315. Inspection of ships with respect to load lines .―A surveyor may inspect any Indian ship 
for the purpose of seeing that the provisions of this Part relating to load lines have been complied with 
and for this purpose may go on board the ship at all reasonable times and do all things necessary for 
the pro per inspection of the ship and may also require the master of the ship to supply him with any 
information which it is in the power of the master to supply for that purpose, including the production 
of any certificate granted under this Part in respect of t he ship.  
Load line c ertificates  
316. Issue of load line certificates and effect thereof .―(1) Where an Indian ship has been 
surveyed and marked in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Part and complies with the 
conditions of assignment to the extent required in her case by those provisions, there shall be issued to 
the owner of the  ship on his application and on payment of the prescribed fee, ― 
1[(a) in the case of an existing ship which is of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more or a 
new ship of twenty -four meters or more in length, and which in either case carries cargo or 
passengers, a certificate to be called “an international load line certificate ”; 
(aa) in the case of a ship which is exempted under clause ( e) or clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 310, a certificate to be called “an international load line exemption cer tificate]; and,  
(b) in the case of any other ship, a certificate to be called “an Indian load line certificate ”. 
(2) Every such certificate shall be issued cither by the Central Government or by such other 
person as may be authorised in that behalf by the Central Government and shall be issued in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed by the load line rules.  
(3) The Central Government may request the Government of a country to which the Load Line 
Convention applies , to issue a load line certificate in th e form of an international load line certificate 
under that Convention in respect of an Indian ship and a certificate issued in pursuance of such a 
request and containing a statement that it has been so issued shall have effect for the purposes of this 
Part as if it had been issued by the Central Government.  
(4) Where a load line certificate, issued in pursuance of this section and for the time being in 
force, is produced in respect of a ship, the ship shall, for the purposes of the foregoing provisions of 
this Part, be deemed to have been surveyed as required by those provisions, and if the deck line and 
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 8, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  127 
 load lines on the ship are of the number and description required by the load line rules and the 
position of the deck line and load lines corresponds with the position specified in the certificate, the 
ship shall be deemed to be marked as required by those provisions.  
1[317. Duration and cancellation of certificates .―(1) Every certificate issued in respect of a 
ship under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 316 and every certificate issued under 
clause ( aa) of that sub -section to a ship referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 310 shall 
be in force for a period of five years from the da te of its issue or for such shorter peri od as may be 
specified in the certificate but subject to the provisions of this Part, a new certificate may be  issued in 
respect of such ship:  
Provided that where it is not possible to issue such new certificate to any ship before the expiry of 
its existin g certificate, the Central Government or any other person authorised by it to issue such 
certificate may, on being satisfied that no alterations affecting the ship's free board have been made in 
the structure, equipment, arrangements, material or scantling s, after the last survey of the ship under 
sub-section ( 5), extend the validity of the existing certificate for such period not exceeding five 
months as the Central Government or such person may deem fit.  
2[Provided further that when the survey for the pur pose of issue of certificate under sub -section 
(1) of section 316 is completed within three months before the expiry date of the existing certificate, 
the new certificate may be valid from the date of completion of such survey to a date not exceeding 
five years from the date of expir y of the existing certificate.]  
(2) Every certificate issued under clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 1) of section 316 to a ship referred to 
in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of section 310 shall cease to be valid upon the completion o f the 
voyage in respect of which such certificate was issued.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, any certificate 
issued in respect of a ship under sub -section ( 1) of section 316 3[shall cease to be valid whe n― 
(a) the ship ceases to be an Indian ship;  
(b) material alterations such as would necessitate the assignment of an increased free board 
have taken place in the hull or superstructure of the ship;  
(c) the fittings and appliances for the protection of openi ngs, the guard rails, freeing ports, or 
the means of access to the crew's quarters are not maintained in an effective condition;  
(d) the structural strength of the ship is lowered to such an extent as to render the ship unsafe;  
(e) the certificate is not e ndorsed to prove that the ship has been surveyed as required under 
sub-section ( 5); or 
(f) the marking of the deck line and load lines on the ship have not bee n properly maintained] . 
4*   *   *   *   *  
(5) The owner of every ship in respect of which any c ertificate has been issued under sub -section 
(1) of section 316 shall, so long as the certificate remains in force, cause the ship to be surveyed in the 
prescribed manner  3[and the certificate endorsed once at least in each year during the period 
commencin g three months before and ending three months after the anniversary date of expiry of the 
certificate for the purpose of ensuring that ― 
(a) alterations have not been made to the hull or superstructure which would affect the 
calculations determining the position of the load lines;  
(b) the fittings and the appliances for the protection of openings, the guard rails, freeing ports, 
or the me ans of access to the crew's quarters are maintained in an effective condition;  
                                                      
1.  Subs . by Act 25 of 1970, s. 9, for section 317  (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).     
2.  Ins. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3.  Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
4.  Omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  128 
 (c) the free board marks are correctly and permanently marked; and  
(d) the stability information required under section 298 is readily available on board ] 
1[(6) If an annual sur vey is completed before the period specified in sub -section ( 5) then, ― 
(a) the anniversary date mentioned on the certificate shall be amended by endorsement to a 
date which shall not be more than three months later than the date on which the survey was 
completed;  
(b) the subsequent annual survey required by sub -section (5) shall be completed using the new 
anniversary date;  
(c) the expiry date of the certificate may remain unchanged provided one or more annual 
survey is carried out so that the maximum interval between the surveys specified under sub -
section ( 5) is not exceede d. 
(7) If a certificate under sub -section ( 1) of section 316 is issued for a period of less than five 
years, the Central Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf, may extend the validity of 
the certificate beyond the expiry date to a maximu m period specified in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that, annual surveys referred to in sub -section ( 5) are carried out as may be appropriate.  
(7A) If a ship at the time when a certificate expires is not in a port at which it is to be surveyed, 
the Central Gov ernment or any person authorised by it in this behalf may extend the period of validity 
of the certificate, but this extension shall be granted only for the purpose of allowing the ship to 
complete the voyage to the port in which it is to be surveyed and a lso only in cases where it appears 
proper and reasonable to do so:  
Provided that no certificate shall be extended for a period longer than three months and the ship to 
which an extension is granted shall not on its arrival at the port in which it is to be surveyed leave that 
port without having a new certificate:  
Provided further that when the survey is completed, the new certificate shall be valid to a date not 
exceeding five years from the date of expiry of the existing certificate.  
(7B) A certificate, is sued to a ship engaged in short voyage which has not been extended under 
sub-section ( 7A), may be extended by the Central Government or any person authorised by it in this 
behalf for a period up to one month from the date of expiry and when the survey is c ompleted, the 
new certificate shall be valid up to a date not exceeding five years from the date of expiry of the 
existing certificate.  
(7C) In special circumstances where the Central Government so determines a new certificate, 
need not be dated from the d ate of expiry of the existing certificate, shall be valid up to a date not 
exceeding five years from the date of completion of the survey.]  
 (8) Where any certificate has ceased to be valid or been cancelled under this section, the Central 
Government may r equire the owner or master of the ship to which the certificate relates to deliver up 
the certificate as it directs and the ship may be detained until such Requirement has been complied 
with.  
(9) On the survey of any ship in pursuance of this section, ther e shall be paid by the owner of the 
ship such fee as may be prescribed.]  
318. Ships not to proceed to sea without certificate .―(1) No Indian ship shall proceed to sea 
unless there is in force in respect of the ship a load line certificate issued under the provisions of 
section 316.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 14, for sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7) (w.e .f. 1-2-2003).  
 129 
 (2) The master of every Indian ship shall produce to the customs collector, from whom a port 
clearance for the ship is demanded, the certificate which is required by the foregoing provisions of 
this section to be in force when th e ship proceeds to sea, and the port clearance shall not be granted, 
and the ship may be detained, until that certificate is so produced.  
319. Publication of load line certificate and particulars relating to depth of loading .―(1) 
When a load line certificate has been issued in pursuance of the foregoing provisions of this Part in 
respect of an Indian ship other than a home -trade ship of less than two hundred tons gross — 
(a) the owner of the ship shall forthwith on the receipt of the certificate cause it to be posted 
up in some conspicuous place on board the ship and to be kept so posted up and legible so long as 
the certificate remains in force and the ship is in use; and  
(b) the master of the ship, before making any other entr y in any official log book, shall enter 
or cause to be entered therein the particulars as to the position of the deck line and load lines 
specified in the certificate.  
(2) Before any such ship leaves any dock, wharf, harbour or other place for the purpose of 
proceeding to sea, the master thereof shall — 
(a) enter or cause to be entered in the official log book such particulars relating to the depth to 
which the ship is for the time being loaded as the Central Government may by rules made in this 
behalf presc ribe; and  
(b) cause a notice in such form and containing such of the said particulars as may be required 
by the said rules, to be posted up in some conspicuous place on board the ship and to be kept so 
posted up and legible until the ship arrives at some o ther dock, wharf, harbour or place:  
Provided that the Central Government may by the said rules exempt home -trade ships or any class 
of home -trade ships from the requirements of clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
320. Insertion of particulars as to load lines in agreements with crew .―(1) Before an 
agreement with the crew of any ship in respect of which a load line certificate is in force, is signed by 
any member, of the crew, the master of the ship shall insert in the agreement the particulars as to the 
position of the deck line and l oad lines specified in the certificate.  
(2) In the case of a ship required by this Act to engage its crew before a shipping master, the 
shipping master shall not proceed with the engagement of the crew until — 
(a) there is produced to him a load line certif icate for the time being in force in respect of the 
ship; and  
(b) he is satisfied that the particulars required by this section have been inserted in the 
agreement with the crew.  
Special provisions as to s hip other than Indian ships 
 321. Issue of load li ne certificates to foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign 
countries .―1[(1)] The Central Government may, at the request of a country to which the Load Line 
Convention applies, issue an international load line certificate in respect of a ship  2[registered or to be 
registered] in that country if it is satisfied in like manner as in the case of an Indian ship that it can 
properly issue the certificate and where the certificate is issued at such a request, it shall contain a 
statement that it has bee n so issued.  
3[(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the issue of a certificate in respect of 
a ship under sub -section ( 1), forward to the Government at whose request such certificate was issued a 
copy each of the certificate, the surv ey report used in computing the free, board of the ship and of the 
computations.]  
                                                      
1. Section 321 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act  25 of 1970 , s.10 (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).    
2. Subs . by s. 10, ibid.,  for the word “registered” (w .e.f. 21 -7-1968).    
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  130 
 322. Recognition of load line certificates issued outside India .―An international  1[load line 
certificate or, as the case may be, an international load line exemption certifi cate] issued in respect of 
any ship other than an Indian ship by the Government of the country to which the ship belongs shall, 
subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf, have the same effect in India 
as a 1[load line certific ate or, as the case may be, an international load line exemption certificate] 
issued in respect of an Indian ship under this Part.  
 323. Inspection and control of Load Line Convention ships other than Indian ships .―2[(1) 
A surveyor may, at any reasonable time, go on board any ship (other than an Indian ship) carrying 
cargo or passengers and registered in a country to which the Load Line Convention applies, when 
such ship is within any port in India, for the purpose  of demanding the production of any international 
load line certificate or, as the case may be, international load line exemption certificate for the time 
being in force in respect of the ship : 
Provided that such ship is an existing ship of one hundred and  fifty tons gross or more or a new 
ship of twenty -four meters or more in length.]  
(2) If a valid international load line certificate is produced to the surveyor on any such demand, 
the surveyor's powers of inspecting the ship with respect to load line shal l be limited to seeing ― 
(a) that the ship is not loaded beyond the limits allowed by the certificate;  
(b) that the position of the load lines on the ship corresponds with the position specified in the 
certificate;  
3[(c) that no material alterations  as woul d necessitate the assignment of an increased free 
board have taken place in the hull or superstructures of the ship;]  
(d) that the fittings and appliances for the protection of openings, the guard rails, the freeing 
ports and the means of access to the cre w's quarters have been maintained on the ship  4[in an 
effective condition.]  
5[(2A) If a valid international load line exemption certificate is produced to the surveyor on 
demand made under sub -section ( 1), the surveyor's powers of inspecting the ship with respect to load 
lines shall be limited to seeing that the conditions stipulated in the certificate are complied with.]  
(3) If it is found  6[on any inspection under sub -section ( 2) or, as the case may be, sub -section 
(2A)] that the ship is loaded beyond the  limits allowed by the certificate, the ship may be detained and 
the provisions of section 342 shall apply.  
(4) If it is found  6[on any inspection under sub -section ( 2) or, as the ease may be, sub -section 
(2A)] that the load lines on the ship are not in th e position specified in the certificate, the ship may be 
detained until the matter has been rectified to the satisfaction of the surveyor.  
(5) If it is found  6[on any inspection under sub -section ( 2) or, as the case may be, sub -section 
(2A)] that the ship has been so materially altered in respect of the matters referred to in clauses ( c) and 
(d) of sub -section ( 2) that the ship is manifestly unfit to proceed to sea without danger to human life, 
the ship shall be deemed to be unsafe for the purpose of sectio n 336 (in the case of an Indian ship) or 
for the purpose of section 342 (in the case of any other ship):  
Provided that where the ship has been detained under either of the last -mentioned sub -sections, 
the Central Government shall order the ship to be relea sed as soon as, it is satisfied that the ship is fit 
to proceed to sea without danger to human life.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 11, for “load line certificate ” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).    
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  
5. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).   
6. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “on any such inspection” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).   131 
 (6) If a valid international load line certificate  1[or, as the case may be, international load line 
exemption certificate] is not produced to the surveyor  on such demand as aforesaid the surveyor shall 
have the same power of inspecting the ship, for the purpose of seeing that the provisions of this Part 
relating to load lines have been complied with as if the ship were an Indian ship.  
(7) For the purposes o f this section a ship shall be deemed to be loaded beyond the limits allowed 
by the certificate if she is so loaded as to submerge in salt water, when the ship has no list, the 
appropriate load line on each side of the ship, that is to say, the load line a ppearing by the certificate 
to indicate the maximum depth to which the ship is for the time being entitled under the Load Line 
Convention, to be loaded.  
324. Certificate of Load Line Convention ships other than Indian ships to be produced to 
customs .―The m aster of every ship other than an Indian ship being a ship of one hundred and fifty 
tons gross or more carrying cargo or passengers, and belonging to a country to which the Load Line 
Convention applies, shall produce to the Customs Collector from whom a po rt clearance for the ship 
from any port of India is demanded — 
(a) in a case where port clearance is demanded in respect of a voyage to a port outside India, a 
valid international load line certificate;  
(b) in a case where port clearance is demanded in resp ect of any other voyage, either a valid 
international load line certificate or a valid Indian load line certificate;  
and the port clearance shall not be granted, and the ship may be detained, until the certificate required 
by this section is so produced.  
325. Marking of deck line and load lines of ships other than Indian ships .―The provisions of 
section 312 shall apply to ships other than Indian ships proceeding or attempting to proceed to sea 
from ports in India as they apply to Indian ships subject to the following modifications, namely: ― 
(a) the said section shall not apply to a ship other than an Indian ship if a valid international 
load line certificate is produced in respect of the ship; and  
(b) subject to the provisions of clause ( a), a ship oth er than an Indian ship which doe s not 
comply with the conditions of assignment  to the extent required in her case by section 323 shall 
be deemed to be unsafe for the purpose of section 342.  
326. Submersion of load line of ships other than Indian ships .―The provisions of section 313 
shall apply to ships other than Indian ships, while they are within any port in India as they apply to 
Indian ships subject to the following modifications, namely: ― 
2[(a) no ship belonging to a country to which the Load Line  Convention applies being an 
existing ship of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more or being a new ship of twenty -four 
metres or more in length shall be detained and no proceedings shall be taken against the owner or 
master thereof by virtue of the said  section except after an inspection by a surveyor as provided by 
section 323; and]  
(b) the expression “the appropriate load line ” in relation to any ship other than an Indian ship 
shall mean ― 
(i) in the case of a ship in respect of which there is produced on such, an inspection as 
aforesaid a valid international load line certificate,  2[or, as the case may be, an international 
load line exemption certificate] the load line appearing by the ce rtificate to indicate the 
maximum depth to which the ship is for the time being entitled under the Load Line 
Convention, to be loaded;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1970, s.12 (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).   
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  132 
 (ii) in any other case, the load line which corresponds with the load line indicating the 
maximum depth to which the ship  is for the time being entitled under the load line rules to be 
loaded, or, if no load line on the ship corresponds as aforesaid, the lowest load line thereon.  
327. Inspection of ships other than Indian ships belonging to non -Convention 
countries .―The provisions of section 315 shall apply, in the same manner as they apply to Indian 
ships, to all ships registered in a country to which the Load Line Convention does not apply whi le 
they are within Indian jurisdiction.  
328. Load line certificates and international load line exemption certificates of ships other 
than Indian ships .―(1) The provisions of this Part relating to the issue, effect, duration,  1[and 
cancellation of Indian load fine certificates or, as the case may be, international load lines e xemption 
certificates] shall apply to ships other than Indian ships as they apply to Indian ships subject to the 
following modifications, namely: ― 
(a) any such certificate may be issued in respect of any such ship as in respect of an Indian 
ship provided t hat 2[any such certificate issued in respect of a ship carrying cargo or passengers 
being an existing ship of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more or being a new ship of twenty -
four metr es or more in length] and registered, in a country to which the Lo ad Line Convention 
applies, shall only be valid so long as the ship is not plying on voyages from or to any port in 
India to or from any place outside India and shall be endorsed with a statement to that effect and 
shall be cancelled by the Central Governm ent if it has reason to believe that the ship is so plying; 
and 
(b) the survey required for the purpose of seeing whether the certificate should remain in 
force shall take -place when required by the Central Government.  
(2) If the Central Government is sati sfied ― 
(a) that provisions has been made for the fixing, marking and certifying of load lines by the 
law in force in any country outside India with respect to ships (or any class or description of 
ships) of that country and has also been so made (or has been ag reed to be so made) for 
recognising Indian load line certificates as having the same effect in ports of that country as 
certificates issued under the said provision;  and 
(b) that the said provision for fixing, marking and certifying of load lines is based on the same 
principles as the corresponding provisions of this Part relating to load lines and is equally 
effective,  
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that load line certificates issued in pursuance of 
the said provision or in respect  of ships (or that class or description of ships) of that country, shall 
have the same effect for the purpose of this Part as Indian load line certificates:  
3[Provided that such direction shall not apply to any ship carrying cargo or passengers being an 
existing ship of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more or being a new ship of twenty -four metr es or 
more in length if such ship is registered in a country to which the Load Line Convention applies, and 
is engaged in plying on voyages from or to any port i n India to or from any port outside India.]  
329. Certificates to be produced to customs by ships other t han Indian ships registered in  
non-Convention countries .―The master of every ship registered in a country to which the Load 
Line Convention does not ap ply shall produce to the customs collector from whom a port clearance 
for the ship from any port in India is demanded, either an Indian load line certificate or a certificate 
having effect under this Act as such a certificate, being a certificate for the t ime being in force in 
respect of the ship, and the port clearance shall not be granted and the ship may be detained until the 
certificate required by this section is so produced.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 14, fo r the words “renewal and cancellation of Indian load line certificates”                       
(w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).   
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “any such certificate issued in respect of a ship of 150 tons gross or more carrying cargo or 
passengers ” (w.e. f. 21-7-1968).   
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 21 -7-1968).  133 
 Loading of timber  
330. Power to make rules as to timber cargo .―(1) The Central Government shall, subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules (hereafter in this section referred to as the timber cargo 
rules) as to the conditions on which timber may be carried as cargo in any uncovered space on the 
deck of any Indian ship.  
(2) The timber cargo rules may prescribe a special load line to be used only when the ships 
carrying timber as cargo on deck and the conditions on which such special load line may be assigned, 
and may further prescribe either general ly or with reference to particular voyages and seasons the 
manner and position in which such timber is to be stowed and the provisions which are to be made for 
the safety of the crew.  
(3) Any surveyor may at any reasonable time, inspect any Indian ship car rying a timber as cargo 
in any uncovered space on her deck for the purpose of seeing whether the timber cargo rules have 
been complied with.  
(4) The foregoing provisions of this section and the timber cargo rules shall apply to ships other 
than Indian ship s while they are within Indian jurisdiction as they apply to Indian ships.  
Dangerous goods and grain cargoes  
331. Carriage of dangerous goods .―(1) The Central Government may make rules for regulating 
in the interests of safety the carriage of dangerous goods in ships.  
1[(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for the classification , packing, labelling and marking of such goods or any class of such 
goods, stowing of such goods (whether with or without other cargo) including plans for stowing, the 
fixing of the maximum quantity of any such class of goods which may be carried in differ ent ships or 
classes of ships, and such other matters relating to dangerous goods as required to be provided for 
implementing the provisions of the Safety Convention.]  
(3) The owner, master or agent of a ship carrying or intending to carry any dangerous go ods as 
cargo and about to make a voyage from a port in India shall furnish in advance the prescribed 
particulars of the ship and the cargo to such authority as may be prescribed for the purpose.  
(4) A surveyor may inspect the ship for the purpose of securi ng that any rules under this section 
are complied with.  
(5) If any of the rules made in pursuance of this section is not complied with in relation to any 
ship, the ship shall be deemed for the purpose of this Part to be an unsafe ship.  
(6) This section sha ll apply, in the same manner as it applies to Indian ships, to ships other than 
Indian ships while they are within any port in India or are embarking or disembarking passengers or 
are loading or discharging cargo or fuel within Indian jurisdiction.  
Explana tion.― In this section the expression “dangerous goods ” means goods which by reason s 
of the nature, quantity or mode of stowage are either singly or collectively liable to endanger the life 
or the health of persons on or near the ship or to imperil the ship, an d includes all substances within 
the meaning of the expression “explosive ” as defined in the Indian Explosives Act, 1884, and any 
other goods which the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify as 
dangerous goods  2[but shall no t include, ― 
 (a) any fog or distress signals or other stores or equipment required to be carried by the ship 
under this Act or the rules or regulations thereunder;  
(b) particular cargoes carried in ships specially built or converted as a whole for that purpose, 
such as tankers.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 26, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2.  Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  134 
 1[331A. Grain loading plan .―(1) No grain shall be loaded on board any Indian ship anywhere 
unless there is in force in respect of such ship a grain -loading plan approved under sub -section ( 3) or 
sub-section ( 4). 
(2) The grain -loading plan sha ll be in such form and contain such particulars as to the stability of 
the ship, circumstances of loading on departure and arrival, the main characteristics of the fittings 
used to prevent the shifting of cargo and such other matters as may be prescribed, having regard to the 
rules made under sub -section ( 5) of section 332.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4), the grain -loading plan shall be submitted to the 
Central Government for approval and that Government may, having regard to the rules ma de under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 332, the stability of the ship and the circumstances of loading on departure 
and arrival, approve the plan with such modifications, if any, as it may deem necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may request the Government of a country to which the Safety 
Convention applies to approve the grain -loading plan of an Indian ship and an approval given in 
pursuance of such a request and containing a statement that it has been so given shall have effect for 
the purposes of this sec tion as if the approval had been given by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may, at the request of the Government of a country to which the 
Safety Convention applies approve the grain -loading plan of a ship registered in that country if th e 
Central Government is satisfied, in the like manner as in the case of an Indian ship, that such approval 
can properly be given and where approval is given at such a request, it shall contain a statement that it 
has been so given.  
(6) It is hereby declare d that for the purposes of section 208 (which requires document relating to 
navigation to be delivered by the master of a ship to his successor) the plan shall be deemed to be a 
document relating to the navigation of the ship.]  
332. Carriage of grain .―(1) Where grain is loaded on board any Indian ship anywhere or is 
loaded within any port in India on board any other ship, all necessary and reasonable precautions shall 
be taken to prevent the grain from shifting; and if such precautions as aforesaid are not taken, the 
owner or the master of the ship or any agent of the owner who was charged with the loading or with 
sending the ship to sea laden with grain shall be guilty of an offence under this sub -section and the 
ship shall be deemed for the purposes of thi s Part to be unsafe by reason of improper loading.  
(2) Where any ship which is loaded with grain outside India without all necessary and reasonable 
precuations having been taken to prevent the grain from shifting, enters any port in India so laden, the 
owner or master of the ship shall be guilty of an offence under this sub -section and the ship shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this Part to be unsafe by reason of improper loading.  
2[(2A) Where grain is loaded on board an Indian ship in accordance with a g rain loading plan 
approved under section 331A or where grain is loaded on board any other ship in accordance with a 
grain -loading plan approved by or on behalf of the Government of the country in which that ship is 
registered, the ship shall be deemed, for  the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), to have been loaded 
with all necessary and reasonable precautions.]  
(3) On the arrival at a port in India from a port outside India of any ship carrying a cargo of grain, 
the master shall cause to be delivered at the port to such customs or other officer as may be specified 
by the Central Government in this behalf, a notice stating - 
(a) the draught of water and free board of the said ship after the loading of the cargo was 
completed at the final port of loading;  3*** 
4[(b) the kind of grain carried and quantity thereof stated in cubic feet, quarters, bushels or 
tons weight; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 2 7 (w.e. f. 28-5-1966).  
2. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  135 
 (c) the mode in which the grain is stowed and the precautions taken to prevent the grain from 
shifting and where the grain has been stowed i n accordance with the ships ‟ grain -loading plan, if 
any, that it has been so stowed.]  
1[(4) any person authorised in this behalf, by general or special order of the Central Government 
may, for securing the observance of the provisions of this section, go o n board a ship carrying a cargo 
of grain and require the production of the grain -loading plan of the ship and inspect the mode in 
which the cargo is stowed in the ship.]  
(5) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication,  2[make rules in 
relation to grain -loading plans  and the loading of ships] with grain generally or of ships of any class 
specifying the precautions to be taken, and when such precautions have been prescribed, they shall be 
treated for the purposes of this secti on to be included in the expression necessary and reasonable 
precautions ”. 
(6) In 3[section 331A and this section,] the expression “gram ” includes wheat, maize, oats, rye, 
barley, rice, pulses and seeds, and the expression “ship carrying a cargo of grain ” means a ship 
carrying a quantity of grain exceeding one -third of the ship's registered tonnage reckoning one 
hundred cubic feet or two tons of weight of grain as equivalent to one ton of registered tonnage.  
Sub-division load lines  
333. Submersion of sub -division load lines in case of passenger ships .―(1) Where — 
(a) an Indian passenger ship has been marked with sub -division load lines, that is to say, load 
lines indicating the depth to which the ship may be loaded having regard to the extent to which 
she is sub -divided and to the space for the time bei ng allotted to passengers, and  
(b) the appropriate sub -division load line, that is to say, the sub -division load line appropriate 
to the space for the time being allotted to passengers on the ship, is lower than the load line 
indicating the maximum depth t o which the ship is for the time being entitled under the provisions 
of this Part to be loaded,  
the ship shall not be so loaded as to submerge in salt water the appropriate sub -division load line on 
each side of the ship when the ship has no list.  
(2) With out prejudice to any other proceedings under this Act, any such ship which is loaded in 
contravention of this section may be detained until she ceases to be so loaded.  
Unseaworthy ships 
 334. Unseaworthy ship not to be sent to sea .―(1) Every person who sen ds or attempts to send 
an Indian ship to sea from any port in India in such an unseaworthy state that the life of any person is 
likely to be thereby endangered shall, unless he proves that he used all reasonable means to insure her 
being sent to sea in a s eaworthy state or that her going to sea in such unseaworthy state was under the 
circumstances, reasonable and justifiable, be guilty of an offence under this sub -section.  
(2) Every master of an Indian ship who knowingly lakes such ship to sea in such unsea worthy 
state that the life of any person is likely to be thereby endangered shall, unless he proves that her 
going to sea in such unseaworthy state was, under the circumstances, reasonable and justifiable, be 
guilty of an offence under this sub -section.  
(3) For the purpose of giving such proof, every person charged under this section may give 
evidence in the same manner as any other witness.  
(4) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except by, or with the consent of, the 
Central Government.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 28, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “make rules in relation to the loading of ships” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “this section” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  136 
 (5) A ship is “unseaworthy ” within the meaning of this Act when the materials of which she is 
made, her construction, qualifications of the master, the number, description and qualifications of the 
crew including officers, the weight, description and stowa ge of the cargo and ballast, the condition of 
her hull and equipment, boilers and machinery ar e not such as to render her in every respect fit for the 
proposed voyage or service.  
 335. Obligation of owner to crew with respect to seaworthiness .―(1) In every contract 
of service, express or implied between the owner of an Indian ship and the master or any seaman 
thereof, and in every contract of apprenticeship whereby any person is bound to serve as an apprentice 
on board any such ship, there shal l be implied, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, an 
obligation on the owner that such owner and the master, and every agent charged with the loading of 
such ship or the preparing thereof for sea, or the sending thereof to sea, shall use all rea sonable means 
to ensure the seaworthiness of such ship for the voyage at the time when such voyage commences, 
and to keep her in a seaworthy state during the voyage.  
(2) For the purpose of seeing that the provisions of this section have been complied with,  the 
Central Government may, either at the request of the owner or otherwise, arrange for a survey of the 
hull, equipment or machinery of any sea -going ship by a surveyor.  
Detention of unsafe ships by the Central Government  
336. Power to detain unsafe ship  and procedure for detention .―(1) Where an Indian ship in 
any port to which the Central Government may specially extend  this section is an unsafe ship, that is 
to say, is by reason of the defective condition of her hull, equipment or machinery, or by reason of 
overloading or improper loading, unfit to proceed to sea without serious danger to human life, having 
regard to the nature of the service for which she is intended, such slip any be provisionally detained 
for the purpose of being surveyed and either finally detained  or released a s follows, namely: ― 
(a) The Central Government, if it has reason to believe, on complaint or otherwise, that any 
such ship is unsafe, may order the ship to be provisionally detained as an unsafe ship for the 
purpose of being surveyed.  
(b) A written statement of the grounds of such detention shall be forthwith served on the 
master of such ship.  
(c) When the Central Government provisionally orders the detention of a ship, it shall either 
refer the matter to the Court of su rvey for the port where the ship is detained, or forthw ith appoint 
some competent person to survey such ship and report thereon; and, on receiving the report, may 
either order the ship to be released or if in its opinion the ship is unsafe, may order her to be 
finally detained, either absolutely or until the p erformance of such conditions with respect to the 
execution of repairs or alterations, or the unloading or reloading of cargo, as the Central 
Government thinks necessary for the protection of human life.  
(d) Before an order for final detention is made, a c opy of the report shall be served upon the 
master of the ship, and within seven days after such service the owner or master may appeal 
against such report, in the manner prescribed, to the court of survey for the port where the ship is 
detained.  
(e) Where a ship has been provisionally detained and a person has been appointed under this 
section to survey such ship, the owner or master of the ship, at any time before such person makes 
that survey, may require that he shall take with him as assessor such perso n as the owner or 
master may select, being a person named in the list of assessors for the Court of survey or, if there 
is no such list, or if it is impracticable to procure the attendance of any person named in such list, 
a person of nautical engineering or other special skill and experience. If the surveyor and assessor 
agree that the ship should be detained or released, the Central Government shall cause the ship to 
be detained or released accordingly, and the owner or master shall have no right of appea l. If the 
surveyor and assessor differ in their report, the Central Government may act as if the requisition 137 
 had not been made, and the owner or master shall have a right of such appeal touching the report 
of the surveyor as is hereinbefore provided in thi s section.  
(f) Where a ship has been provisionally detained, the Central Government may at any  time if 
it thinks it expedient, refer the matter to the Court of survey for the port where the ship is 
detained.  
(g) The Central Government may at any time, if s atisfied that a ship detained under this 
section is not unsafe, order her to be released either upon or without any conditions.  
(2) Any person appointed  by the Central Government for the purpose (in this Act referred to as a 
detaining officer) shall have t he same power as the Central Government has under this section of 
provisionally ordering the detention of a ship for the purpose of being surveyed, and of appointing a 
person to survey her, and if he thinks that a ship so detained by him is not unsafe, may  order her to be 
released.  
(3) A detaining officer shall forthwith report to the Central Government any order made by him 
for the detention or release of a ship.  
(4) A ship detained under this section shall not be released by reason of her Indian register being 
subsequently closed.   
Costs of detention and damages incidental thereto  
337. Liability of Central Government for costs and damage when ship wrongly detained .―If 
it appears that there was not reasonable and probable cause, by reason of the condition o f the ship or 
the act or default of the owner or the m aster, for the provisional detention of a ship, the Central 
Government shall be liable to pay to the owner of the ship his costs of and incidental to the detention 
and survey of the ship, and also compe nsation for any loss or damage sustained by him by reason of 
the detention or survey.  
338. Liability of ship  owner for costs when ship rightly detained .―If a ship is finally detained 
under this Part, or if it appears that a ship provisionally detained was at the time of such detention 
unsafe, or if a ship is detained in pursuance of any provision of this Part which provides for the 
detention of a ship un til a certain event occurs, the owner of the ship shall be liable to pay to the 
Central Government its costs of and incidental to the detention and survey of the ship; and the ship 
shall not be released until such costs are paid.  
339. Method of calculating  costs of detention and survey .―For the purposes of this Act, the 
costs of and incidental to any proceeding before a Court of survey, and a reasonable amount in respect 
of the remuneration of the surveyor or any person appointed to represent the Central Government 
before the Court, sha ll be deemed to be part of the costs of the detention and survey of the ship.  
340. Power to require from complainant security for costs, etc .―When a complaint is made to 
the Central Government or a detaining officer that an Indian ship is unsafe, it shall be in the discretion 
of the Central Government or the detaining officer, as the case may be, to require the complainant to 
give security to the satisfaction of the Central Government or the detaining officer for the costs and 
compensation which such compla inant may become liable to pay as hereinafter mentioned : 
Provided that, where the complaint is made by one -fourth, being not less than three, of the seamen 
belonging to the ship, and is not in the opinion of the Central Government or the detaining officer 
frivolous or vexatious, such  security shall not be required;  and the Central Government or the 
detaining officer shall, if the complaint is made insufficient time before the sailing of the ship, take 
proper steps to ascertain whether the ship ought to be d etained under this Part.  
341. Costs, etc., payable by Central Government recoverable from complainant .―Where a 
ship is detained in consequence of any complaint and the circumstances are such that the Central 
Government is liable under this Part to pay to the owner of the ship any costs or compensation , the 
complainant shall be liable to pay to the Central Government all such costs and compensation as the 
Central Government incurs, or is liable to pay, in respect of the detention and survey of the ship.  138 
 342. Application to ships other than Indian ships of provisions as to detention .―When a ship 
other than an  Indian ship is in a port in India and is, whilst at that port, unsafe by reason of the 
defective condition of her hull, equipment or machinery, or by reason of overloading or improper 
loading, the provisions of this Part with respect to the detention of s hips shall apply to that ship as if 
she were an Indian ship with the following modifications, namely: — 
(a) a copy of the order for the provisional detention of the ship shall forthwith be served on 
the consular officer for the country to which the ship be longs at or nearest to the port in which 
such ship is detained;  
(b) the consular officer, at the request of the owner or master of the ship, may require that the 
person appointed by the Central Government to survey the ship shall be accompanied by such 
person as the consular officer may select, and in that case, if the surveyor and that person agree, 
the Central Government shall cause the ship, to be detained or released accordingly, but, if they 
differ, the Central Government may act as if the requisition had not been made, and the owner and 
master shall have the like right of appeal to a Court of survey touching the report of the surveyor 
as is hereinbefore provided in the case of an Indian ship; and  
(c) where the owner or master of the ship appeals to the  Court of survey, the consular officer, 
at the request of the owner or master, may appoint a competent person to be assessor in the case in 
lieu of the assessor who, if the ship were an Indian ship, would be appointed otherwise than by the 
Central Governme nt. 
 343. Exemption of ships from certain provisions of this Part .―(1) Nothing in this Part ― 
(a) prohibiting a ship from proceeding to sea unless there are in force in relation to the ship, 
or are produced the appropriate certificates issued under this Par t or the appropriate safety 
convention certificates;  
(b) requiring information about a ship's stability to be carried on board,  
shall, unless in the case of information about a ship's stability the Central Government otherwise 
orders, apply to any troopsh ip, pleasure yacht or fishing vessel or to  1[any cargo ship of less than three 
hundred tons gross] or to any ship not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion.  
(2) Nothing in the preceding sub -section shall affect the exemption conferred by any other 
provision of this Act.  
(3) Nothing in this Part shall apply to any ship other than an Indian ship while it is within any port 
in India if it would not have been within such port but for stress of weather or any other circumstance 
that neither the master nor t he owner nor the charterer, if any, of the ship could have prevented or 
forestalled.  
344. Power to make rules respecting certificates under this Part .―(1) The Central 
Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Part relating to certificates granted under this Part.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoin g power, such rules may 
prescribe ― 
2[(a) the form of any certificate and record of equipment issued under this Part;  
(aa) the manner of surveys required to be made in respect of ships to which the manner of 
surveys specified in the Safety Convention is not  applicable;]  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 21 of 1966, s. 29,  for  “any ship of less than five hundred tons gross ot her than a passenger ship ”  
(w.e.f. 28-5-1966).   
2. Subs . by Act 63 of 2002 , s.15, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
 139 
 (b) the circumstances in which a certificate purporting to have been issued outside India in 
accordance with the provisions of the Safety Convention or the Load Line Convention shall be 
recognised in India;  
(c) the fees to be charged in respe ct of any certificate issued under this Part and the manner in 
which such fees may be recovered.  
1[(d) the fees to be charged for the survey or inspection of hull, machinery , boilers, electrical 
appliances and o ther fittings and the materials  used for thei r construction, fire appliances,                 
life-saving appliances, radio communications equipment, radar, echo sounding device and gyro 
compass, or testing or approval of any of the fo regoing equipment s or materials used for their 
manufacture, or exa mination of plans of construction of any part of ships' hull, machinery, 
electrical appliances and other equipment aforesaid and the manner in which such fees may be 
recovered.]  
2[PART IXA  
NUCLEAR SHIPS  
344A.Application of Act to nuclear ships .―(1) This Part applies only to nuclear ships.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a nuclear ship shall not be required to obtain 
or produce any certificate referred to in sub -clauses (i) to ( ix) of clause ( 38) of section 3 or, as the case 
may be, any like valid safety convention certificate.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an y of the 
provisions of this Act  (other than the provisions of this Part and the provisions of section 4 56) 
specifie d in the notification ― 
(a) shall not apply to nuclear ships; or  
(b) shall apply to nuclear ships, only with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(4) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 3) shal l be laid in draft 
before both Houses of Parliament for a period of not less than thirty days while they are in session and 
it shall not be issued until it has been approved, whether with or without modification, by each House 
of Parliament.  
344B . Nuclear passenger ship safety certificates and nuclear cargo ship safety 
certificates .―(1) If in respect of any Indian nuclear passenger or cargo ship the Central Government 
is satisfied that the ship has been surveyed in accordance with this Act and has been inspected by a 
person appointed in this behalf by the Central Government and has c omplied with such special 
requirements, if any, as that person has, after such inspection, specified, the Central Government may 
issue ― 
(a) in the case of a passenger ship, a nuclear passenger ship safety certificate;  
(b) in the case of a cargo ship, a nuc lear cargo ship safety certificate.  
(2) A certificate issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be in force for a period of twelve months from 
the date of issue or for such shorter period as may be specified in the certificate.  
344C.  Prohibition of proceeding to sea without certificates .―(1) No Indian nuclear ship shall 
proceed on a voyage from any port or place in India to any port or place outside India unless there is 
in force in respect of the ship―  
(a) a nuclear passenger ship safety certificate, if she is a passenger ship;  
(b) a nuc lear cargo ship safety certificate, if she is a cargo ship.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 30 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  140 
 (2) The master of a ship to which this section applies shall produce to the customs collector from 
whom a port clearance for the ship is demanded the certificate required by sub -section ( 1) when t he 
ship proceeds to sea and the port clearance shall not be granted and the ship may be detained until the 
said certificate is so produced.  
344D.  Safety assessment and operating manual .―(1) Every Indian nuclear ship shall have on 
board a safety assessment and an operating manual in such form and containing such particulars and 
approved by such authority as may be prescribed.  
(2) The safety assessment and the operating manual shall be pre pared, maintained and kept up -to-
date in such manner as may be prescribed.  
344E.  Foreign nuclear ships to give advance notice of arrival .―(1) No nuclear ship, other than 
an Indian ship, shall enter the territorial waters of India unless the master, owner o r agent thereof has 
given such advance notice of the ship's intended arrival in India as may be prescribed, to such 
authority as may be specified by the Central Government, and has forwarded along with the notice a 
true copy of the ship's safety assessment  to that authority.  
(2) If on the examination and evaluation of the ship's safety assessment the authority referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) is of opinion that the entry of the ship will involve unreasonable radiation or other 
hazards to the crew, passengers,  members of the public, waterways, food or water resources, he may 
direct the nuclear ship not to enter the territorial waters of India and the ship shall comply with such 
direction.  
344F.  Control on arrival of nuclear ships .―(1) The master of every nuclea r ship shall, on 
arrival at a port in India, give notice of the ship's arrival in the prescribed form to such authority as the 
Central Government may specify in this behalf.  
(2) Any person authorised in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as the authorise d person), by 
general or special order of the Central Government, may go on board such ship for the purpose of 
verifying that she has on board a valid nuclear passenger ship safety certificate or, as the case may be, 
nuclear cargo ship safety certificate a nd for the purpose of satisfying himself after examining the 
safety assessment and operating manual and such other things as he deems fit that there are no 
unreasonable radiation or other hazards to the crew, passengers members of the public, waterways, 
food or water resources.  
(3) If the authorised person is satisfied after such examination that there are no unreasonable 
radiation or other hazards to the crew, passengers, members of the public, waterways, food or water 
resources, he may issue a certificate  to that effect.  
344G.  Notice of accidents to nuclear ships .―(1) Where an Indian nuclear ship meets with an 
accident and such accident is likely to lead to environmental hazards, the master of the ship shall 
forthwi th give notice of the accident―  
(a) to su ch officer or authority as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government; 
and 
(b) if the ship is in or intends to enter the territorial water of a foreign State, also to the 
appropriate Government authority of the State.  
(2) Where a nuclear shi p other than an Indian ship meets with an accident of the nature specified 
in sub -section ( 1) while she is in the territorial waters of, or at a port in, India, the master of the ship 
shall forthwith give notice of the accident to the officer or authority specified under clause ( a) of             
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) On receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the officer or authority 
specified under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall issue such directions as he thinks necessary and 
expedient in the circumstances of the case and investigate into the causes of the accident in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  141 
 (4) A copy of the directions issued under sub -section ( 3) and a report of the findings of the 
investigation shall be sent to the C entral Government within such time as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where a nuclear ship other than an Indian ship meets with an accident of the nature specified 
in sub -section ( 1) at any port or place outside India and intends to enter the territorial waters of India 
in a damaged condition, the master of such ship shall give notice of the nature of the accident and the 
condition of the ship in such form as may be prescribed to the officer or authority specified under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) and shall comply  with such directions as that officer or authority may 
give.  
(6) The provisions of this section are in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions , of Part 
XII of this Act.  
344H.  Application of certain sections to or in relation to certain certific ates under section  
344B .―(1) The provisions of sections 228 to 231 (inclusive) shall, so far as may be, apply to and in 
relation to every certificate issued by the Central Government under section 344B in the same manner 
as they apply to and in relation to a certificate of survey . 
(2) The provisions of section 309 A shall apply to and in relation to a nuclear ship surveyed for 
the purpose of issue of a certificate under section 344B as they apply to and in relation to a  ship 
surveyed for the purpose of issue of a safety conventio n certificate under Part IX.  
344-I. Power to make rules .― (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the fo llowing matters, namely: ― 
(a) the design, construction and standards of inspection and assembly of the reactor 
installations of nuclear ships;  
(b) the standa rds of safety of nuclear ships;  
(c) the manner of survey of nuclear shi ps; 
(d) the forms in which c ertificates unde r this Part may be issued;  
(e) the form and manner in which the safety assessment and operating manual of a nuclear 
ship are to be prepared, maintained and kept up -to-date and the particulars to be contained  therein;  
(f) the form of notice s under this Part and the time whe n such notices should be given;  
(g) the manner in which investigations may be made into causes of accidents to a nuclear 
ship;  
(h) the special precautions to be taken against unreasonable radiation or other nuclear hazards  
to the crew, passengers and other persons, to waterways a nd to food and water resources;  
(i) the manner in which radio -active waste from nuclear ships i s to be stowed and disposed of;  
(j) the manner in which the reactor fuelling, defuelling and refuelling  and maintenance of 
nucle ar ships are to be carried out;  
(k) the special training for and qualifications of, maste rs and seamen of nuclear ships;  
(l) the special requirements relating to approach, entry into, stay in or departure from, an  
Indian port of a nuclear ship;  
(m) the procedure to be followed for determining the operationa l conditions of a nuclear ship;  
(n) the protection and closure of the reactor installation of nuclear ships in the case of a 
collision, grounding, fire, leakage of radio -active ma terial or other accident;  
(o) the fees to be charged for any inspection survey or certificate under this Part;  
(p) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.]  142 
 1[PART IXB 
SECURITY OF SHIPS AND PORT FACILITIES  
 344J. Application .―(1) Subject to sub -section ( 2), this Part shall apply to — 
(a) the following types of ships engaged on international voyages, namely: — 
(i) passenger ships including high speed passenger craft;  
(ii) cargo ships including high speed craft of five hundred gro ss tonnage and above;  
(iii) mobile offshore drilling units:  
Provided that the Central Government may extend the application of this Part to those ships which 
are exclusively engaged on coastal voyages;  
(b) the port facilities serving ships referred to in c lause ( a): 
Provided that the Central Government may, after taking decision, on the basis of port facility 
security assessment having carried out under this Part, extend the application of this Part to those port 
facilities which, although used primarily  by ships not engaged on international voyages, are 
occasionally required, to serve ships arriving or departing on international voyages.  
(2) This Part shall not apply to war ships, naval auxiliaries, or other ships owned or operated by 
the Central Government  and used only for non -commerc ial service by that Government.  
344K. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “company ” means the owner of the ship who, or any organisation which has assumed the 
responsibility of operation of the ship from the owner of such ship and who or which has agreed 
to take over all  the duties and responsibilities imposed by the International Safety Management 
Code;  
(b) “declaration of security ” means an agreement between ships or a ship and a port facility 
specifying therein the security measures to be complied with;  
(c) “designated  authority ” means such authority as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify;  
(d) “International Ship and Port Facility Security Code ” means the code for the security of 
ships and port facilities provided in the Safety C onvention;  
(e) “port facility ” means any location or area including anchorages or waiting berths or 
approaches from seaward and determined by the Central Government or the designated authority, 
as the case may be, where interface between ships or a ship an d a port takes place;  
(f) “recognised security organisation ” means any organisation, company, firm or body of 
individuals having expertise in matters relating to security and knowledge of ship, and port 
operations, which or who are authorised by the Centra l Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette, to carry out assessment or verification or approval or certification required by this Part or 
by the International Ship arid Port Facility Code;  
(g) “security level ” means the qualification of the degre e of risk associated with the threat or 
an unlawful act against a ship, or against a port facility or any other area connected therewith;  
(h) words and expressions used in this Part but not defined in this Part shall have the 
respective meanings as assigne d to them in the Safety Convention.  
344L. Ship identification number .―(1) The Central Government or the designated authority, as 
the case may be, shall provide every Indian ship of one hundred gross tonnage and above and every 
Indian cargo ship of three hu ndred gross tonnage and above, a ship identification number, which 
conforms to the relevant scheme formulated by the International Maritime Organisation.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2007, s. 6 ( w.e.f. 1 -3-2008) .  143 
 (2) All the certificates issued under this Act and all certified copies thereof shall bear the ship 
identification number.  
 344M. Security measures .―(1) The Central Government or the designated authority, as the case 
may be, shall set security levels taking into consideration human element such as shore leave and 
provide information thereof to all the Indian ships, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Centra l Government or the designated authority, as the case may be, shall set security 
levels and provide information thereof to port facilities within India and to every ship prior to entering 
an Indian port or while in a port within India, as may be prescribed : 
Provided that the Central Government may authorise any recognised security organisation to carry 
out any of the security measures under this section, on behalf of it, with such c onditions as may be 
prescribed.  
344N. Port facility assessment .―The Central Government shall carry out port facility 
assessment in the manner as may be prescribed.  
344-O. Obligations of companies, etc. ―Every company, ship or port facility shall comply with 
the relevant requirements under the Safety Convention and the International Code for the Security of 
Ships and Port Fa cility.  
 344P. Obligations of port facility .―Every port facility in India shall comply with the 
requirement of this Part or the rules made thereunder.  
344Q. International Ship Security Certificate .―The Central Government or the designated 
authority or the authorised person, as the case may be, shall issue every Indian ship to which this Part 
applies, an International Ship Security Certificate or an Interim International Ship Security Certificate, 
as the case may be, in the form and manner as may be prescribed.  
344R. Ship Security Alert System .―Every Indian ship shall be provided with such Ship 
Security Alert System, as may be prescribed.  
344S. Control measures .―Every ship to which this Part applies shall be subject to such control 
measures as may be prescribed.  
344T. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the provisions 
of the Safety Convention, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
rules may provide — 
(a) for alternative or equivalent security levels;  
(b) fee to be levied for any service rendered;  
(c) any other matter which by this Part is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
PART X  
COLLISIONS, ACCIDENTS AT SEA AND 1*** LIABILITY  
345. Division of loss in case of collision .―(1) Whenever by the fault of two or more ships 
damage or loss is caused to one or more of them or to the cargo of one or more of them or to any 
property on board one or more of them, the liability to make good the damage or loss shall be in 
proportion to the degree in which each ship was at fault :  
Provided that ― 
(a) if, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, it is not possible to establish different 
degrees of fault, the liability shall be apportioned equally;  
                                                      
1. The words “limitation of” omitted by Act 25 of 1970, s. 15 (w.e.f. 15 -9-1972).  144 
 (b) nothing in this  section shall operate so as to render any ship liable for any loss or damage 
to which her fault has not contributed;  
(c) nothing in this section shall affect the liability of any person under any contract, or shall be 
construed as imposing any liability u pon any person from which he is exempted by any contract 
or by any provision of law, or as affecting the right of any person to limit his liability in the 
manner provided by law.  
(2) For the purposes of this Part, references to damage or loss caused by the  fault of a ship shall 
be construed as including references to any salvage or other expenses, consequent upon that fault, 
recoverable in law by way of damages.  
 346. Damages for personal injury .―(1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered 
by any person on board a ship owing to the fault of that ship and of any other ship or ships, the 
liability of the owners of the ships concerned shall be joint and several.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as depriving any person of any right of defence on 
which, independently of this section, he might have relied in an action brought against him by the 
person injured, or any person entitled to sue in respect of such loss of life, or shall affect the right of 
any person to limit his liability i n cases to which this section relates in the manner provided by law.  
347. Right of contribution .―(1) Whenever loss of life or personal injuries are suffered by a 
person on board a ship owing to the fault of that ship and of any other ship or ships, and a p roportion 
of the damages is recovered from the owner of one of the ships which exceeds the proportion in which 
she was in fault, the said owner may recover by way of contribution the amount of the excess from the 
owners of the other ship or ships to the ex tent to which those s hips were respectively in fault : 
Provided that no amount shall be so recovered which could not, by reason of any statutory or 
contractual limitation of, or exemption from, liability, or which could not for any other reason, have 
been r ecovered in the first instance as damages by the p ersons entitled to sue therefor . 
(2) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the person entitled to any contribution under 
sub-section ( 1) shall, for the purpose of recovering the contribution, hav e, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, the same rights and powers as the persons entitled to sue for damages in the first instance.  
348. Duty of master of ship to assist in case of collision .―In every case of collision between 
two ships it shall be the duty of the master or person in charge of each ship, i f and so far as he can do 
so without danger to his own shi p, crew and passengers, if any ― 
(a) to render to the other ship, her master, crew and passengers, if any, such assistance as may 
be practicable and may be necessary to save them from any danger caused by the collision and to 
stay by the other ship until he has ascertained that she has no need of further assistance, and  
(b) to give to th e masters or persons in -charge of the other ships the name of his own ship and 
of the port to which she belongs and also the names of the ports from which she comes and to 
which she is bound.  
349. Collision to be entered in official log .―In every case of collision in which it is practicable 
so to do, the master of every ship concerned shall, immediately after the occurrence, cause a statement 
thereof and of the circumstances under which the same occurred to be entered in the official log book, 
if any, and the entry shall be signed by the master and also by the mate or one of the crew.  
350. Report to Central Government of accidents to ships .―When a ship has sustained or 
caused any accident occasioning loss of life or any serious injury to a ny person or has received any 
material damage affecting her seaworthiness or her efficiency either in her hull or is so altered in any 
part of her machinery as not to correspond with the particulars contained in any of the certificates 
issued under this Ac t in respect of the ship, the owner or master shall, within twenty -four hours after 
the happening of the accident or damage or as soon thereafter as possible, transmit to the Central 
Government or the nearest principal officer a report of the accident or d amage and of the probable 
cause thereof stating the name of the ship, her official number, if any, her port of registry and the 
place where she is.  145 
 351. Notice of loss of Indian ship to be given to Central Government .―If the owner or agent 
of any Indian sh ip has reason, owing to the non -appearance of the ship or to any other circumstance, 
to apprehend that the ship has been wholly lost, he shall, as soon as conveniently may be, send to the 
Central Government notice in writing of loss and of the probable cau se thereof stating the name of the 
ship, her official number, if any, and her port of registry.  
 1[PART XA   
LIMITATION OF LIABILITY  
 352. Definitions .―In this Part, unless  the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “claim ” means a personal claim or property claim;  
2[(b) “Convention ” means the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims, 
1976 as amended from time to time;]  
(c) “Fund ”, in relatio n to a vessel, means the limitation Fund constituted under section 352C;  
(d)”liability ”, in relation to owner of a vessel, includes liability of the vessel herself;  
(e)”occurrence ” means an occurrence referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 352A;  
(f)”personal claim ” means a claim resulting from loss of life or personal injury;  
(g) “property claim ” means any claim other than a personal claim arising from an occurrence.  
3[(h) “salvor ” means any person rendering services in direct connection with salvage 
operations.  
Explanation .―For the purpose of this clause, “salvage operations ” includes ― 
(i) the raising, removal, destruction or the rendering a ship harmless which is sunk, 
wrecked, stranded or abandoned including anything that is or has been on board such s hip; 
(ii) the removal, destruction or rendering the cargo of a ship harmless; and  
(iii) the measures taken to avert or minimise loss to a ship or its cargo or both;  
(i) “ship owner ” means owner, charterer, manager,'and operator of a sea going ship;  
(j) “Special Drawing Rights ” means Special Drawing Rights as determined by the 
International Monetary Fund.]  
4[352A. Limitation of liability for damages in respect of certain claims .―(1) The ship owner, 
salvor, any person for whose act, neglect or default the ship owner or salvor, as the case may be, is 
responsible, and an insurer of liability for claims to the same extent as the assured himself, may limit 
his liability as provided un der section 352B in respect of,―  
(a) claims arising from loss of life of or personal injury to, or loss of or damage to, property 
(including damage to harbour works, basins and waterways and aids to navigation), occurring on 
board or in direct connection w ith the operation of the ship or with salvage operations, and 
consequential loss resulting there from;  
(b) claims arising out of loss resulting from delay in the carriage by sea of cargo and 
passengers or their luggage;  
(c) claims arising out of other loss resulting from infringement of rights other than contractual 
rights, occurring in direct connection with the operation of the ship or salvage operations;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 16, for section 352 (w.e.f. 15 -9-1972).  
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 16, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 17,  ibid.,  for section 352A (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  146 
 (d) claims of a person other than the person liable in respect of measures taken in order to 
avert or minimise loss for which the person liable may limit his liability in accordance with the 
provisions of the Convention or the rules made in this behalf prescribe, as the case may be, and 
such further loss caused by such measures;  
(e) claims for the loss of life or personal injury to passengers of a ship brought  by or on behalf 
of any person, ― 
(i) under the contract of passenger carriage; or  
(ii) who, with the consent of the carrier, is accompanying a vehicle for live animals which 
are covered by a contract for the carriage of goods,  
carried in that ship:  
Provided that the limits for passenge rs claim specified in the rules made under this Part shall 
not be applicable to the passengers carried in and around the coast of India in respect of whom 
separate limits shall be prescribed.  
(2) Claims set out in sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to limita tion of liability even if brought by 
way of recourse or for indemnity under a contract or otherwise:  
Provided that claims set out in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall not be subject to limitation of 
liability to the extent that they relate to remuneratio n under a contract with the person liable. ( 3) 
Nothing in this section shall apply to ―  
(a) claims for salvage or contribution in general average;   
(b) claims for oil pollution damage within the meaning of the International Convention on 
Civil Liability fo r Oil Pollution Damage, 1992 as amended from time to time;   
(c) claims by servants of the ship owner or salvor whose duties are connected with the ship or 
the salvage operations, including claims of their heirs, dependents or other persons entitled to 
make  such claims, if under the law governing the contract of service between the ship owner or 
salvor and such servants of the ship owner or salvor is not entitled to limit his liability in respect 
of such claims, or if he is by such law only permitted to limi t his liability to an amount greater 
than that provided for in the provision of the Convention or the rules made under this Part 
prescribe;   
(d) claims subject to any International Convention or any law for the time being in force in 
India governing or pro hibiting limitation of liability for nuclear damage;   
(e) claims against the ship owner of a nuclear ship for nuclear damage.   
Explanation  1.―For the purpose of this section, the act of involving limitation of liability shall 
not constitute an admission of liability.   
Explanation  2.― For the purpose of this Part, the liability of a ship owner shall include liability in 
an action brought against  the ship herself.]  
1[352B. Limitation of liability .―The amount to which any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
of section 352A may limit his liability in accordance with the provisions of the Convention and in 
cases where the provisions of the Conventi on are not applicable, the limit shall be in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf prescribe.]  
352C. Limitation Fund and consolidation of claims  2***.―3[(1) Where any liability is alleged 
to have been incurred by a person referred to in sub -section  (1) of section 352A in respect of claims 
arising out of an occurrence, and legal proceedings are instituted in respect of claims subject to 
limitation, then such person may apply to the High Court for the setting up of a limitation Fund for the 
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 18, for section 352B (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
2.  The words “against owner” omitted by s. 19, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3.  Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  147 
 total sum representing the amounts set out in the Convention or the rules made in this behalf under 
this Part applicable to claims for which that person may be liable together with interest thereon from 
the date of occurrence giving rise to the liability until the d ate of the constitution of the Fund.]  
(2) The High Court to which the application is made under sub -section ( 1) may determine the 
amount of the owner's liability and require him to deposit such amount with the High Court  1[or 
produce a guarantee acceptable  or produce a bank guarantee in respect of the amount as in the opinion 
of the High Court is satisfactory and the amount so deposited or guarantee so given] shall constitute a 
limitation Fund for the purposes of the claims referred to in sub -section ( 1) and shall be utilised only 
for the payment of such claims.  
(3) After the Fund has been constituted, no person entitled to claim against it shall be entitled to 
exercise any right against any other assets of the owner in respect of his claim against the Fund,  if that 
Fund is actually available for the benefit of the claimant.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the High Court may distribute the amount constituting 
the Fund  rateably amongst the several claimants and may stay any proceedings pending in a ny other 
court in relation to the same matter and may proceed in such manner and subject to such rules of the 
High Court as to making persons interested parties to the proceedings, and as to the exclusion of any 
claims which do not come in within a certain  time, and as to requiring security from the owner, and as 
to payment of any costs, as the High Court thinks fit.  
2[(5) Where the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or his insurer establishes that he has paid is 
whole or in part any claims in respect of  which he can limit his liability under this Part, the High 
Court shall place him in the same position and to the same extent in relation to the Fund as the 
claimant whose claim has been paid and allow to acquire by subrogation the rights which the person 
so compensated would have enjoyed under this Part:  
Provided  that the right of subrogation provided for in this sub -section may also be exercised by 
persons other than those therein mentioned in respect of any amount of compensation which they 
might, have p aid to that extent if prescribed by the rules made in this behalf under this Part.  
(6) Where the person liable or any other person has established that he may at a later date be 
required to pay in whole or in part, any of the claims under this Part, which could be settled from the 
Fund, the High Court may notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section order that a 
sufficient sum may be provisionally set aside for the purpose to enable the person to enforce his claim 
against the Fund at a later dat e in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 5).] 
(7) If the owner is entitled to make a claim against a claimant arising out of the same occurrence, 
their respective claims shall be set off against each other and the provisions of this Part shall o nly 
apply to the balance, if any.  
352D . Release of ship, etc .―(1) Where a vessel or other property is detained in connection with 
a claim which appears to the High Court to be founded on a liability to which a limit set by section 
352B applies, or security is given to prevent or obtain release from such detention, t he High Court 
may, and in the circumstances mentioned in sub -section ( 3) of this section shall, order the release of 
the vessel, property or security if the conditions specified in sub -section ( 2) are satisfied; and where 
the release is ordered, the person  on whose application it is ordered shall be deemed to have submitted 
to the jurisdiction of the High Court to adjudicate upon the claim.  
(2) The conditions referred to in sub -section ( 1) are― 
(a) that security which in the opinion of the High Court is satisfactory (in this section referred 
to as “guarantee ”) has previously been given whether in India or elsewhere, in respect of the said 
liability or any other liability incurred on the same oc casion and the High Court is satisfied that if 
the claim is established, the amount for which the guarantee was given or such part thereof as 
corresponds to the claim will be actually available to the claimant; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 19, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
2.  Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  148 
 (b) that either the guarantee is for an a mount not less than the said limit or further security is 
given which, together with the guarantee, is for an amount not less than that limit.  
(3) The circumstances referred to in sub -section ( 1) are that the guarantee was given in a port 
which, in relatio n to the claim, is the relevant port (for as the case may be, a relevant port) and that 
port is in a convention country.  
(4) For the purposes of t his section―  
(a) a guarantee given by the giving of security in more than one country shall be deemed to 
have been given in the country in which security was last given  
(b) any question whether the amount of any security is (either by itself or together with any 
other amount) not less than any limit set by section 352B shall be decided as at the time at which 
the security is given;  
(c) where part only of the amount for which a guarantee was given will be available to a 
claimant that part shall not be taken to correspond to his claim if any other part may be available 
to a claimant in respect of a liability to which  no limit is set as mentioned in sub -section ( 1). 
(5) In this section―  
1[(a) “Convention country ” means a country in which the Convention on Limitation of 
Liability for Maritime Claims, 1976 as amended from time to time is for the time being in force;]  
(b) “relevant port ”, in relation to any claim, means a port where the event giving rise to the 
claim occurred, or if that event did not occur in that port, the first port of call after the event -
occurred and includes in relation to a claim for loss of life or  personal injury or for damage to 
cargo, the port of disembarkation or discharge.  
2[(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 4), the vessels or other property 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be ordered to be released if the limit ation Fund has been 
constituted, ― 
(a) in the port where the occurrence took place, or, if it took place out of port, in the first port 
of call thereafter;  
(b) in the port of disembarkation in respect of claims for loss of life or personal injury; or  
(c) in the port of discharge in respect of damage to cargo.  
(7) The provision of sub -section ( 6) shall apply only if the claimant brings a claim against the 
limitation Fund before the High Court administering the Fund and the Fund is actually available and 
freely transferable in respect of that claim.]  
3[352E. Scope of application .―(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply whenever any person 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 352A seeks to limit his liability before the Court or seeks to 
procure the release of a ship or other property or the discharge of any guarantee give n within the 
Indian jurisdiction but any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 352A who at the time when 
the provisions under this Part are invoked before any Court in India does not have his habitual 
residence in India or does not have his prin cipal place of business in India or any ship in relation to 
which the right of limitation is invoked or whose release is sought and which does not at the time 
specified above fly the flag of the State, which is a party to the Convention, is wholly excluded  from 
the provisions of this Part.  
(2) The provisions of this Part shall not be applicable to the following vessels unless the Central 
Government, by notification, specify otherwise, ― 
(a) ships intended for navigation on or around coast of India and regist ered as coastal vessels 
under the provisions of this Act;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 20, for clause ( a) (w.e.f.1 -2-2003). 
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for section 352E (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  149 
 (b) ships less than three hundred tons;  
(c) air-cushion vehicles;  
(d) floating platforms constructed for the purpose of exploring or exploiting the natural 
resources of the sea -bed or the subsoil th ereof.]  
352F. Application of this Part to charterer, manager, etc., of a vessel .―(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this Part relating to limitation of liability of an owner 
of a vessel in respect of claims arising out of an occurrence shall apply to the charterer, manager and 
operator of the vessel an d to the master, members of the crew and other servants of the owner, 
charterer. manager or operator acting in the course of their employment in the same manner as they 
apply in relation to the owner.  
Provided that the total limits of liability of the owne r and all other persons referred to in this sub -
section in aspect of personal claims and property claims arising on a distinct occasion shall not exceed 
the amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of section 352B.  
(2) The master or a member of  the crew of a vessel may limit his liability under subsection ( 1) 
even if the occurrence which gives rise to a claim against him resulted from the actual fault or privity 
of the master and the members of the crew or any one or more of them :  
Provided that  where the master or a member of the crew is at the same time the owner, co -owner, 
charterer, manager or operator of a vessel, the provisions of this sub -section shall only apply where 
such occurrence resulted from any act, neglect or default committed by the master or, as the case may 
be, the member of the crew in his capacity as master, or, as the case may be, us a member of the crew.  
1[352FA. Power to make rules .―The Central Government may make rules to carry out the 
purposes of this Part:  
Provided that the rules under this Part shall be made having regard to the provisions of the 
Convention.]  
2[PART XB  
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR OIL POLLUTION DAMAGE  
352G . Application .―This Part applies to ― 
(a) every Indian ship wherever it is; and  
(b) every foreign ship while i t is at a port or place in India or within the territorial waters of India 
or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has, or may hereafter have, exclusive 
jurisdiction in regard to control of marine pollution under the Territorial Waters, Conti nental Shelf, 
Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
3[352H. Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “incident ” means any occurrence, or series of occurrences having the same origin, which 
causes pollution damage or creates a grave and imminent threat of causing such damage;   
(b) “liability conven tion” means the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil 
Pollution Damage, 1992 as amended from time to time;  
(c) “oil” means any persistent hydro carbon mineral oil such as crude oil, fuel oil, heavy 
diesel oil, lubricating oil whether carried on board a ship as cargo or in the bunker of such ship;   
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 63 of 2002, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 10 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 23 , for s ection 352H  (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  150 
 (d) “owner ” means ―  
(i) the person registered as owner of the ship;   
(ii) in the absence of registration, the person owning the ship; or   
(iii) in the case of a ship owned by a foreign State, the person registered in that State as 
operator of the ship;   
(e) “person ” means any individual or partnership or any public or private body, whether 
corporate or not, including a state or any of its constituent sub -divisions;   
(f) “pollution damage ” means ―  
(i) loss or damage caused outside the ship by contamination resulting from esc ape or 
discharge of oil from the ship, wherever such escape or discharge occurs, provided that 
compensation for impairment of the environment other than losses or profit from such 
impairment shall be limited to costs of reasonable measures of reinstatement  actually 
undertaken or to be undertaken;   
(ii) the costs of preventive measures and further loss or damage caused by such 
measures;   
(g) “preventive measures ” means any reasonable measures taken by any person after the 
incident to prevent or minimise poll ution damage;   
(h) “ship” means any sea -going vessel and sea borne craft of any type whatsoever constructed 
or adapted for the carriage of oil in bulk as cargo, provided that a ship capable of carrying oil and 
other cargoes shall be regarded as a ship only  when it is actually carrying oil in bulk as cargo and 
during any voyage following such carriage unless it is proved that it has no residues of such 
carriage of oil in bulk aboard;   
(i) “State of the ship's registry ”, in relation to registered or unregiste red ships, means the State 
of registration of the ship, or as the case may be, the State whose flag the ship is flying .]  
352-I. Liability of owner .―(1) Save, as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), the 
owner at the time of an incident, or,  where the incident consists of a series of occurrence at the time of 
first of such occurrences, shall be liable for any pollution damage caused by oil which has escaped or 
been discharged from the ship as a result of the incident.  
(2) No liability for pol lution damage shall attach to the owner under sub -section ( 1), if he proves 
that the pollution damage ― 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon of 
an exceptional, inevitable and irresistible character; or  
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause such damage by any 
other pers on; or  
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or the wrongful act of any government or other 
authority responsible for the maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in exercise of its 
functions in that behalf.  
(3) Where, with respect to any inciden t the owner proves that the pollution damage resulted, either 
wholly or partially, from an act or omission done, with intent to cause such damage, by the person 
who suffered damage, or from the negligence of that person, the owner shall be exonerated wholl y or, 
as the case may be, partially , from liability to that person.  
1[(4) When any incident involving two or more ships occurs and pollution damage results               
therefrom, the owners of all the ships concerned, unless exonerated under sub -section (3), shall be 
jointly and severally liable for such damage which is not reasonably separable.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 24, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  151 
 (5) No claim for pollution damage shall be made against any owner otherwise than in accordance 
with the provisions of this section.  
1[(6) Without prejudice to an y right of recourse of the owner against third parties, no claim for 
compensation for pollution damage may be made against ― 
(a) the servants or agents of the owner or the members of the crew;  
(b) the pilot or any other person who, without being a member of  the crew, renders services 
for the ship;  
(c) any charterer (howsoever described, including a bare -boat charterer), manager or operator 
of the ship;  
(d) any person performing salvage operations with the consent of the owner or on the 
instructions of a comp etent public authority;  
(e) any person taking preventive measures;  
(f) all servants or agents of persons mentioned in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e),  
unless the incident causing such damage occurred as a result of their personal act or omission 
committed or mad e with the intent to cause such damage, or recklessly and with knowledge that such 
damage would probably result.]  
2[352J. Limitation of liability .―(1) The owner shall be entitled to limit his liability under this 
Part, in respect of any one or more inciden t, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The owner shall not be entitled to limit his liability if it is proved that the incident causing 
pollution damage occurred as a result of his personal act or omission committed or made with the 
intent to cause such damage, or r ecklessly and with knowledge that such  damage would probably 
result.]  
352K . Constitution of limitation fund .―(1) (a) Any owner desiring to avail of the benefit of 
limitation of his liability under sub -section ( 1) of section 352J shall make an application to the High 
Court for constitution of a limitation fund (hereafter in this Part referred to as fund).  
(b) Suc h fund may be constituted either by depositing the sum with the High Court or by 
furnishing bank guarantee or such other security as, in the opinion of the High Court, is satisfactory.  
(2) (a) The insurer or any other person providing financial security to  the owner may apply to the 
High Court for constitution of the fund under sub -section ( 1) and any fund so constituted shall have 
the same effect as it were constituted “by the owner.  
(b) Such fund may be constituted even in cases where sub -section ( 2) of s ection 352J applies but 
in any such event constitution of the fund shall not prejudice the rights of any claimant against the 
owner for full compensation exceeding the amount deposited or secured in the fund.  
3[(3) The amount in Special Drawing Rights to b e deposited or secured in the fund under sub -
section ( 1) shall be converted in rupees on the basis of official value in rupees of the Special  Drawing 
Rights as determined by the Reserve Bank of India on the date of constitution of the fund.]  
352L . Acquisit ion of right for compensation by subrogation .―(1) Where the owner or any of 
his servants or agents or any other person providing him insurance or other financial security has, as a 
result of incident in question, paid any compensation to any claimant, such  person shall, up to the 
amount so paid by him, be entitled to acquire by subrogation the rights to which the claimant so 
compensated would be entitled to.  
(2) Where the owner or any other person providing him insurance or other financial security 
establis hes that he may, at a later date, be compelled to pay to any person, in whole or in part, any 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 24, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).   
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for section 352J (w.e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by A ct 55 of 1988, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  152 
 amount by way of compensation for pollution damage caused by the incident with respect to which he 
would have been entitled to acquire by subrogation the right of  the claimant had the compensation 
been paid before the fund was distributed, the High Court may order that sufficient amount from the 
fund may provisionally be set aside to enable the owner or such other person to enforce his claim 
against the fund at a l ater date.  
352M . Consolidation of claim and distribution of fund .―(1) The High Court shall consolidate 
all claims against the fund including those arising under section 352L.  
(2) Any claim in respect of expense s reasonably incurred or sacrifices reasonably made by the 
owner voluntarily to prevent or minimise pollution d amage shall rank equally with other claims 
against the fund.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 352L, the High Court shall distribute the 
amount in the fund among all claimants in proportion to their established claims.  
352N . Compu lsory insurance or other financial guarantee .―(1) The owner of every Indian 
ship which carries 2000 tons or more oil in bulk as cargo shall, in respect of such ship, maintain an 
insurance or other financial secur ity for an amount equivalent to―  
1[(a) one hundred and thirty -three Special Drawing Right s for each ton of the ship's tonnage; 
or 
(b) fourteen million Special Drawing Rights,]  
whichever is lower.  
(2) In respect of every Indian ship which maintains insurance or other financial security under 
sub-section ( 1), there shall be issued by the Directo r-General a certificate in such form and giving 
such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On an application by the owner or agent of any foreign ship, the Director -General may issue a 
certificate under sub -section ( 2) in respect of such foreign ship on pr oduction of satisfactory evidence 
relating to maintenance of insurance or other financial security in accordance with the provisions of 
the International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage signed at Brussels on the 
29th day of November,  1969 2[as amended from time to time].  
(4) For every certificate issued under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) there shall  be charged such fee as 
may be prescribed.  
352-O. Acceptance of certificates issued outside India .―Any certificate issued by a competent 
authority in any country outside India to a ship registered in that country or any certificate issued by a 
competent authority of any country which is a contracting party to the International Convention on 
Civil Liabi lity for Oil Pollution Damage signed at Brussels on the 29th day of November, 1969  3[as 
amended from time to time] to any ship wherever registered, shall be accepted at any port or place in 
India as if it were issued under this Act.  
352P . Ban on entering o r leaving an Indian port without certificate .―(1) No Indian ship, 
which has on board 2000 tons or more oil in bulk as cargo shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or 
leave any port or place in India unless it carries on board a certificate issued under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 352N or a certifica te accepted under section 352 -O. 
(2) No ship other than an Indian ship carrying 2000 tons or more oil in bulk as cargo, wherever 
registered, shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or leave any port or place in India, unless it carries 
on board a certific ate issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 352N or a certificate accepted under 
section 352 -O. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1988, s. 5, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  153 
 (3) No customs officer shall grant inward entry or outward clearance to any ship to which                  
sub-section ( 1) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 2) applies, unless its master produces a certificate 
required under the respective sub -section.  
352Q . Government ships .―Nothing in this Part shall apply to any ship of war or any ship for the 
time being used by the Government of any country for purposes ot her than commercial purposes.  
352R . Power to make rules .―The Central Government may make rules prescribing ― 
(a) the form of certificate to be issued by the Director -General under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 352N and the particulars which it may contain;  
(b) fees which may be charged for issue of certificates under section 352N.]  
1[(c) the limits of liability of owner in respect of one or more incident of pollution damage or 
other requirements having regard to the provisions of the Liability Convention.]  
2[PART XC  
INTERNATIONAL  OIL POLLUTION  COMPENSATION  FUND 
352S . Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “contributing oil ” means crude oil and fuel oil.  
Explanation. ―For the purposes of this clause, ― 
(i) “crude oil ” means any liquid hydro carbon mixture occurring naturally in the earth 
whether or not  treated to render it suitable for transportation and includes crude oils from 
which certain distillate fractions have been removed or to which certain distillate fractions 
have been added;  
(ii) “fuel oil ” means heavy distillates or residues from crude oil  or blends of such 
materials intended for use as a fuel for the production of heat or power of a quality equivalent 
to the „American Society for Testing and Materials‟ Specification for Number Four Fuel Oil 
(Designation D 396 - 69)', or heavier;  
(b) “disch arge or escape ”, in relation to pollution damage, means the discharge or escape of 
oil carried by the ship;  
(c) “Fund ” means the International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund established by the Fund 
Convention;  
(d) “Fund Convention ” means the International  Convention on the Establishment of an 
International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1992 as amended from time to 
time;  
(e) “Fund Convention country ” means a country in which the Fund Convention is for the time 
being in force;  
(f) “guaranto r” means any person providing insurance or other financial security to cover the 
owner's liability;  
(g) “terminal installation ” means any site for the storage of oil in bulk which is capable of 
receiving oil from waterborne transportation, including any fa cility situated off -shore and linked 
to such site;  
(h) “ton”, in relation to oil, means a metric ton.  
352T . Contribution to the Fund .―(1) Contributions to the Fund, in respect of contributing oil 
carried by sea to ports or terminal installations in India, shall be payable in accordance with Articles 
10 and 12 of the Fund Convention.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 2002, s. 26 (w .e.f. 1 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-2993).  154 
 (2) Sub -section ( 1) shall apply whether or not the con tributing oil is imported, and 
notwithstanding that contributions are payable to the Fund in respect of carriage of the same 
contributing oil on a previous voyage.  
(3) Contributions shall also be payable to the Fund in respect of contributing oil when firs t 
received in any installation in India after having been carried by sea and discharged in a port or 
terminal installation in a country which is not a Fund Convention country.  
(4) The person liable to pay contributions to the Fund shall be ― 
(a) in case of contributing oil which is being imported into India, the importer; or  
(b) in any other case, the person by whom the oil is received in India.  
(5) A person shall not be liable to pay contributions to the Fund in respect of the contributing oil 
imported or received by him in any year if the quantity of contributing oil so imported or received in 
the year does not exceed one hundred and fifty thousand tones or as may be specified from time to 
time in the Fund Convention.  
352U . Contribution pay able by persons to the Fund .―(1) The contributions payable to the 
Fund by a person for any year shall be, ― 
(a) such amount as may be determined by the Assembly of the Fund under Articles 10 and 12 
of the Fund Convention;  
(b) in such installments, becoming due at such dates,  
as may be  notified and if any amount due from such person remains unpaid after the date on which it 
became due, it shall from that due date bear interest at a rate determined by the said Assembly until it 
is paid.  
(2) The Central Government may require persons, who  are or may be liable to pay contributions 
to the Fund under section 352T, to give financial security for payment of contributions to that 
Government or the Fund.  
352V . Power to call for information .―(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of 
transmitting to the Fund the names and addresses of the persons who under section 352T are liable to 
make contributions to the Fund every year and the quantity of contributing oil in respect of which they  
are so liable, by notice require any such person to furnish such information as may be specified 
therein.  
(2) A notice under this section may require a person to give such information as may be required 
to ascertain whether he is liable to contribute to t he Fund.  
(3) A notice under this section may specify the manner in which, and the time within which, such 
notice is to be complied with.  
(4) In proceedings by the Fund against any person to recover any amount due under section 352T, 
particulars contained i n any list transmitted by the Central Government to the Fund shall, so far as 
those particulars are based on information obtained under this section, be admissible as evidence of 
the facts stated in the list; and so far as particulars which are so admissib le are based on information 
given by the person against whom the proceedings are brought, those particulars shall be presumed to 
be accurate until the contrary is proved.  
(5) No person shall disclose any information which has been furnished to or obtained by him 
under this section unless the disclosure is made,  
(a) with the consent of the person from whom the information was obtained;  
(b) in connection with the compliance of this section;  
(c) for the purpose of any legal proceedings arising out of this sect ion or of any report of such 
proceedings.  155 
 (6) A person who, ― 
(a) refuses or willfully neglects to comply with a notice under this section; or  
(b) makes, while furnishing any information in compliance with a notice under this 
section, any statement which he knows to be false in a material particular, or recklessly makes 
any statement which is false in a material particular,  
shall be guilty of an offence punishable under this Act.  
 352W . Liability of the Fund .―Where any person suffering pollution damage has been unable to 
obtain the full and adequate compensation for  the damage under the terms of the Liability Convention 
on any of the grounds specified in Article 4 of the Fund Convention, the Fund shall be liable for 
pollution damage in accordance with the provisions of the Fund Convention.  
352X . Jurisdiction of Court s.―(1) Any action for a claim against the Fund for compensation 
under section 352W shall be brought before the High Court.  
(2) The Fund shall have the right to intervene as a party to any legal proceedings instituted in the 
High Court against the owner or hi s guarantor.  
(3) Where an action for compensation for pollution damage has been brought against the owner or 
his guarantor before the High Court each party to the proceedings may notify the Fund of the 
proceedings.  
(4) Where such notice of proceedings has been given to the Fund, any judgment given in the 
proceedings shall, after it has become final and enforceable, become binding upon the Fund in the 
sense that the facts and evidence in that judgment may not be disputed by the Fund on the ground that 
it has  not intervened in the proceedings.  
352Y . Extinguishment of claims .―Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, no action to enforce a claim against the Fund under this Part shall be entertained 
by a High Court unless ― 
(a) the action to enforce is commenced; or  
(b) notice of action to enforce a claim against the owner or his guarantor in respect of the 
same pollution damage is given to the Fund,  
within three years from the date when the damage occurred:  
Provided that in  no case an action to enforce a claim shall be brought after six years from the date 
of the incident that caused such damage.  
352Z . Subrogation and right of recourse .―In respect of any sum paid by a public authority in 
India or the Fund, as the case may be, as compensation for pollution damage, that authority shall 
acquire by subrogation any rights which the person so compensated would have enjoyed under the 
Fund Conve ntion.  
352ZA . Power to make rules .―The Central Government may make such rules as may be 
required to carry out the purposes of the Fund Convention.]  
PART XI  
NAVIGATION  
353. Method of giving helm orders .―No person on any Indian ship shall, when the ship is g oing 
ahead, give a helm or steering order containing the word “starbo ard” or “right ” or any equivalent of 
“starboard ” or “right ” unless he intends that the head of the ship shall move to the “right ” or give a 
helm or steering order containing the word “port” or “left” or any equivalent of “port” or “left” unless 
he intends that the head of the ship shall move to the left.  
354. Duty to report dangers to navigation .―The master of any Indian ship on meeting with 
dangerous ice, a dangerous derelict, a tro pical storm or any other direct danger to navigation  1[or on 
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 31 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  156 
 encountering sub -freezing air te mperatures associated with gale -force winds, causing severe ice 
accretion s on super  structures or strong gales for which no storm warning has been received by him] 
shall send information accordingly by all means of communication at his disposal and in accordance 
with such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf t o ships in the vicinity and to such 
authorities on shore as may be prescribed by those rules.  
Explanation. ―For the purpose of this section the expression “tropical storm ” means a hurricane 
typhoon, cyclone or other storm of a similar nature, and the master of a ship shall be deemed to have 
met with a tropical storm if he has reason to believe that there is suc h a storm in the vicinity.  
1[354A. Communication of intelligence regarding dangers to navigation .―(1) Where an 
authority prescribed under section 354 receives intelligence from any source of any danger to 
navigation mentioned in that section, that authorit y shall, as soon as possible, communicate such 
intelligence to such ships and authorities as he may deem proper.  
(2) The intelligence shall be communicated in such manner and subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no fees shall be levied for communicating any intelligence under this section to a 
ship.]  
355. Obligation to render assistance on receiving signal of distress .―(1) The master of an 
Indian ship on receiving at sea a signal of distress or information from any source that a vessel or 
aircraft is in distress shall proceed with all speed to the assistance of the persons in distress (informing 
them if possible that he  is doing so) unless he is unable or in the special circumstances of the case 
considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to do so or unless he is released from such obligation under 
the provisions of sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4). 
(2) Where the master o f any ship in distress has requisitioned any Indian ship that has answered 
his call, it shall be the duty of the master of the requisitioned ship to comply with the requisition by 
continuing to proceed with all speed to the assistance of the persons in dis tress unless he is released 
from the obligation under the provisions of sub -section ( 4). 
(3) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed by sub -section ( 1) as soon as he is 
informed of the requisition of one or more ships other than his own an d that the requisition is being 
complied with by the ship or ships requisitioned.  
(4) The master shall be released from the obligation imposed by sub -section ( 1), and if his ship 
has been requisitioned, from the obligation imposed by sub -section ( 2), if he  is informed by the 
persons in distress or by the master of any ship that has reached the persons in distress that assistance 
is no longer required.  
(5) If the master of an Indian ship on receiving at sea a signal of distress or information from any 
source  that a vessel or aircraft is in distress is unable or in the special circumstances of the case 
considers it unreasonable or unnecessary to go to the assist ance of the persons in distress,  he shall 
forth with cause a statement to be entered in the official  log book or, if there is no official log book, 
cause other record to be kept of his reasons for not going to the assistance of those persons.  
(6) The master of every Indian ship for which an official log is required shall enter or cause to be 
entered in t he official log book every signal of distress or message that a vessel, aircraft or person is in 
distress at sea.  
2[355A. Obligation to render assistance to persons in danger .―(1) The master of every Indian 
ship shall render assistance to every person found at sea in danger of being lost, unless he is unable or, 
in the special circumstances of the case, considers that such assistance cannot be rendered without 
serious danger to  his ship, or the persons thereon.  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 32 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
2. Ins. by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  157 
 (2) If the master of an Indian ship is unable or consider it unreasonable to go to the assistance of a 
person found at sea in danger of being lost, the master shall forthwith cause a statement to be entered 
in the officia l log book or, if there is no official log book, cause other record to be kept of his reasons 
for not going to the assistance of that person.]  
356. Power to make rules  as to signals .―The Central Government may, subject to the condition 
of previous publication, make rules prescribing ― 
(a) the manner of communicating information regarding dangers to navigation, and the 
authorities on shore to whom , such information is to be communicated ; 
1[(aa) the manner of communicating intelligence regarding dangers to navigation, the terms 
and conditions subject to which such intelligence may be communicated and the fees which may 
be levied for the communication of intelligence;]  
(b) the signals whic h shall be  2[signals of d istress, urgency and of safety ], respectively;  
(c) the circumstances in which, and the purposes for which, any such signal is to be used, and 
the circumstances in which it is to be revoked; and  
(d) the speed at which any message se nt by  3[radio telegraphy or telephony] in connection 
with such signal is to be transmitted.  
4[PART XIA  
PREVENTION AND CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION OF THE SEA BY OIL  
5[356A. Application .―(1) Save as otherwise provided, this Part shall apply to ― 
(a) oil tankers of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more, other ships of four hundred tons 
gross or more and off -shore installations; and  
(b) incidents of marine casualty or acts relating to such casualty occurring with grave and 
imminent danger to Indian coast line or  related interests from pollution or threat of pollution in 
the sea by deliberate, negligent or accidental release of oil, ballast water, noxious liquid and other 
harmful substances into sea including such incidents occurring on the high seas.  
(2) This Par t shall not apply to any war ships or other ships owned or operated by the Government 
and used for the time being on Government no n-commercial service.  
356B . Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “ballast ” means any solid o r liquid placed in a ship to increase the draft to change the trim, 
to regulate the stability, or to maintain stress load within such limits as may be prescribed;  
(b) “cargo ” includes ballast and ship's stores and fuel;  
(c) “coasts ” has the meaning assigne d to it in section 357;  
(d) “coastal waters ” means any part of the territorial waters of India, or any marine areas 
adjacent thereto over which India has, or, may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to 
control of marine pollution under the Ter ritorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic 
Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 1976), or any other law for the time being in 
force;  
(e) “Convention ” means the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships, 1973,  including its Protocol of 1978, as amended from time to time in the manner specified 
therein;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 34 (w.e.f. 2 8-5-1966).  
2. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “signals of distress and of urgency” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for “radio telegraphy” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 11, for PART XIA (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).  
5. Subs. by Act 59 of  2003, s. 2, for sections 356A to 356H (w.e.f. 1-3-2004 ). 158 
 (f) “international pollution prevention certificate ” means any certificate issued in accordance 
with the provisions of Pollution Prevention Conventions and Proto cols thereto which are acceded 
to by India;  
(g) “mile” means a nautical mile of 1,852 meters;  
(h) “noxious liquid substance ” means any substance which has been designated as such by 
rules made under this Part;  
(i) “off-shore installation ” means an installa tion, whether mobile or fixed, which is used or is 
intended to be used for under -water exploration or exploitation of crude oil, petroleum or other 
similar mineral oils, under lease, licence or any other form of contractual arrangement and 
includes ― 
(a) any installation which could be moved from place to place under its own motive 
power or otherwise; and  
(b) a pipe -line; 
(j) “oil” means petroleum in any form including crude oil, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and 
refined products;  
(k) “oily mixture ” means a mixture with any oil content;  
(l) “oil tanker ” means a ship constructed or adapted primarily to carry oil in bulk in its cargo 
spaces and includes any combination carrier or any chemical tanker when it is carrying a cargo or 
part cargo of oil in bul k; 
(m) “reception facilities ”, in relation to a port, means facilities for enabling tankers or ships 
using the port to discharge or deposit residue or mixture of any substance subject to control by the 
Convention;  
(n) “ship” means a vessel of any type what soever operating in the marine environment and 
includes hydrofoil boats, air -cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft a nd fixed or floating 
platforms.   
356C . Issue of pollution prevention certificate .―(1) No Indian oil tanker or other Indian ship 
shall proceed to sea unless there is in force, in respect of that ship, a certificate issued by the Central 
Government, to be called an international oil pollution prevention certificate, in such form, for such 
duration and subject to such conditions as may b e prescribed.  
(2) No Indian oil tanker or other Indian ship carrying noxious liquid substances in bulk shall 
proceed to sea except with a certificate issued by the Central Government, to be called an 
international pollution prevention certificate, in such form, for such duration and subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed for the carriage of noxious liquid substances in bulk.  
(3) No Indian oil tanker or other Indian ship to which Annexure IV of the Convention applies 
shall proceed to sea except with  a certificate issued by the Central Government, to be called an 
international sewage pollution prevention certificate, in such form, for such duration and subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, “sewage ” means ― 
(i) drainage and other waste from any form of toilets, urinals and water closet scuppers;  
(ii) drainage from medical premises (dispensary, sick bay and other like places) via wash 
basins, wash tubs and  scuppers located in such premises;  
(iii) drainage from spaces containing living animals; or  
(iv) other waste water when mixed with the drainages specified above.  
(4) A valid international pollution prevention certificate issued in respect of an oil tanker  or a 
ship, other than an Indian ship, by the Government of the country to which the ship belongs shall, 159 
 subject to such rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf, have the same effect in India 
as the corresponding certificate issued in respe ct of an I ndian ship has under this Part.  
356D . Issue of certificates for foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign 
countries .―(1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Government of a country to which 
the Convention applies, cause any  international pollution preven tion certificate to be issued in 
accordance with the Convention in respect of an oil tanker or other ship in that country, if it is 
satisfied that such certificate can properly be issued, and where a certificate is so issued , it shall 
contain a statement that it has been issued on request.  
(2) The Central Government may request the Government of a country to which the Convention 
applies, to issue any international pollution prevention certificate in accordance with the Conven tion 
in respect of a ship and the certificate issued in pursuance of such a request containing a statement 
that it has been so issued shall have the same effect as if it had been issued by the Cen tral Government 
under this Act.  
356E . Requirement for constr uction and equipment in ships to prevent pollution .―For the 
purpose of preventing or reducing discharges of harmful sub stances or mixtures containing such 
substances from the oil tankers or other ships, the Central Government may make rules requiring 
Indian oil tankers and other Indian ships to be fitted with such equipment and to comply with such 
requirements for construction, survey of equipment and structure of such oil tankers or other ships and 
specifying conditions for making of surveys of all oil tankers or other ships, as may be prescribed, 
prior t o issuing an international pollution prevention certificate.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, “harmful substance ” means any substance which, 
if introduced into the sea, is liable to create hazards to human health, harm living resources and 
marine life, damage amenities or interfere with other legitimate uses of th e sea, and includes any 
substance subjec t to control by the Convention.  
356F . Record books .―(1) Every Indian oil tanker or other Indian ship which carries a substance 
subject to control by the Convention shall maintain, as may be required, record books in the 
prescribed forms, on board the oil tanker or other ship.  
(2) The manner in which record books shall be maintained, the nature of entries to be made 
therein, the custody and disposal thereof, and all other matters relating thereto shall be such as may b e 
prescribed having regard to th e provisions of the Convention.  
356G . Inspection and control of oil tankers and other ships to which this Part applies .―(1) 
A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf may go, at any reasonable time, on board an oil 
tanker or other ship to which any of the provisions of this Part applies, for the purposes of ― 
(a) ensuring that the prohibitions, restrictions and obli gations imposed by or under this Part 
are complied with;  
(b) satisfying himself about the adequacy of the measures taken to pre vent pollution;  
(c) ascertaining the circumstances relating to an alleged discharge of a substance which is 
subject to control b y the Convention from the oil tanker or other ship in contravention of the 
provisions of this Part;  
(d) inspecting any record required to be maintained on board; and  
(e) checking the validity of the international pollution prevention certificate.  
(2) The s urveyor or any such person may, if necessary, make, without unduly delaying the oil 
tanker or the other ship, a true copy of any record of the oil tanker or the other ship and may require 
the master of such tanker or ship to certify the copy to be a true c opy and such copy shall be 
admissible as eviden ce of the facts stated therein.  
356H . Information regarding contravention of provisions of Convention .―(1) If, on report 
from a surveyor or other person authorised to inspect an oil tanker or other ship under section 356G, 
the Director -General is satisfied that any provision of the Convention has been contravened by such 160 
 oil tanker or other ship within the  coastal waters, the Director -General or any officer authorised by 
him in this behalf, may ― 
(a) detain the oil tanker or other ship until the causes of such contraven tion are removed to the 
satisfaction of the Director -General or the officer authorised by  him; and  
(b) proceed against such oil tanker or other ship for recovery of cost of pollution damage, if 
any, and the cost of prevention of pollution damage and cleaning of such pollution;  
Provided that where the Director -General deems it necessary, he may  request the Indian Navy or 
the Coast Guard for preventing the oil tanker or other ship from proceeding to sea, and the Indian 
Navy or the Coast Guard, as the case may be, shall take action as re quested by the Director -General:  
(2) On receipt of informatio n from the Government of any country to which the Convention 
applies that an Indian oil tanker or other ship has contravened any provision of the Convention, the 
Central Government may, if it deems it necessary so to do, request such Government to furnish 
further details of the alleged contravention and if satisfied that sufficient evidence is available to 
establish contravention of any of the provisions of this Part or the rules made thereunder, take 
appropriate action against the owner or master of the co ncerned oil tanker or other ship and intimate 
the reporting Government of the action so taken.]  
356-I. Oil reception facilities at ports in India .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, in respect of every port  in India, the powers of the port authority 
shall include the power to provide  1[reception facilities].  
(2) A port authority providing  1[reception facilities] or a person providing such facilities by 
arrangement with the port authority, may make charges fo r the use of the facilities at such rates and 
may impose such conditions in respect of the use thereof as may be approved, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, by the Central Government in respect of the port.  
(3) Where the Central Government is satisf ied that there are no  1[ reception facilities] at any port 
in India or that the facilities available at such port are not adequate for enabling ships calling at such 
port to comply with the requirements of the Convention, the Central Government may, after 
consultation with the port authority in charge of such port, direct, by order in writing, such authority 
to provide or arrange for the provision of such  1[reception facilities] as may be specified in the order.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, specify the ports in India 
having  1[reception facilities] in accordance with the requirements of the Convention.  
Explanation .―For the purpose of this section, “port authority ” means, ― 
(a) in relation to any major port, the Board  of Trustees in respect of that port constituted under 
any law for the time being in force;  
(b) in relation to any other port, the Conservator of the Port, within the meaning of section 7 
of the Indian Ports Act, 1908  (15 of 1908) . 
PROVISIONS FOR CONTAINME NT OF ACCIDENTAL POLLUTION  
356J . Power to give a not ice to owner, etc., of polluting  ship.―(1) Where the Central 
Government is satisfied that ― 
(a) 2[oil or noxious liquid substance] is escaping or is likely to escape from a tanker, a ship 
other than a tanker or any off -shore installation; and  
(b) the 2[oil or noxious liquid substance] so escape d or likely to escape is causing or threatens 
to cause pollution of any part of coasts or coastal waters of India,  
it may, for the purpose of minimising the pollution already caused, or, for preventing the pollution 
threatened to be caused , require ― 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2003, s. 3, for “oil reception facilities” (w.e.f. 1-3-2004).  
2. Subs by s. 4, ibid., for “oil” (w.e.f. 1-3-2004).  161 
 (i) the owner, agent, master or charterer of the tanker,  
(ii) the owner, agent, master or charterer of the ship other than a tanker,  
(iii) the owner, agent, master, charterer or operator of a mobile off -shore installation,  
(iv) the owner, operator, lessee or lic ensee of off -shore installation of any other type,  
or all or any of them, by notice served on him or as the case may be on them , to take such action in 
relation to the tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off -shore installation, or, as the case may be,  
off-shore installation of any other type or its cargo or in relation to both, as may be specified in such 
notice.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1), the notice issued under that sub -section 
may require the person or persons on who m such notice is served to take action relating to any or all 
of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) action for preventing the escape of  1[oil or noxious liquid substance] from the tanker, ship 
other than a tanker mobile off -shore installation or off -shore installation of any other type;  
(b) action for removing  1[oil or noxious liquid substance] fro m the tanker, ship other than a 
tanker, mobile off -shore installation or off -shore installation of any other type in such manner, if 
any, and to such place, if any, as may be specified in the notice;  
(c) action for removal of the tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off -shore installation or 
off-shore installation of any other type to a place, if any, as may be specified in the notice;  
(d) action for removal of the  1[oil or noxious liquid substance] slicks on the surface of the sea 
in such manner, if an y, as may be specified in the notice;  
(e) action to disperse the  1[oil or noxious liquid substance] slicks on the surface of the sea in 
such manner, if any, as may be specified in the notice.  
(3) The Central Government may, by any notice issued under sub -section ( 1), prohibit the 
removal ― 
(a) of the tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off -shore installation or off -shore 
installation of any other type, from a place specified in the notice;  
(b) from the tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off -shore installation or off -shore 
instal lation of any other type , of any cargo or stores as  may be specified in the notice,  
except with its previous permission and upon such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
notice.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Cent ral Government may, if it is of 
the opinion that the pollution caused or likely to be caused has or may present a grave emergency, 
proceed to take such measures as may be deemed necessary and any measures so taken shall be 
deemed to have been taken under s ection 356K.  
356K . Powers to take measures for preventing or containing 1[oil or noxious liquid 
substance ] pollution .―(1) Where any person fails to comply, or fails to comply in part, with any 
notice served on him under section 356J, the Central Government  may, whether or not such person is 
convicted of an offence under this Part by reason of his having so failed to comply, cause such action 
to be taken as it may deem necessary for ― 
(i) carrying out the directives given in the notice issued under section 35 6J; and  
(ii) containing the pollution already caused or preventing the pollution threatened to be 
caused, of coastal waters or, as the case may be, of any part of the coast of India by  2[oil or 
noxious liquid substance] escaped or threatening to escape fro m the tanker, a ship other than a 
tanker, a mobile off -shore installation or off -shore installation of any other type.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2003, s. 5, for “oil” (w.e.f.1 -3-2004).  
 
 162 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of Part XB, any expenditure or liability incurred by the Central 
Government in, or by reason of, the exerci se of powers under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any tanker, 
ship other than a tanker, mobile off -share installation or off -shore installation of any other type in 
respect of which a notice had been issued under section 356J, or its cargo of  1[oil or noxi ous liquid 
substance] that had escaped or was discharged into the sea, shall be a debt due to the Central 
Government by the person or persons on whom the notice was served and may be recovered from that 
person, or as the case may be, from all or any of tho se persons and shall be a charge upon all or any 
tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off -shore installation or off -shore installation of any other type 
owned by that person or persons which may be detained by the Central Gove rnment until the amount 
is paid:  
Provided that provisions of Part XB of this Act shall not apply to measures taken in respect of any 
off-shore installation which is not a ship within the meaning of this Act except that in the event of 
pollution damage caused by any such off -shore i nstallation the person who  is liable for the damage 
may claim exoneration from any liability if he proves that such damage ― 
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, insurrection or a natural phenomenon of 
an exceptional, inevitable and irre sistible  character; or  
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omission done with intent to cause that damage by any 
other person; or  
(c) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful act of any government or other 
authority responsible for the maintena nce of lights or other nevigational aids in exercise of its 
functions in that behalf.  
356L . Power of the Central Government to give directions to certain ships to render certain 
services .―(1) Where for the purposes of taking any measures under sub -section ( 1) of section 356K, 
services of any Ind ian ship becomes necessary for―  
(i) lightening or transporting any cargo or equipment from or to the polluting ship; or  
(ii) providing any assistan ce to any other ship or equipment engaged in rendering services 
under clause ( i), 
the Central Government may, if it deems it necessary so do, direct, by an order in writing, the owner 
of any Indian ship, tug, barge or any other equipment to provide such se rvices or assistance as may be 
specified in that order.  
(2) The owner of any ship, tug , barge or any other equipment with respect to which an order under 
sub-section ( 1) has been made shall be entitled to tariff rates of freight and charter hire at reasona ble 
rates having regard to current market conditions:  
Provided that where tariff rates of freight are not fixed or where there is any dispute about 
reasonable rate of charter hire, the freight or, the case may be, charter hire, shall be paid at such rates 
as may be fixed by the Director -General by an order in writing.  
(3) Where in pursuance of the proviso to sub -section ( 2), the Director -General makes any order 
fixing rates of freight or charter hire, he shall determine reasonability of such rates of freigh t or 
charter hire by examining such witnesses, documents and accounts as he may deem necessary.  
[356M . Oil pollution cess .][Rep. by  the Finance Act , 2016 (28 of 2016), section  239 and the 
Fifteenth Schedule  (w.e.f .14-5-2016 )]. 
[356N . Refusal of port cleara nce.][Rep. by  the Finance Act , 2016 (28 of 2016), section  239 and 
the Fifteenth Schedule  (w.e.f .14-5-2016 )]. 
356-O. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the 
provisions of the Convention, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2003, s. 5, for “oil” (w.e.f. 1 -3-2004).  163 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
rules may ― 
1[(a) prescribe the limits of ballast, and designate noxious liquid substances, under clauses ( a) and 
(h), respectively, of section 356B;  
(b) prescribe the forms in which, the duration for which and the conditions subject to which, 
various international pollution prevention certificates shall be issued under section 356 PC; 
(bb) prescribe the period within which, the manner in which and the conditions for making 
surveys of oil tankers or other ships prior to issuing an international pollution prevention certificate 
and the requirements as to equipment which are to be fitted for prevention of pollution by an oil 
tanker and other ship under section 356E;]  
(c) prescribe the forms of  2[record books] for tankers and other Ships the manner in which such 
books shall be main tained, the nature of the entries to be made therein, the time and circumstances in 
which such entries shall be made, the custody and disposal thereof and all other matters relating 
thereto for the purposes of section 356F;  
(d) prescribe the fees which may  be levied for inspection of  3[various equipments required under 
the Convention] and the manner in which such fees may be collected;  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[(ee) any other matter which, for the implementation of the Conven tion, has to be or may be 
prescribed .] 
6[PART XIB  
CONTROL OF HARMFUL ANTI -FOULING SYSTEMS O N SHIPS  
356P. Application. ―(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Part, this Part shall apply to ― 
(a) every Indian ship, wherever it is;  
(b) ships not entitled to fly the flag of India, but which operate under the authority of India; 
and 
(c) ships that enter a port, shipyard, or of fshore terminal or place in India or within the 
territorial waters of India or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which India has, or may 
hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to control of pollution under the Territorial Waters, 
Continental  Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 1976) or 
any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) This Part shall not apply to any warship, naval auxiliary or other ship owned or operated by or 
under the authority of India a nd used, for the time being, only on Government non -commercial 
service:  
Provided that in case of such ships, the Government shall ensure by the adoption of appropriate 
measures not impairing operations or operational capabilities of such ship that such shi ps are operated 
in a prescribed manner consistent with this Part.  
356Q . Definitions .―In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “anti-fouling system ” means a coating, paint, surface treatment, surface, or device that is 
used on a ship to control or prevent attachment of unwanted organisms;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2003, s. 6, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -3-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “oil record books” (w.e.f. 1 -3-2004).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w. e.f. 1 -3-2004).  
4. Clause ( e) repealed by Act 28 of 2016, s. 239 and the Fifteenth Schedule (w.e.f. 14 -5-2016).  
5. Ins. by Act 59 of 2003, s. 6 (w.e.f.1 -3-2004).  
6. Ins. by Act 31 of 2014, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -12-2014).  164 
 (b) “authority ” means ― 
(i) the Go vernment of India under whose authority the ship is operating;  
(ii) with respect to a ship entitled to fly a flag of any other country, the Government of 
that country; and  
(iii) with respect to floating platforms engaged in exploration and exploitation of the                 
sea-bed and subsoil thereof adjacent to Indian coast over which Government of India 
exercises sovereign rights for the purposes of exploration and exploitation of its natural 
resources (including Floating Storage Units and Floating Prod uction Storage and Offloading 
Units), the Government of India;  
(c) “Committee ” means the Marine Environment Protection Committee of the Organisation;  
(d) “Convention ” means the International Convention on the Control of Harmful Anti -Fouling 
Systems on Ship s, 2001;  
(e) “gross tonnage ” means the gross tonnage calculated in accordance with the tonnage 
measurement regulations contained in Annex 1 to the International Convention on Tonnage 
Measurement of Ships, 1969, or any successor Convention as ratified or ac ceded to or adopted by 
the Government of India;  
(f) “international voyage ” means a voyage by a ship entitled to fly the flag of one State to or 
from a port, shipyard, or offshore terminal under the jurisdiction of another State;  
(g) “length ” means the leng th as defined in the International Convention on Load Lines, 1966, as 
modified by the Protocol of 1988 relating thereto, or any successor Convention as ratified or acceded 
to or adopted by the Government of India;  
(h) “Organisation ” means the International  Maritime Organisation;  
(i) “port” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian Port Act, 1908  (15 of 1908), 
the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963  (38 of 1963), or under any other law for the time being in force and 
shall include any terminal, eit her within the port limits or otherwise;  
(j) “ship” means a vessel of any type whatsoever operating in the marine environment and 
includes hydrofoil boats, air -cushion vehicles, submersibles, floating craft, fixed or floating platforms, 
floating storage un its and floating production storage and off -loading units.  
356R . Control of anti -fouling systems .―(1) Every Indian ship and other ships which are not 
entitled to fly Indian flag but operating under the authority of India, shall comply with the 
requirements  set forth in this Part, including the applicable standards and requirements as prescribed 
from time to time as well as effective measures to ensure that such ships comply with the 
requirements, as may be prescribed from time to time.  
(2) All other vessels  to which this Part applies shall comply with requirements of the anti -fouling 
systems as prescribed from time to time.  
356S . Issuance of International Anti -Fouling System Certificate .―(1) No Indian ship or other 
ships entitled to fly Indian flag or operating under its authority, which is of 400 gross tonnage and 
above shall engage in International Voyage unless there is on -board, in respect of that ship, a 
certificate issued by the Dir ector -General, to be called as International Anti -Fouling System 
Certificate, in such form, for such duration and subject to such procedures and conditions as may be 
prescribed, from time to time.  
(2) No Indian ship or other ships entitled to fly Indian fl ag or operating under its authority 
excluding fixed or floating platforms, Floating Storage Units and Floating Production Storage and 
Offloading Units which is of 24 meters or more in length, but less than 400 gross tonnage, shall 
engage in international v oyage unless there is onboard a declaration in such form and subject to such 
procedures and conditions as may be prescribed, from time to time.  
(3) Indian ships entitled to fly Indian flag which are of 400 gross tonnage and above, with 
appropriate conditio ns as applicable for each type of ships and not engaged in international voyage 165 
 and are required to be registered under this Act, shall be issued an Indian Anti -Fouling System 
Certificate, as may be prescribed from time to time.  
356T . Issue of Anti -Fouling  System Certificate for foreign ships in India and Indian ships in 
foreign countries .―(1) The Central Government may, at the request of the Government of a country 
to which the Convention applies, cause an International Anti -Fouling System Certificate to b e issued 
in accordance with the Convention in respect of any ship of that country to which the Convention 
applies, if it is satisfied that such certificate can properly be issued, and where a certificate is so 
issued, it shall contain a statement that it h as been so issued on a request, as per the procedure 
prescribed in this behalf from time to time.  
(2) The Central Government may request the Government of a country to which the Convention 
applies, to issue an International Anti -Fouling System Certificate in accordance with the Convention 
in respect of a ship to which this Part applies and the certificate so issued in pursuance of such a 
request shall contain a statement that it has been so issued and shall have the same effect as if it had 
been issued by t he Central Government under this Act.  
356U . Controls of waste materials .―Taking into account the international rules, standards and 
requirements, the Central Government shall prescribe the rules and take appropriate measures in its 
territory to require that wastes from the application or removal of an anti -fouling system, are 
collected, handled, treated and disposed of in a safe and environmentally sound manner, by any 
person in India, to protect human health and the environment.  
 356V . Record of anti -fouling systems .―(1) Every ship to which this Part applies shall 
maintain, a record of anti -fouling systems in the prescribed form.  
(2) The manner, in which the record of anti -fouling systems to be maintained shall be prescribed 
having regard to the provisions of the Convention and this Part.  
356W . Inspection and control of all shi ps above 400 gross tonnage .―(1) Any person 
authorised by the Director -General as Surveyor in this behalf may inspect, at any reasonable time, any 
ship to which any of the provisions of this Par t applies, for the purposes of―  
(a) ensuring that the prohibitions, restrictions and oblig ations imposed by or under this Part 
are complied with;  
(b) verifying that, where required, there is on -board a valid International Anti -Fouling System 
Certificate or a declaration on anti -fouling system; or  
(c) brief sampling of the ship's anti -fouling sy stem that does not affect the integrity, structure, 
or operation of the anti -fouling system taking into account the procedures as prescribed from time 
to time; and  
(d) verifying any record required to be maintained on -board.  
(2) For the purposes of clause (c) of sub -section ( 1), the time required to process the results of 
such sampling shall not be used as a basis for preventing the movement and departure of the ship.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Director -General as surveyor in this behalf, may, certify  any 
matter referred to in sub -section ( 1) in respect of such ship as a copy of the records of the ship to be a 
true copy and such copy shall be admissible as evidence of the facts stated therein.  
 356X . Information regarding contravention of the provision s of Convention .―(1) If, on 
receipt of a report from a surveyor or other person authorised to inspect a ship, the Director -General is 
satisfied that any provision of this Part has been contravened by such ship within the coastal waters, 
the Director -Genera l or any officer authori sed by him in this behalf, may―  
(a) detain the ship until the causes of such contravention are removed to the satisfaction of the 
Director -General or the officer authorised by him; and  
(b) levy penalty on such ship as specified in s ection 436:  166 
 Provided that where the Director -General deems it necessary, he may request the Indian Navy or 
the Coast Guard for preventing the ship from proceeding to sea and the Indian Navy or the Coast 
Guard, as the case may be, shall take action as reque sted by the Director -General.  
(2) On receipt of information from the Government of any country to which the Convention 
applies that a ship has contravened any provision of the Convention, the Central Government may, if 
it deems it necessary so to do, reque st such Government to furnish further details of the alleged 
contravention and, if satisfied that sufficient evidence is available, conduct investigation of the alleged 
violations and take appropriate measures in respect thereof.  
356Y . Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the provisions 
of the Convention, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Part.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) appropriate measures for operation of ships under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 
356P;  
(b) the standards, requirements and measures to ensure compliance under section 356R;  
(c) procedure and conditions and the fees which may be levied for inspection and issuance of 
international Anti -Fouling Systems Certificate under section 356S;  
(d) procedure and the fees which may be levied for issuance of Anti -Fouling Systems 
Certificate for foreign ships in India and Indian ships in foreign countries under section 356T;  
(e) procedure for collection, handling and disposal of wastes under section 356U;  
(f) the format of record of Anti -Fouling Systems, the manner in which such record shall be 
maintained under  section 356V;  
(g) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.]  
PART XII  
INVESTIGATIONS AND INQUIRIES  
357. Definition of “coasts ”.―In this Part, the word “coasts ” includes the coasts of creeks and 
tidal rivers.  
358. Shipping casualties a nd report thereof .―(1) For the purpose of investigations and 
inquiries under this Part, a shipping casualty  shall be deemed to occur when―  
(a) on or near the coasts of India, any ship is lost, abandoned, stranded or materially damaged;  
(b) on or near the c oasts of India, any ship causes loss or material damage to any other ship;  
(c) any loss of life ensues by reason of any casualty happening to or on board any ship on or 
near the coasts of India;  
(d) in any place, any such loss, abandonment, stranding, mate rial damage or casualty as above  
mentioned occurs to or on board any Indian ship, and any competent witness thereof is found in 
India;  
(e) any Indian ship is lost or is supposed to have been lost , and any evidence is obtainable in 
India as to the circumsta nces under which she proceeded to sea or was last heard of.  
(2) In the cases mentioned in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the master, pilot, harbour 
master or other person in charge of the ship, or (where two ships are concerned) in charge of each ship 
at the time of the shipping casualty, and  
in the cases mentioned in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), where the master of the ship concerned or 
(except in the case of a loss) where the ship concerned proceeds to any place in India from the place 
where the shipping casualty has occurred, the master of the ship,  167 
 shall, on arriving in India, give immediate notice of the shipping casualty to the officer appointed in 
this behalf by the Central Government.  
359. Report of shipping casualties to Central Gove rnment .―(1) Whenever any such officer as 
is referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 358 receives credible informatio n that a shipping casualty 
has occurred, he shall forthwith report in writing the information to the Central Government; and may 
proceed to make a preliminary inquiry into the casualty.  
(2) An officer making a preliminary inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall send a report thereof to 
the Central Government or such other authority as may be appointed by it in this behalf.  
360. Application to court for  formal investigatio n.―The officer appointed under sub -section 
(2) of section 358, whether he has made a preliminary inquiry or not, may, and, where the Central 
Government so directs, shall make an application to a court empowered under section 361, requesting 
it to make a form al investigation into any shipping casualty, and the court shall thereupon make such 
investigation.  
 361. Court empowered to make formal investigation .―1[A Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class] specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government  and a  2[Metropolitan Magistrate] 
shall have jurisdiction to make formal investigation into shipping casualties under this Part.  
362. Power of court of investigation to inquire into charges against master, mates and 
engineers .―(1) Any court making a formal  investigation into a shipping casualty may inquire into 
any charge of in competency or misconduct arising, in the course of the investigation, against any 
master, mate or engineer, as well as into any charge of a wrongful act or default on his part causin g 
the shipping casualty.  
(2) In every case in which any such charge, whether of in competency or misconduct, or of a 
wrongful act or default, as aforesaid, arises against any master, mate or engineer, in the course of an 
investigation, the court shall, bef ore the commencement of the inquiry, cause to be furnished to him a 
statement of the case upon which the inquiry has been directed.  
363. Power of Central Government to direct inquiry into charges of in competency or 
misconduct .―(1) If the Central Governmen t has reason to believe that there are grounds for charging 
any master, mate or engineer with in competency or misconduct, otherwise than in the course of a 
formal investigation into  a shipping c asualty, the Central Government, ― 
(a) if the master, mate or engineer holds a certificate under this Act, in any case;  
(b) if the master, mate or engineer holds a certificate under the law of any country outside 
India, in any case where the in competency or misconduct has occurred on board an Indian ship;  
may transm it a statement of the case to any court having jurisdiction under section 361, which is at or 
nearest to the place where it may be convenient for the parties and witnesses to attend, and may direct 
that court to make an inquiry into that charge.  
(2) Before  commencing the inquiry, the court shall cause the master, mate or engineer so charged 
to be furnished with a copy of the statement transmitted by the Central Government.  
364. Opportunity to be given to person to make defence .―For the purpose of any inquir y 
under this Part into any charge against a master, mate or engineer, the court may summon him to 
appear, and shall give him an opportunity of making a defence either in person or otherwise.  
 365. Power of court as to evidence and regulation of proceedings .―3[(1)] For the purpose of 
any investigation or inquiry under this Part, the court making the investigation or inquiry shall in 
respect of compelling the attendance and examination of witnesses and the production of documents 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “A magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule, ibid., for “presidency magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
3. Section . 365 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 41 of 1984, s. 19 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985). 168 
 and the regulation of the proc eedings, have the same powers as are exercisable by that court in the 
exercise of its criminal jurisdiction.  
1[(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, the court making an 
investigation or inquiry under this Part may, if it t hinks fit, order the payment, on the part of that 
Government, of the reasonable expenses of any witness attending for the purposes of such 
investigation or inquiry before such court.]  
366. Assessors .―(1) A court making a formal investigation shall constitute as its assessors not 
less than two and not more than four persons, of whom one shall be a person conversant with 
maritime affairs and the other or others shall be conversant with either  maritime or mercantile affairs : 
Provided that, where the investigation involves, or appears likely to involve, any question as to 
the cancellation or suspension of the certificate of a master, mate or engineer, two of the assessors 
shall be persons having also expe rience in the merchant service.  
(2) The assessors shall attend during the investigation and deliver their opinions in writing, to be 
recorded on the proceedings, but the exercise of all powers conferred on the court by this Part or any 
other law for the ti me being in force shall rest with the court.  
(3) The assessors shall be chosen from a list to be prepared from time to time by the Central 
Government.  
367. Power to arrest witnesses and enter ships .―If any court making an investigation or 
inquiry under thi s Part thinks it necessary for obtaining evidence that any person should be arrested, it 
may issue a warrant for his arrest, and may, for the purpose of effecting the arrest, authorise any 
officer, subject, nevertheless, to any general or special instructi ons from the Central Government, to 
enter any vessel, and any officer so authorised may, for the purpose of enforcing the entry, call to his 
aid any officer of police or customs or any other person.  
368. Power to commit for trial and bind over witnesses .―Whenever, in the course of any such 
investigation or inquiry, it appears that any person has committed in India an offence punishable 
under any law in force in India, the court making the investigation or inquiry may (subject to such 
rules consistent with  this Act as the High Court may from time to time make) cause him to be 
arrested, or commit him or hold him to bail to take his trial before the proper court, and may bind over 
any person to give evidence at the trial, and may, for the purposes of this sec tion, exercise all its 
powers as a criminal court.  
 369. Report by court to Central Government .―(1) The court shall, in the case of all 
investigations or inquiries under this Part, transmit to the Centr al Government a full report of  the 
conclusions at which it has arrived together with the evidence.  
(2) Where the investigation or inquiry affects a  master or an officer of a ship other than an Indian 
ship who holds a certificate under the law of any country outside India, the Central Government may 
transmit a copy of the report together with the evidence to the proper authority in that country.  
2[(3) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the investigation report from the court, cause it 
to be pub lished in the Official Gazette. ] 
370. Powers of court as to certificates granted by Central Government .―(1) A certificate of a 
master, mate or engineer which has been granted by the Central Government under this Act  may be 
cancelled or suspended―  
(a) by a court holding a formal investigation into a shipping casualty under this Part if the 
court finds that t he loss, stranding or abandonment of, or damage to, any ship, or loss of life, has 
been caused by the wrongful act or default of such master, mate or engineer;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 41 of 1984,  s. 19 (w.e.f.15 -7-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 9 of 1998, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26 -9-1997).  169 
 (b) by a court holding an inquiry under this Part into the conduct of the master, mate or 
engine er if the court finds that he is incompetent or has been guilty of any gross act of 
drunkenness, tyranny or other misconduct or in a case of collision has failed to render such 
assistance or give such information as is required by section 348.  
(2) At the c onclusion of the investigation or inquiry, or as soon thereafter as possible, the court 
shall state in open sitting the decision to which it may have come with respect to the cancellation or 
suspension of any certificate and, if suspension is ordered, the period for which the certificate is 
suspended.  
(3) Where the court cancels or suspends a certificate, the court shall forward it to the Central 
Government together with the report which it is required by this Part to transmit to it.  
371. Power of court to censure master, mate or engineer .―Where it appears to the court 
holding an investigation or inquiry that having regard to the circumstances of the case an order of 
cancellation or suspension under section 370 is not justified, the court may pass an order c ensuring the 
master, mate or engineer in respect of his conduct.  
 372. Power of court to remove master and appoint new master .―(1) A 1[Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class] specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government or a  2[Metropolitan 
Magistrate] may remove the master of any ship within his jurisdiction if the removal is shown to h is 
satisfaction to be necessary.  
(2) The removal may be made upon the application of the owner of any ship or his agent, or of the 
consignee of the ship or of  any certificated officer or of one -third or more of the crew of the ship.  
(3) The  3[Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan  Magistrate, as the case may be,]  
may appoint a new master instead of the one removed, but where the owner, agent or consignee of the 
ship is within his jurisdiction, such an appointment shall not be made without the consent of that 
owner, agent or consignee.  
(4) The  3[Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be] 
may also make su ch order and require such security in respect of the cost of the matter as he thinks fit.  
Marine Board  
373. Convening of Marine Boards outside India .―Whenever ― 
(a) a complaint is made to an Indian consular officer or a senior officer of any ship of the 
Indian Navy in the vicinity (hereinafter referred to as naval officer) by the master or any member 
of the crew of an Indian ship and such complaint app ears to the Indian consular officer or naval 
officer, as the case may be, to require immediate investigation; or  
(b) the interest of the owner of an Indian ship or of the cargo thereof appears to an Indian 
consular officer or naval officer, as the case may  be, to require it; or  
(c) an allegation of in competency or misconduct is made to an Indian consular officer or a 
naval officer against the master or any of the officers of an Indian ship; or  
(d) any Indian ship is lost, abandoned or stranded at or near t he place where an Indian 
consular officer or naval officer may be or whenever the crew or part of the crew of any Indian 
ship which has been lost, abandoned or stranded arrives at that place; or  
(e) any loss of life or any serious injury to any person has occurred on board an Indian ship at 
or near that place;  
the Indian consular officer or the naval officer, as the case may be, may, in his discretion, convene a 
Board of Marine Inquiry to investigate the said complaint or allegation or the matter affecting the said 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule, for “ magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule, ibid., for “presidency magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
3. Subs. by  s. 17 and the Schedule, ibid.,  for “magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  170 
 interest or the cause of the loss, abandonment or the stranding of the ship or of the loss of life or of the 
injury to the person.  
374. Constitution and procedure of Marine Board .―(1) A Marine Board shall consist of the 
officer convening the Board  and two other members.  
(2) The two other members of the Marine Board shall be appointed by the officer convening the 
Marine Board from among persons conversant with maritime or mercantile affairs.  
(3) The officer convening the Marine Board shall be the presiding officer thereof.  
(4) A Marine Board shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have power to regulate it‟s own 
procedure.  
375. Decisions of Marine Board to be by majority .― Where there is a difference of opinion 
among members of the Marine Board, the decision of the majority of the members shall be the 
decision of the Board.  
376. Powers of Marine Board .―(1) A Marine Board may, after investigating and hearing the 
case― 
(a) if it is of opinion that the safety of an Indian ship or her cargo or crew or the interest of the 
owner of an Indian ship or of the owner of the cargo thereof requires it, remove the master and 
appoint another qualified person to act in his stead;  
(b) if it is of opinion that any master or officer of an Indian ship is incompetent or has been 
guilty of any act of misconduct or in a case of collision has failed to render such assistance or give 
such information as is required by section 348 or that loss, aban donment or stranding of or serious 
damage to any ship, or loss of life or serious injury to any person has been caused by the wrongful 
act or default of any master or ship ‟s officer of an Indian ship, suspend the certificate of that 
master or ship's office r for a stated period : 
Provided that no such certificate shall be suspended unless the master or officer concerned has 
been furnished with a statement of the case in respect of which investigation has been ordered and 
he has also been given an opportunity of making a defence either in person o r otherwise;  
(c) discharge a seaman from an Indian ship and order the wages of any seaman so discharged 
or any part of those wages to be forfeited;  
(d) decide any questions as to wages, fines or forfeitures arising bet ween any of the parties to 
the proceedings;  
(e) direct that any or all of the costs incurred by the master or owner of an Indian ship or on 
the maintenance of a seaman or apprentice while in prison outside India shall be paid out of , and 
deducted from, the  wages of that seaman or apprentice, whether earned or subsequently earned;  
(f) if it considers such a step expedient, order a survey to be made of any Indian ship which is 
the subject of investigation;  
(g) order the costs of proceedings before it or any p art of those costs, to be paid by any of the 
parties thereto, and may order any person making a frivolous or unjustified complaint to pay 
compensation for any loss or delay caused thereby; and any costs or compensation so ordered to 
be paid by any person s hall be paid by that person accordingly and may be recovered in the same 
manner in which wages of seaman are recoverable or may be deducted from the wages due to that 
person.  
(2) All orders made by a Marine Board shall, whenever practicable, be entered in the official log 
book of the ship which is the subject of investigation or on board which the casualty or occurrence or 
conduct investigated  took place, and be signed by the presiding officer of the Board.  171 
 Miscellaneous provisions relating to cancellation  and suspension of certificates  
377. Powers of Central Government to cancel, suspend, etc., certificate of master, mate or 
engineer .―(1) Any certificate which has been granted by the Central Government under this Act to 
any master, mate or engineer, may be  cancelled or suspended for any specified period, by the Central 
Government in the fo llowing cases, that is to say, ― 
(a) if, on any investigation or inquiry made by any court, tribunal or other authority for the 
time being authorised by the legislative aut hority in any country outside India, the court, tribunal 
or other authority reports that the master, ma te or engineer is incompetent or has been guilty of 
any gross act of misconduct, drunkenness or tyranny, or in a case of collision has failed to render 
assistance, or to given such information as is referred to in section 348, or that the loss, stranding 
or abandonment of, or damage to, any ship or loss of life has been caused by his wrongful act or 
default;  
(b) if the master, mate or engineer is proved to  have been convicted ― 
(i) of any offence under this Act or of any non -bailable offence committed under any 
other law for the time being in force in India; or  
(ii) of an offence committed outside India, which, if committed in India, would be a non -
bailable offence;  
(c) if (in the case of a master of an Indian ship) he has been superseded by the order of any 
court of competent jurisdiction in India or outside India.  
1[(1A) Any certificate within the meaning of clause ( b) of section 87 A may be cancelled or 
suspended for any specified period by the Central Government if the person to whom such certificate 
has been granted has contravened the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 87 B: 
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be pa ssed by the Central Government unless 
the person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a representation against the order 
proposed.]  
(2) The Central Government may at any time, if it thinks the justice of the case so requires, ― 
(a) revoke any o rder of cancellation or suspension made by it under  2[sub-section ( 1) or sub -
section ( 1A) or] set aside any order of cancellation or suspension made by a court under section 
370 or any order of suspension made by a Marine Board under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 376 or any order of censure made by a court under section  371; or  
(b) shorten or lengthen the period of suspension ordered by it under 2[sub-section ( 1) or             
sub-section ( 1A) or] by a court under section 370 or by a Marine Boar d under clause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 1) of section 376 or cancel a certificate suspended by a Marine Board under that 
clause; or  
(c) grant without examination a new certificate of the same or any lower grade in the case of 
any certificate cancell ed or suspended by it under  2[sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A) or] by a 
court under section 370 or any certificate suspended by a Marine Board under clause ( b) of             
sub-section ( 1) of section 376:  
Provided that no order under clause ( b) either  lengthening the period of suspension of or 
cancelling a certificate shall be passed by the Central Government unless the person concerned has 
been given an opportunity of making a representation against the order proposed.  
(3) A certificate granted under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) shall have the same effect as if it had 
been granted after examination.  
378. Delivery of Indian certificate cancelled or suspended .―A master or ship ‟s officer who is 
the holder of a certificate issued under this Act shall, if such certificate has been cancelled or 
suspended by the Central Government or by a court or suspended by a Marine Board, deliver his 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1979, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4 -5-1979).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “sub -section ( 1) or” (w.e.f. 4 -5-1979).  172 
 certificate to the Central Government, court or Marine Board on demand or if it is not so demanded by 
the Central Government or court or Board, to the Director -General.  
379. Effect of cancellation or suspension of certificate .―The cancellation or suspension of a 
certificate by the C entral Government or by a court or the suspension of a certificate by a  Marine 
Board , shall ― 
(a) if the certificate was issued under this Act, be effective everywhere and in respect of all 
ships; and  
(b) if the certificate was issued outside India , be effe ctive ― 
(i) within India and the territorial waters of India, in respect of all ships; and  
(ii) outside India, in respect of Indian ships only.  
 380. Suspended certificate not to be endorsed .―If the certificate of a master or ship's officer is 
suspended und er this Part by the Central Government or by a court or a Marine Board, no 
endorsement shall be made to that effect on the said certificate.  
381. Power of Central Government to cancel or suspend other certificates .―Notwithstanding 
anything contained in thi s Act, the Central Government may, at any time, without any formal 
investigation or inquiry, cancel or suspend any certi ficate granted by it under this  Act, other than a 
certificate granted to a master, mate or engineer, if, in its opinion, the holder is, or has become, unfit 
to act in the grade for which the certificate was granted to him:  
Provided that no order under this section shall be passed by the Central Government unless the 
person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a representation against the order 
proposed.  
Re-hearing of cases  
382. Re-hearing .―(1) Whenever an investigation or inquiry has been held by a court or by a 
Marine Board under this Part, the Central Government may order the case to be reheard either 
generally or as to any p art thereof, and shall so order ― 
(a) if new and important evidence which could not be produced at the investigation has  been 
discovered, or  
(b) if for any other reason there has, in its opinion, been a miscarriage of justice.  
(2) The Central Government may  order the case to be reheard by the court or Marine Board as the 
case may be consisting of the same members or other members as the Central Government may deem 
fit. 
Courts of survey  
383. Constitution of court of survey .―(1) A court of survey for a port sh all consist of a Judge 
sitting with two assessors.  
(2) The Judge shall be a District Judge, Judge of a court of small causes,  1[Metropolitan 
Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class] or other fit person appointed in this behalf by the 
Central Gov ernment either generally or for any specified case.  
(3) The assessors shall be persons of nautical, engineering pr other special skill or experience.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of Part IX as regards ships other than Indian ships, one of the 
assessors sh all be appointed by the Central Government either generally or in each case and the  other 
shall be summoned by the  Judge in the manner prescribed out of a list of persons from time to time 
prepared for the purpose by the Central Government or, if there is no such list or if it is impracticable 
to procure the attendance of any person named in such list, shall be appointed by the Judge.  
                                                      
1. Su bs. by Ac t 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “presidency magistrate, magistrate of the first class”                     
(w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  173 
 384. Appeal from surveyor to court of survey .―(1) If a surveyor authorised to inspect a ship ― 
(a) makes a statement in his report of inspection with which the owner or his agent or the 
master of the ship is dissatisfied, or  
(b) gives notice under thi s Act of any defect in any ship,  or 
(c) declines t o give any certificate under this Act,  
the owner, master or agent, as the case may be, may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) and 
of section 387, appeal to a court of survey.  
(2) Whenever a surveyor inspects any ship, he shall, if the owner, m aster or agent of the ship so 
requires, be accompanied on the inspection by some person nominated by the owner, master or agent, 
as the case may be, and if the person so nominated agrees with the surveyor as to the statement made 
or the notice given by the s urveyor or the refusal by the surveyor to give a certificate, there shall be no 
appeal to a court of survey from that statement, notice or refusal.  
385. Powers and procedure of court of survey .―(1) The Judge shall on receiving notice of 
appeal or a referen ce from the Central Government immediately summon the assessors to meet 
forthwith in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The court of survey shall hear every case in open court.  
(3) The Judge may appoint any competent person to survey the ship and report thereon to  the 
court.  
(4) The Judge shall have the same powers as the Central Government has to order the ship to be 
released or finally detained; but unless one of the assessors concurs in an order for the detention of the 
ship, the ship shall be released.  
(5) The owner and master of the ship and any person appointed by the owner or master and also 
any person appointed by the Central Government may attend any inspection or survey made in 
pursuance of this section.  
(6) The Judge shall report the proceedings of the co urt in each case to the Central Government in 
the manner prescribed and each assessor shall either sign such report or report to the Central 
Government the reasons for his dissent.  
386. Power to make rules .―The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Part with respect to a court of survey and in particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the fo regoing power, with respect to ― 
(a) the procedure of the court;  
(b) the requiring, on an appeal, of security for costs and damages;  
(c) the amount and application of fees; and  
(d) the ascertainment, in case of dispute, of the proper amount of costs  
Scientific referees  
 387. Reference in difficult cases to scientific persons .―(1) If the Central Government is of 
opinion that an appeal to a court of survey involves a question of construction or design or a scientific 
difficult y or important principle, it may refer the matter to such one or more out of a list of scientific 
refere es to be from time to time prepared by the Central Government as may appear to possess the 
special qualifications necessary for the particular case and may be selected by agreement between a 
person duly appointed by the Central Government in this behalf an d the appellant, or in default of any 
such agreement, by the Central Government; and there upon the appeal shall be determined by the 
referee or referees instead of by the court of survey.  
(2) The Central Government, if the appellant in any such appeal so requires and gives security to 
its satisfaction to pay the costs of and incidental to the reference, shall refer such appeal to a referee or 
referees selected as aforesaid.  174 
 (3) The referee or referees shall have the same powers as a Judge of the court of s urvey.  
Investigations into explosions or fires on board ships  
388. Power to investigate causes of explosion or fire on board ship .―Whe never any explosion 
or fire occurs on board any ship on or near the coasts of India, the Central Government may direct that 
an investigation into the causes of explosion or fire be made by such person or persons as it thinks fit.  
389. Report to he mad e regarding cause of explosion or fire .―The person or persons referred 
to in section 388 may go on board the ship on which the explosion or fire has occurred with all 
necessary workmen and labourers, and remove any portion of the ship, or of the machinery thereof, 
for the purpose of the investigation, and shall report to the Central Government or the person duly 
appointed by it, as the case may be, what in his or their opinion was the cause of the explosion or fire.  
PART XIII  
WRECK AND SALVAGE WRECK  
390. Definition of “coasts ”.―In this Part, the word “coasts ” includes the coasts of creeks and 
tidal rivers.  
391. Receivers of wreck .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint any person to be a receiver of wreck (in this Part referred to as re ceiver of wreck) to 
receive and take possession of wreck and to perform such duties connected therewith as are 
hereinafter mentioned, within such local limits as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) A receiver of wreck may, by order in writing, direct  that all or any of his functions under this 
Part shall, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, be discharged by such person as may be specified therein and any person while discharging any 
such func tions shall be deemed to be a receiver of wreck for the purposes of this Act.  
392. Duty of receiver where vessel is in distress .―Where any vessel is wrecked, stranded or in 
distress at any place on or near the coasts of India, the receiver of wreck, within  the limits of whose 
jurisdiction the place is situate, shall, upon being made acquainted with the circumstances, forthwith 
proceed there, and upon his arrival shall take command of all persons present and shall assign such 
duties and give such directions to eac h person as he thinks fit for the preservation of the vessel and of 
the lives of the person's belonging to the vessel and of its cargo and equipment:  
Provided that the receiver shall not interfere between the master and the crew of the vessel, in 
reference to the management thereof unless he is requested to do so by the master.  
393. Power to pass over adjoining lands .―(1) Whenever a vessel is wrecked, stranded or in 
distress as aforesaid, all persons may, for the purpose of rendering assistance to the  vessel or of saving 
the lives of the shipwrecked persons, or of saving the cargo or equipment of the vessel, unless there is 
some public road equally convenient, pass and repass, either with or without vehicles or animals, over 
any adjoining lands without  being subject to interruption by the owner or occupier, so that they do as 
little damage as possible and may also on the like condition, deposit on these lands any cargo or other 
article recovered from the ship.  
(2) Any damage sustained by an owner or occ upier in consequence of the exercise of the rights 
given by this section, shall be a charge on the vessel, cargo or articles in respect of or by which the 
damage is occasioned and the amount payable in respect of the damage shall, in case of dispute, be 
determined by a Magistrate on application made to him in this behalf.  
 394. Power of receiver of wreck to suppress, plunder and disorder by force .―Whenever a 
vessel is wrecked, stranded or in distress as aforesaid, and any person plunders, creates disorder or 
obstructs the preservation of the vessel or of the shipwrecked persons or of the cargo or equipment of 
the vessel, the receiver of wreck may take such steps and use such force as he may consider necessary 
for the suppression of any such plundering, disorder or obstruction, and may for that purpose 
command any person to assist him.  175 
 395. Procedure to be observed by persons finding wreck .―Any pers on finding and taking 
possession of any wreck within any local limits for which there is a receiver of wreck, or bringing 
within such limits any wreck which has been found and taken possession of elsewhere, shall, as soon 
as practicable — 
(a) if he be the o wner thereof, give the receiver of wreck notice in writing of the finding 
thereof and of the marks by which such wreck is distinguished;  
(b) if he be not  the owner of such wreck, deliver the same to the receiver of wreck.  
396. Investigation of certain matt ers in respect of vessels wrecked, etc .―Whenever any vessel 
is wrecked, stranded or in distress as aforesaid, the receiver of wreck within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the vessel is wrecked, stranded or in distress may conduct an investigation in to all or any 
of the following matters, that is to say ,— 
(a) the name and description of the vessel;  
(b) the names of the master and of the owners;  
(c) the names of the owners of the cargo;  
(d) the ports from and to which the vessel was bound;  
(e) the occa sion of the wrecking, stranding, or distress of the vessel;  
(f) the services rendered; and  
(g) such other matters or circumstances relating to the vessel, the cargo or the equipment, as 
the receiver thinks necessary.  
397. Notice to be given by receiver .―The receiver of wreck shall as soon as may be after taking 
possession of any wreck, publish a notification in such manner and at such place as the Central 
Government may, by general or special order, direct, containing a description of the wreck and the 
time at which and the place where it was found.  
398. Immediate sale of wreck by receiver in certain cases .―A receiver of wreck may at any 
time sell any wreck in his custody if, in his opinion, — 
(a) it is under the value of five hundred rupees; or  
(b) it is  so much damaged or of so perishable a nature that it cannot with advantage be kept; 
or 
(c) it is not of sufficient value for warehousing;  
and the proceeds of the sale shall, after defraying the expenses thereof, be held by the receiver for the 
same purpos es and subject to the same claims, rights and liabilities as if the wreck had remained 
unsold.  
399. Claims of owners to wreck .―(1) The owner of any wreck in the possession of the receiver 
upon establishing his claim to the same to the satisfaction of the receiver within one year from the 
time at which the wreck came into the possession of the receiver shall, upon paying the salva ge and 
other charges, be entitled to have the wreck or the proceeds thereof delivered to him.  
(2) Where any articles belonging to or forming part of a vessel other than an Indian vessel which 
has been wrecked or belonging to and forming part of the cargo o f such vessel, are found on or near 
the coasts of India or are brought into any port in India, the consular officer of the country in which 
the vessel is registered or, in the case of cargo, the country to which the owners of the cargo may have 
belonged sh all, in the absence of the owner and of the master or other agent of the owner, be deemed 
to be the agent of the owner, with respect to the custody and disp osal of the articles.  
(3) Where the owner of the wreck does not appear and claim the balance of the proceeds of sale 
within one year from the date of sale, the said balance shall become the property of the Central 
Government.  176 
 400. Prohibition of certain acts in respect of wreck .―No person shall — 
(a) without the leave of the master board or attempt to board any vessel which is wrecked, 
stranded or in distress as aforesaid, unless the person is, or acts by command of, the receiver of 
wreck; or  
(b) impede or hinder or attempt in an y way to impede or hinder the saving of any vessel 
stran ded or in danger of being stran ded or otherwise in distress on or near the coasts of India or of 
any part of the cargo or equipment of the vessel, or of any wre ck; or 
(c) secrete any wreck or deface o r obliterate any marks thereon; or  
(d) wrongfully carry away or remove any part of a vessel stranded or in danger of being 
stranded or otherwise in distress, on or near the coasts of India, or any part of the cargo or 
equipment of the vessel or any wreck.  
401. Search warrants where wreck is concealed ―Where a receiver of wreck suspects or 
receives information that any wreck is secreted or is in the possession of some person who is not the 
owner thereof or that any wreck is otherwise improperly dealt with, he  may apply to the nearest  
1[Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate , as the case may be ,] for a search 
warrant, and that  1[Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate , as the case may 
be,] shall have power to  grant such warrant and the receiver of wreck by virtue thereof may enter any 
house or other place wherever situate and also any vessel and search for, seize  and detain any such 
wreck there found.   
Salvage  
402. Salvage payable for saving life, cargo or wre ck.―(1) Where services are rendered ― 
(a) wholly or in part within the  territorial waters of India in saving life from any vessel, or 
elsewhere in sa ving life from a vessel registered In India; or  
(b) in assisting a vessel or saving the cargo or equipment o f a vessel which is wrecked, 
stranded or in distress at any place on or near the coasts of India; or  
(c) by any person other than the receiver of wreck in saving any wreck;  
there shall be payable to the salvor by the owner of the vessel, cargo, equipment o r wreck, a 
reasonable sum for salvage having regard to al l the circumstances of the case.  
(2) Salvage in respect of the preservation of life when payable by the owner of the vessel shall be 
payable in priority to all other claims for salvage.  
(3) Where sal vage services are rendered by or on behalf of the Government or by a vessel of the 
Indian Navy  2[or of the Coast Guard] or the commander or crew of any such vessel, the Government, 
the commander or the crew, as the case may be, shall be entitled to salvage  and shall have the same 
rights and remedies in respect of those services as any other salvor.  
2[Explanation .―“Coast Guard ” means the Coast Guard constituted under section 3 of the Coast 
Guard Act, 1978  (30 of 1978) .] 
(4) Any dispute arising concerning the amount due under this section shall be determined upon 
application made by either of the disputing parties ― 
(a) to a   1[Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate , as the case may 
be,] where the amount claimed does not exceed ten thousand rupees; or  
(b) to the High Court, where the amount claimed exceeds ten thousand rupees.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule, for “ magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s.  20 (w.e.f.15 -7-1985).   177 
 (5) Where the re is any dispute as to the persons who are entitled to the salvage amount under this 
section, the  1[the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate or the High 
Court as the case may be ,] shall decide the dispute and if the are mo re persons than one entitled to 
such amount,  2[such magistrate] or the High Court shall apportion the amount thereof among such 
persons.  
(6) The costs of and incidental to all proceedings before  3[a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or 
Metropolitan Ma gistrate] or the High Court under this section shall be in the discretion of  2[such 
magistrate] or the High Court, and  2[such magistrate] or the High Court shall have full power to 
determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are  to be paid and to give 
all necessary directions for the purpose aforesaid.  
403. Savings .―Nothing in this Part shall — 
(a) affect any treaty or arrangement with any foreign country to which India is a party with 
reference to the disposal of the proceeds of wrecks on their respective coasts; or  
(b) affect the provisions of section 29 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908  (15 of 1908) , or entitle 
any person to salvage in respect of any property recovered by creeping or sweeping in 
contravention of that section.  
404. Power to make rules respecting wreck and salvage .―(1) The Central Government may 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely : — 
(a) the procedu re to be followed by a receiver of wreck in respect of the taking possession of 
wrecks and their disposal;  
(b) the fees payable to receivers in respect of the work done by them;  
(c) the procedure to be followed for dealing with claims relating to ownership  of wrecks;  
(d) the appointment of valuers in salvage cases;  
(e) the principles to be followed in awarding salvage and the apportioning of salvage;  
(f) the procedure to be followed for dealing with claims for salvage;  
(g) the detention of property in the c ustody of a receiver of wreck for the purpose of enforcing 
payment of salvage.  
PART XIV  
CONTROL OF INDIAN SHIPS AND SHIPS ENGAGED IN COASTING TRADE  
405. Application of Part .―This Part applies only to sea -going ships fitted with mechanical 
means of propulsi on of not less than one hundred and fifty tons gross, but the  Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix any lower tonnage for the purposes of this Part.  
406. Indian ships and Chartered ships to be licensed .―(1) No Indian ship and  no other ship 
chartered by a citizen of India or a company  4[or a co-operative Society] shall be taken to sea from a 
port or place within or outside India except under a licence granted by the Dire ctor-General under this 
section : 
Provided that the Central  Government, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the 
public interest so to do, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt  any class of ships 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule, for “the magistrate or the High Court, as the case may be”                     
(w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).   
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Schedule,  ibid.,  for “the magistrate” (w.e.f.  18-5-1983).   
3. Subs. by s. 17 and the Schedule,  ibid.,  for “a magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 7 (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  178 
 chartered by a citizen of India or a company  1[or a co-operative Society] from the p rovisions of this 
sub-section.  
(2) A licence granted under this section may be  
(a) a general licence;  
(b) a licence for the whole or any part of the coasting trade of India; or  
(c) a licence for a specified period or voyage.  
(3) A licence granted under thi s section shall be in such form and shall be valid for such period as 
may be prescribed, and shall be subject to such conditions as may be specified by the                      
Director -General.  
407. Licensing of ships for coasting trad e.―(1) No ship other than an Indian ship or a ship 
chartered by a citizen of India  1[or a company or a co -operative society which satisfies the 
requirements specified in clause ( b) or, as the case may be, clause ( c) of section 21] , shall engage in 
the coast ing trade of India except under a licence granted by the Director -General under this section.  
(2) A licence granted under this section may be for a specified period or voyage and shall be 
subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Director -Gener al. 
(3) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that the provisions of              
sub-section ( 1) shall not apply in respect of any part of the coasting trade of India or shall apply 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the order.  
408. Revocation or modification of licence .―(1) The Director -General may, at any time if the 
circumstances of the case so require, revoke or modify a licence granted under section 406 or section 
407. 
(2) No licence shall be r evoked or modified under this section unless the person concerned has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against such revocation or 
modification, as the case may be.  
409. Licences to be surrendered when they cease to be valid .―When a licence under section 
406 or section 407 ceases to be valid, the person to whom it was granted shall, without unreasonable 
delay, return it or cause it to be returned to the Director -General.  
410. No port clearance until licence is produced .―No custo ms collector shall grant a port 
clearance to a ship in respect of which a licence is required under this Part until after production by 
the owner, master or agent of such a licence.  
411. Power to give directions .―The Director -General may, if he is satisfie d that in the public 
interest or in the interests of Indian shipping it is necessary so to do, give, by order in writing, such 
directions as he thinks fit — 
(a) in the case of a ship which has been granted a licence under section 406, with respect to all 
or any of the following matters: — 
(i) the ports or places whether in or outside India, to which, and the routes by which, the 
ship shall proceed for any particular purpose;  
(ii) the diversion of any ship from one route to another for any particular purpose;  
(iii) the classes of passengers or cargo which may be carried in the ship;  
(iv) the order of priority in which passengers or cargo may be taken on or put off the ship 
at any port or place, whether in or outside India;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 8, for “or a company which satisfies the requirements specified in clause ( b) of              
section 21”  (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  179 
 (b) in the case of a ship which has be en granted a licence under section 407 with respect to the 
order of priority in which passengers or, cargo may be taken on the ship at any port or place in 
India from which she is about to proceed for any port or place on the continent of India at which 
she is to call in the course of her voyage.  
1[411A. Powers of the Central Government to protect interests of Indian shipping from 
undue foreign intervention .―(1) If it appears to the Central Government ― 
(a) that measures have been taken by or under the law o f any foreign country for regulating or 
controlling the terms or conditions upon which goods or passengers may be carried by sea, or the 
terms or conditions of contracts or arrangements relating to such carriage; and  
(b) that such measures, in so far as th ey apply to things done or to be done outside the 
territorial jurisdiction of that country by persons carrying on lawful business in India, constitute 
an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs to India,  
it may, by an order in writing, direct that this section shall apply to those measures either in whole or 
to such extent as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Where an order issued under sub -section ( 1) is in force in relation to any measures, it shall be 
the duty of every person in India who carrie s on business consisting or comprising of the carriage of 
goods or passengers by sea to give notice to the Central Government of any requirement or 
prohibition imposed or threatened to be imposed on him pursuant to such measures so far as this 
section appl ies to him, including any requirement to submit any contractor other document for 
approval thereunder.  
(3) Where a notice under sub -section ( 2) is received from any person or there are grounds to 
believe that a notice is likely to be received; the Central Government may, by an order in writing, give 
to such person directions prohibiting compliance with any such requirement or prohibition as it 
considers proper for maintaining the jurisdiction of India.  
(4) Any directions given by the Central Government unde r sub -section ( 3) may be either general 
or special and may prohibit compliance with any requirement or prohibition either absolutely or in 
such cases or subject to such conditions, as to consent or otherwise, as may be specified in the order.  
(5) If it app ears to the Central Government that any person in India has been or may be required to 
produce or furnish to any court, tribunal or authority of a foreign country any commercial document 
which is not within the territorial jurisdiction of that country or a ny commercial information to be 
compiled from documents not within the territorial jurisdiction of that country and that the 
requirement constitutes or would constitute an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs to India, 
the Central Government may,  by an order in writing, give directions to that person, prohibiting him 
from complying with the requirement except to such extent or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the order.]  
412. [Power to fix shipping rates .] Omitted by the Merchant Shipping  (Amendment ) Act,                      
(68 of 1993 ), s. 6 (w.e.f.  27-10-1993).  
413. Power of Director -General to call for information .―The Director -General may, by 
notice, require — 
(a) the owner, master or agent of any ship in respect of which a li cence granted by the 
Director -General under this Act is in force; or  
(b) the owner, master or agent of any ship in respect of which any directions have been or 
may be given under clause ( b) of section 411;  
to furnish within the period specified in the noti ce information as to — 
(i) the classes of passengers and cargo which the ship is about to carry or is capable of 
carrying or has carried during any specified period;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 12 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  180 
 (ii) the rates of passenger fares and freight charges applicable to the ship;  
(iii) any oth er matter which may be prescribed.  
414. Power to make rules . (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for  all or any of  the following matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which, the period or voyage for which, and the conditions subject to which 
licences under this Part may be granted, the particulars to be included therein  and the fees payable 
therefor ; 
1*   *   *   *  * 
 (d) the matters regarding which information may be required to be furnished under section 
413. 
PART XV  
SAILING VESSELS  
415. Application of Part .―Save as otherwise provided, this Part applies to every sea -going 
sailing vessel owned by a citizen of India  2[or a company or a co -operative society which satisfies the 
requirements specified in clause ( b) or, as the case may be, clause ( c) of section 21.]  
416. Decision of question whether a vessel is a sailing vessel .―If any question arises whether a 
vessel is a sai ling vessel or not for the purposes of this Part, it shall be decided by the                     
Director -General and his decision thereon shall be final.  
417. Certificate of registry .―(1) Every sailing vessel 3[(other than a sailing vessel solely 
engaged in fishing for profit)] shall be registered in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The owner of every sailing vessel shall make an application in the prescribed form to a 
registrar for the grant to him of a certificate of registry in respec t of the vessel.  
(3) The owner of every sailing vessel in respect of which an application under sub -section ( 2) is 
made, shall cause the tonnage of the vessel to be ascertained in the prescribed manner.  
(4) The registrar may make such inquiry as he thinks fit with respect to the particulars contained 
in such application and shall enter in a register to be kept for the purpose (hereinafter referred to as 
sailing vessels register) the following particulars in  respect of the vessel, namely:―  
(a) the name of th e sailing vessel, the place where she was built, and the port to which she 
belongs;  
(b) the right type and tonnage of the vessel;  
(c) the name, occupation and residence of the owner of the vessel;  
(d) the number assigned to the vessel;  
(e) the mortgages, i f any, effected by the owner in respect of the vessel;  
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(5) After the particulars in respect of the vessel have been entered in the sailing vessels register 
under sub -section ( 4), the registrar shall grant to  the applicant a certificate of registry in the prescribed 
form.  
                                                      
1 Clauses ( b) and ( c) omitted by Act 68 of 1993, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -10-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 9, for “or a company which satisfies the requir ements specified in clause ( b) of               
section 21 ” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  181 
 (6) The owner of every sailing vessel shall pay for each certificate of registry a fee according to 
such scale as may be prescribed by the Central Government, having regard to the tonnage of the 
vessel, but in no case exceeding one rupee per ton of its gross tonnage.  
(7) A sailing vessel requiring to be registered under this Part but not so registered may be detained 
by a proper officer  until the owner or tindal produces a certificate of regis try in respect of the vessel.  
418. Particulars relating to sailing vessel to be painted .―The owner of every sailing vessel so 
registered shall, before the vessel begins to take any cargo or passengers, paint or cause to be painte d 
permanently in the prescr ibed manner on some conspicuous part of the sailing vessel, the name by 
which the vessel has been registered, the number assigned to the vessel by the registrar and the port to 
which she belongs, and shall take all steps to ensure that the vessel remains p ainted as required by this 
section.  
419. Change of name of sailing vessel .―A change shall not be made in the name of a sailing 
vessel registered under this Part except in accordance with the rules made in this behalf.  
420. Prevention of overloading or overcrowding .―(1) The Central Government may make 
rules regulating the carria ge of cargo or passengers in sailing vessel and the protection of life and 
property on board such vessels.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, nam ely:―  
(a) the assignment of free board to sailing vessel;  
(b) the marking of such free board on such vessels and the maintenance of such markings;  
(c) the survey of the space allotted to passengers on board such vessels;  
(d) the scale and type of accommoda tion to be provided for each passenger.  
(3) Any sailing vessel attempting to ply or proceed to sea without free board markings or any 
sailing vessel which has been so loaded as to submerge such marking may be detained by a proper 
officer  until free board m arkings are made in accordance with the rules made in this behalf or the 
vessel is so loaded that such markings are not submerged.  
(4) Nothing in this section relating to free board, shall apply to any sailing vessel in respect of 
which a load line has bee n assigned under Part IX.  
421. Certificate of inspection .―(1) No sailing vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless there is in 
force in respect of that vessel a certificate of inspection granted under this Part, the same being 
applicable to the voyage on w hich she is about to ply or proceed.  
(2) A certificate of inspection in respect of a sailing vessel shall specify — 
(a) the name and tonnage of the vessel;  
(b) the names of the owner and tindal of the vessel;  
(c) the maximum number of the crew and the maxim um number of passengers which the 
vessel is fit to carry;  
(d) the limits within which the vessel may be used for the purpose of trading and the terms 
and conditions subject to which she may be used for such trading;  
(e) the particulars of the free board as signed to the vessel;  
and shall contain a statement to the effect that her hull, rigging and equipment (including auxiliary 
machinery, if any) are in good condition.  
(3) Every certificate of inspection shall be in force from the date of issue for a period of one year 
or for such shorter period as may be specified therein:  182 
 Provided that where a sailing vessel is on a voyage outside India at the time of expiry of the 
certificate, the certificate shall continue to be valid until her first arrival at a port in India after the 
expiry of such period.  
(4) No customs collector shall grant a port clearance to a sailing vessel registered under this Part 
until after the production by the owner or tindal thereof of a certificate of inspection granted under 
this Part in respect of the vessel.  
422. Cancellation, re -issue, etc. of certificate of inspection .―(1) Where at any time subsequent 
to the issue of a certificate of inspection in respect of a sailing vessel, the Director -General has reason 
to believe that the vessel is not fit to ply or proceed to sea, he may, after giving the owner an 
opportunity of making a representation, cancel such certificate.  
(2) Where at any time subsequent to the issue of a certificate of inspection a sailing vessel has 
undergone material alteration or has met with accident or, where the certificate of inspection of a 
sailing vessel has been cancelled under sub -section ( 1) and an application is made for the re -issue of 
such certificate or for the grant of a fresh certificate, the registrar may, before re -issuing the certificate 
or issuing a fresh certificate, as the case may be , cause such vessel to be inspected; and if the authority 
inspecting the vessel reports that she is not fit to ply or proceed to sea or that her hull, rigging and 
equipment (including auxiliary machinery, if any) are defective, such certificate shall not b e re-issued 
or issued until the vessel is, in the opinion of such authority, fit to ply or proceed to sea or the defect is 
rectified to the satisfaction of such authority.  
423. Registry of alterations .―When a sailing vessel is so altered as not to correspond with the 
particulars relating to her entered in the certificate of registry, the owner of such vessel shall make a 
report of such alteration to the registrar of the port where the vessel is registe red, and the registrar 
shall either cause the alteration to be registered, or direct that the vessel be registered anew, in 
accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf.  
424. Transfer of registry .―The registry of a sailing vessel may be transfe rred from one port to 
another in India on the application of the owner or tindal of the vessel in accordance with such rules 
as may be made in thi s behalf.  
425. Closure of registry .―If a sailing vessel is lost, destroyed or rendered permanently unfit for 
service, the owner of such vessel shall with the least practicable delay report the fact to the registrar of 
the port where the vessel is registered and also forward to him along with the report, the certificate of 
registry in respect of the vessel; and the reupon the registrar shall have the registry of the vessel 
closed.  
426. Restriction s on transfer of sailing vessel .―No perso n shall transfer or acquire any  sailing 
vessel registered under this Part or any interest therein without the previous approval of the Central 
Government; and any transaction effected in contravention of this section shall be void and 
unenforceab le. 
427. Mortg ages of sailing vessels .―(1) Every mortgage of a sailing vessel or of any interest 
therein effected after the date on which this Part comes into force shall be registered with the registrar.  
(2) Every mortgage of a sailing vessel or any inter est therein effected before the date on which 
this Part comes into force shall, if subsisting on that date, be registered with the registrar within three 
months of that date.  
(3) The registrar shall enter every such mortgage in the sailing vessels register  in the order in 
which it is registered with him.  
(4) If there are more mortgages than one recorded in respect of the same sailing vessel or interest 
therein, the mortgages shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or constructive notice, have 
priority a ccording to the date on which each mortgage is registered with the registrar and not 
according to the date of each mortgage itself:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect the relative priorities as they 
existed immediately before the date on which this Part comes into force as between mortgages of the 183 
 same vessel or interest therein effected before such date which are registered in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
428. Fraudulent use of certificate of registry or certificate of inspection, etc., 
prohibited .―(1) No person shall use or attempt to use the certificate of registry or the certificate of 
inspection granted in respect of a sailing vessel for any purpose other than the lawful navigation of the 
vessel.  
(2) No person shall use or attempt to use for the navigation of a sailing vessel a certificate of 
registry or a certificate of inspection not granted in respect of that vessel.  
(3) No person who has in his possession or under his control the certificate of regi stry or the 
certificate of inspection of a sailing vessel shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause to deliver 
such certificate on demand to the owner of the vessel.  
 429. Statement relating to crew of sailing vessel to be maintained .―(1) Every owner or tindal 
of a sailing vessel shall maintain or cause to be maintained in the prescribed a form a statement of the 
crew of the vessel containing with respect to each member thereof — 
(a) his name;  
(b) the wages payable to him;  
(c) the name s and addresses of his next -of-kin; 
(d) the date of commencement of his employment; and  
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every change in the crew of the vessel shall be entered in the statement under sub -section  (1). 
(3) A copy of such statement and of every change entered therein shall be communicated as soon 
as possible to the registrar of the port of registry of the vessel concerned.  
430. Inquiry into jettisoning of cargo .―(1) If any owner or tindal of a sailing vessel in the 
course of her voyage, has jettisoned or claims to have jettisoned the whole or any part of the cargo of 
the vessel on account of abnormal weather conditions or for any other reason, he shall immediate ly 
after arrival of the vessel at any port in India give notice of such jettisoning to the proper officer  at 
such port; and such notice shall contain full particulars of the cargo jettisoned and the circumstances 
under which such jettisoning took place.  
(2) When any such officer receives  notice  under sub -section ( 1) or has reason to believe that the 
cargo of any sailing vessel in his port has been jettisoned, he shall forthwith report in writing to the 
Central Government the information he has received and may proceed to m ake an inquiry into the 
matter.  
 431. Non-Indian sailing vessels not to engage in coasting trade without permission .―(1) A 
sailing vessel not owned by a citizen of India  1[or a company or a co -operative society which satisfies 
the requireme nts specified in clause ( b) or, as the case may be, clause ( c) of section 21,] shall not 
engage in the coasting trade of India without the written permission of the Director -General.  
(2) The Director -General may, when granting such permission, impose such terms and conditions 
as he thinks fit and may require the owner or other person in charge of the vessel to deposit with him 
such amount as he thinks necessary for t he due fulfil ment of such terms and conditions.  
(3) No customs collector shall grant a port clearance to a sailing vessel not registered under this 
Part which engages or attempts to engage in the coasting trade of India until after the production by 
the owner or person in charge thereof of the written permission of the Director -General.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1981, s. 10, for “or a company which satisfies the requirements specified in clause ( b) of             
section 21 ” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1981).  184 
 432. Dete ntion of overloaded non -Indian sailing vessels .―(1) If any sailing vessel registered in 
any country outside India arrives in or proceeds from a port or place in India in an overloaded 
conditions, the person in charge of the vessel shall be guilty of an offence under this section.  
(2) A sailing vessel shall be deemed to be in an overloaded condition for the purposes of this 
section — 
(a) where the vessel is loaded beyond the limit specified in any certificate issued in the 
country in which she is registered; or  
(b) in case no such certificate has been is sued in respect of the vessel, where the actual free 
board of the vessel is less than the free board which would have been assigned to her had she been 
registered under this Part.  
(3) Any sailing vessel which is in an overloaded condition and is about to p roceed from a port or 
place in India may be detained until she ceases to be in an overloaded conditions; but nothing herein 
contained shall affect the liability of the person in charge of the vessel in respect of such overloading 
under any other provision of this Act.  
433. Power of courts to rescind contracts between owner and tindal .―Where a proceeding is 
instituted in any court in respect of any dispute between the owner of a sailing vessel and the tindal 
arisin g out of or incidental to their  relation as such, or is instituted for the purpose of this section, the 
court, if having re gard to all the circumstances of the case it thinks it just to do so, may rescind any 
contract between the owner and the tindal upon such terms as the court may think just and this power 
shall be in addition to any other jurisdiction which the court can ex ercise independently of this 
section.  
434. Application to sailing vessels of other provisions relating to ships .―The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any provisions of this Act other 
than those contained in this Part which do not expressly apply to sailing vessels shall also apply to 
sailing vessels subject to such condit ions, exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the 
notification.  
1[434A. Insurance of members of crew of a sailing vessel .―(1) Subject to the other provisions 
of this section and the scheme framed under sub -section ( 3), the owner of every sailin g vessel shall 
take and keep in force, in accordance with the provisions of the said scheme, a policy of insurance 
whereby all the members of the crew of such vessel are insured against death or personal injury 
caused by accident in the course of employmen t as such members.  
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of every sailing vessel to bear the expenses 
incidental to the taking of the policy of insurance referred to in sub -section ( 1) and to pay the 
premiums for keeping it in force:  
Provided tha t the maximum amount which the owner of the sailing ves sel shall be liable to pay by 
way of premiums per year shall not exceed ― 
(a) where the number of members of the crew is not more than ten, one hundred and fifty 
rupees.  
(b) where the number of members of the crew is more than ten, a sum calculated at the rate of 
fifteen rupees for each member of the crew.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme 
providing for the insurance of all persons employed as members  of the crew of sailing vessels against 
death or personal injury caused by accident arising in the course of their employment as such 
members.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 3), a scheme framed 
under that sub -section may provide for ― 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1984, s. 21 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  185 
 (a) the amount which should be payable in the case of personal injury resulting in the death of 
a member of the crew of a sailing vessel due to accident an d in the case of other injuries:  
Provided that different amounts may be provided  in respect of different personal injuries not 
resulting in death;  
(b) the procedure for payment of such amounts; and  
(c) all other matters necessary for giving effect to the scheme.  
(5) Where , under the provisions of any other law for the time being in fo rce compensation is 
payable in respect of death or personal injury sustained by a member of the crew of a sailing vessel as 
a result of an accident in the course of his employment as such member, then if the amount payable in 
respect of such death or perso nal injury  in accordance with the scheme framed under this section ― 
(a) is equal to or more than, the compensation payable under such other law, no compensation 
shall be payable under such other law;  
(b) is less than the compensation payable under such oth er law, the compensation payable 
under such other law shall be reduced by the said amount.  
(6) Every scheme framed by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree tha t the scheme should not be made, the scheme shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however , that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly done 
under that scheme.  
 434B . Policy of insurance .―(1) No sailing vessel shall ply or proceed to sea unless there is in 
force in respect of the members of the crew of the vessel a policy of insurance complying with the 
requirements of section 434 -A and the scheme framed thereunder.  
(2) No customs collect or shall grant a port clearance to a sailing vessel until after production by 
the owner of such a policy of insurance.]  
435. Power to make rules respecting sailing vessels .―(1) The Central Government may   make 
rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which applications for certificates of registry shall be made and the particulars 
which such applications should contain;  
(b) the manner in which the tonnage of sailing vessels shall be ascertained;  
(c) the manner in which free board is to be assigned to sailing vessels and the free board 
markings are to be made;  
(d) the form in which cer tificates of registry and certificates of inspection may be issued;  
(e) the issue of duplicate copies of certificates of registry and certificates of inspection where 
the originals are destroyed, lost, mislaid, mutilated or defaced;  
(f) the manner in which , and the time within which, applications for the registry of alterations 
in the certificates of registry of sailing vessels shall be reported, the endorsement of the particulars 
of alteration on the certificates of registry, the grant of provisional certi ficates in cases where 
sailing vessels are directed to be registered anew, the period for which provisional certificates 
shall be valid and all other matters ancillary to the registry of alterations;  186 
 (g) the manner in which applications for the transfer of  registry of sailing vessels from one 
port to another in India shall be made and the procedure to be followed by the registrar in 
connection with such transfer;  
(h) the authorities by which sailing vessels are to be inspected and certificates of inspection  
are to be issued under this Part;  
(i) the criteria by which sailing vessels may be classified for the purpose of determining the 
limits within which they may be used for purposes of trading;  
(j) the fixing of the rates of freight which may be charged by s ailing vessels for specified 
goods or for any class of goods in relation to the coasting trade of India;  
(k) the equipment which sailing vessels or any class of sailing vessels should carry including 
equipment relating to life saving and fire appliances, l ights, shapes and signals required by the 
collision regulations;  
(l) the survey of space provided for passengers of sailing vessels and the scale and type of 
accommodation to be provided for such passengers;  
(m) the authority to which information regarding  certificates of registry, registry of alterations 
and issue of fresh certificates of registry under this Part is to be sent by registrars;  
(n) the qualifications to be possessed by tindals and other members of the crew of sailing 
vessels, the issue of per mits to tindals and of identity cards to other members of the crew, the 
conditions for the issue of such permits and identity cards and the cancellation or suspension 
thereof;  
1[(o) the fees which may be levied for the issue or re -issue of certificates of registry, for the 
survey or inspection of sailing vessels before issue of such certificates, for the inspection of 
sailing vessels and for all other purposes of this Part and the manner in which such fees may be 
recovered.]  
(p) the form in which a contract  of chartering a sailing vessel shall be executed;  
(q) the form in which a contract for the carriage of goods by sailing vessels shall be executed;  
(r) the reservation, in the public interest or in the interest of sailing vessels, of specified 
commodities for transport by sailing vessels either generally or in specified sectors of the coasting 
trade or between specified ports and the conditions subject to which such reservation may be 
made;  
(s) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
2[PART X VA 
FISHING BOATS  
435A . Application of Part .―Save as otherwise provided, this Part applies to every Indian fishing 
boat.  
435B . Definition .―For the purposes of this Part, “Indian fishing boat ” means ― 
(a) every fishing vessel as defined in clause (12) of section 3;  
(b) every sailing vessel, whether o r not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion, solely 
engaged in fishing for profit;  
(c) every boat or craft of any other type used solely for fishing which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be a fishing boa t for the purpose of this 
section,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12  of 1983, s. 14, for clause ( o) (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).    
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  187 
 which is owned wholly by persons to each of whom any of the descriptions specified in clause ( a) or 
in clause ( b) or in clause ( c), as the case may be, of section 21 applies or which satisfies such other 
requirements as t he Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
435C . Obligation to register .―Every Indian fishing boat shall be registered under this Part:  
Provided that any Indian fishing boat registered at the commencement of this Part unde r Part V or 
Part XV of this Act or any other law for the time being in force in India shall be deemed to have been 
registered under this Part:  
Provided further that every Indian fishing boat so deemed to have been registered shall be re -
registered under th is Part within such period from the commencement of this Part as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:  
Provided also that registration of non -mechanised sailing vessels will commence in different ports 
on such dates as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
 435D . Port of registry .―(1) The ports at which registration of Indian fishing boats shall be 
made shall be such ports or places in India as the Central Government may, by not ification in the 
Official Gazette, declare to be ports or places of registry under this Part.  
(2) The port or place at which an Indian fishing boat is registered for the time being under this 
Part, shall be deemed to be her port or place of registry and th e port or place to which she belongs.  
435E . Registrars of Indian fishing boats .―The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint an officer to be registrar of Indian fishing boats (hereafter in this Part 
referred to as registrar) at every port or place declared as a port or place of registry under sub -section 
(1) of section 435D.  
435F . Application for registry .―An application for the registry of an Indian fishing boat shall 
be made ― 
(a) in the case of an individual, by the person requiring to be registered as owner or by his 
agent;  
(b) in the case of more than one individual requiring to be so registered , by one or more of the 
persons so requiring or by his or their agent or agents, as the case may be; and  
(c) in the case of a company or a co -operative society requiring to be so registered, by its 
agents;  
and the authority of the agent shall be testified in writing, if appointed by an individual under the hand 
of the person appointing him and, if appointed by a company or a co -operative society under its 
common seal.  
435G . Certificate of registry .―(1) The owner of every Indian fishing boat required to be 
registered under this Part shall make an application in the prescribed form to the registrar for the grant 
to him of a certificate of registry in respect of the fishing boat.  
(2) The owner of ever y Indian fishing boat in respect of which an application under                         
sub-section  (1) is made, shall cause the tonnage of the fishing boat to be ascertained in the prescribed 
manner.  
(3) The registrar may make such inquiry as he thinks fit  with respect to the particulars contained 
in such application and shall enter in a register to be kept for the purpose (hereinafter referred to as 
fishing boats register) the following particulars in respect of th e Indian fishing boat, namely:―  
(a) the name of the fishing boat, the place where she was built and the port to which she 
belongs;  
(b) the rig, type and tonnage of the fishing boat;  
(c) the number assigned to the fishing boat;  
(d) the name, occupation and residence of the owner of the fishing boat;  188 
 (e) the mortgages, if any, effected by the owner in respect of the fishing boat; and  
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(4) After the particulars in respect of the Indian fishing boat have been ent ered in the fishing boats 
register under sub -section ( 3), the registr ar shall grant to the applicant  a certificate of registry in the 
prescribed form.  
(5) The owner of every Indian fishing boat shall pay for each certificate of registry a fee according 
to such scale as may be prescribed by the Central Government having regard to the tonnage of the 
fishing boat, but in no ease exceeding one rupee per ton of its gross tonnage.  
(6) An Indian fishing boat required to be registered under this Part but not so reg istered may be 
detained by a proper officer until the owner, skipper, tindal or other person in charge of the fishing 
boat produces a certificate of registry in respect of the fishing boat.  
435H . Particular relating to Indian fishing boats to be painted .―The owner of every Indian 
fishing boat so registered shall, before commissioning the fishing boat into service, paint or cause to 
be painted permanently in the prescribed manner on some conspicuous part of the fishing boat, the 
name by which the fishing boat has been registered, the number assigned to the fishing boat by the 
registrar and the port or place to which she belongs, and shall take all steps to ensure that the fishing 
boat remains painted as required by this section.  
 435-I. Change of name of I ndian fishing boat .―A change shall not be made in the name of an 
Indian fishing boat registered under this Part except  in accordance with rules made in this behalf.  
435J . Special provision for Indian fishing boats .―Every Indian fishing boat registered under 
this Part shall carry on board such life sauing appliances and fire appliances as are prescribed by rules 
made under sections 288, 289 and 457 or under any other provision of this Act, subject to such 
exemptions as may be specially granted in respect of such fishing boat.  
435K . Certificate of inspection .―(1) No Indian fishing boat shall ply or proceed to sea unless 
there is in force in respect of that fishing boat a certificate of inspection granted under this Part.  
(2) A certificate of inspection in respect of an Ind ian fishing boat shall specify―  
(a) the name and tonnage of the fishing boat;  
(b) the name of skipper, tindal or other person in charge of the fishing boat;  
(c) the maximum number of members of crew the fishing boat is certified to carry;  
(d) the safety equipments and appliances the fishing b oat is required to carry on board;  
(e) such other matters as the Central Government may think fit to specify , 
and shall contain a statement to the effect that her hull, rigging , equipment and machinery where fitted 
are in good condition.  
(3) Every certific ate or inspection shall be in force from the date of issue for a period of one year 
or for such shorter period as may be specified therein:  
Provided that when an Indian fishing boat is at sea at the time of expiry of the certificate, the 
certificate shall continue to be valid until her first arrival at a port or place in India.  
 435L . Cancellation, re -issue , etc., of certificate of inspection .―(1) Where at any time 
subsequent to the issue of a certificate of inspection in respect of an Indian fishing boat, the registrar 
has reason to believe that the fishing boat is not fit to proceed to sea, he may, after giving the owner 
an opportunity of ma king a representation, cancel such certificate.  
(2) Where at any time subsequent to the issue of a certificate of inspection an Indian fishing boat 
has undergone material alteration or has met with accident or, where the certificate of inspection has 
been cancelled under sub -section ( 1) and the application is made for the re -issue of such certificate or 
for the grant of a fresh certificate, the registrar may, before re -issuing the certificate or issuing a fresh 
certificate, as the case may be, cause such fi shing boat to be inspected; and if the authority inspecting 
the fishing boat reports that she is not fit to proceed to sea or that her hull, rigging or equipment are 189 
 defective, such certificate shall not be re -issued or issued until the fishing boat is in the opinion of 
such authority, fit to proceed to sea or the defect is rectified to the satisfaction of that authority.  
 435M . Inspection of safety equipments and appliances .―(1) Any surveyor appointed under 
section 9, any registrar appointed under section 435E or any other officer appointed by the Central 
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette may at any reasonable time inspect 
any Indian fishing b oat for the purpose of seeing the she is properly provided with safety equipments 
and appliances in conformity with the rules referred to in section 435J.  
(2) If the surveyor, or, as the case may be, the registrar or other officer appointed under                   
sub-section ( 1) finds that the Indian fishing boat is not provided with the aforesaid equipments and 
appliances, he shall give to the owner, skipper or tindal or any other person in  charge of the fishing 
boat a notice in writing pointing out the d eficiency and also what in his opinion is requisite to remedy 
the said deficiency.  
(3) No Indian fishing boat served with a notice under sub -section ( 2) shall proceed to sea until it 
obtains a certificate signed by the surveyor, registrar or other officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
to the effect that it is properly provided with safety equipments and appliances in conformity with the 
aforesaid rules.  
435N . Registration of alteration .―When an Indian fishing boat is so altered us not to 
correspond with the particulars relating to her entered in the certificate of registry, the owner of such 
fishing boat shall make a report of such alterations to the registrar of the port or place where  the 
fishing boat is registered, and the registrar shall either cause the alterations to be registered, or direct 
that the fishing boat may be registered anew, in accordance with such rules as may be made in this 
behalf.  
435-O. Transfer of registry .―The re gistry of an Indian fishing boat may be transferred from one 
port or place to another port or place in India on the application of the owner of the fishing boat, in 
accordance with such rules as may be made in his behalf.  
435P . Closure of registry .―If an I ndian fishing boat is lost, destroyed or rendered permanently 
unfit for service, the owner of such fishing boat shall, with the least possible delay, report the fact to 
the registrar of the port or place where the fishing boat is registered and also forwar d to him certificate 
of registry in respect of the fishing boat; and thereupon the registrar shall have the registry of the 
fishing boat closed.  
435Q . Restriction on Transport of Indian fishing boats .―No person shall transfer or acquire 
any Indian fishing boat registered under this Part or any interest therein without the previous approval 
of the Central Government; and any transaction effected in contravention of this section shall be void 
and unenfo rceable.  
435R . Mortgage of Indian fishing boats .―(1) Every mortgage of an Indian fishing boat or any 
interest therein effected after the date on which this Part comes into force shall be registered with the 
registrar.  
(2) Every mortgage of an Indian fishin g boat or any interest therein effected before the date on 
which this Part comes into force shall, if subsisting on that date, be registered with the registrar within 
three months from that date.  
(3) The registrar shall enter every such mortgage in the fis hing boats register in the order in which 
it is registered with him.  
(4) If there arc more mortgages than one recorded in respect of the same Indian fishing boat or 
interest therein, the mortgages shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or constructive  notice, have 
priority according to the date on which each mortgage is registered with the registrar and not 
according to the date of each mortgage itself:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect the relative priorities as they 
existed immediately before the date on which this Part comes into force as between mortgages of the 190 
 same fishing boat or interest therein effected before such date which are registered in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
435S . Fraudulent use  of certificate of registry or certificate of inspection, etc. , 
prohibited .―(1) No person shall use or attempt to use the certificate of registry or the certificate of 
inspection granted in respect of an Indian fishing boat for any purpose other than the l awful operation 
of that fishing boat.  
(2) No person shall use or attempt to use for the operation of an Indian fishing boat, a certificate 
of registry or a certificate of inspection not granted in respect of that fishing boat.  
(3) No person who has in his possession or under his control the certificate of registry or the 
certificate of inspection of an Indian fishing boat shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause to 
deliver such certificate on demand to the owner of the fishing boat.  
435T . Statement rel ating to crew of Indian fishing boat to be maintained .―(1) Every owner, 
skipper, tindal or other person in charge of a mechanised Indian fishing boat of 25 registered tons and 
above shall maintain or cause to be maintained in the prescribed form a statemen t of the crew of the 
fishin g boat containing the following  particulars with respect t o each member thereof, namely:―  
(a) his name  
(b) the wages payable to him;  
(c) the names and addresses of his next -of-kin; 
(d) the date of commencement of his employment; and 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so 
to do, and for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt, by general or special order, any Indian 
fishin g boat or class of Indian fishing boats from the provisions of this sub -section.  
(2) Every change in the crew of the Indian fishing boat shall be entered in the statement under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) A copy of such statement and of every change entered there in shall be communicated as soon 
as possible to the registrar of the port or place of registry of the Indian fishing boat concerned.  
435U . Power to make rules respecting Indian fishing boats .―(1) The Central Government 
may make rules to carry out the provi sions of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which applications for certificates of registry shall be made an d the particulars 
which such applications should contain;  
(b) the manner in which tonnage of an Indian fishing boat shall be ascertained;  
(c) the form in which fishing boats register shall be maintained;  
(d) the forms in which certificates of registry and certificates of inspection may be issued;  
(e) the fees which may be levied for the issue or re -issue of certificates of registry or 
certificates of inspec tion and for all other purposes  of this Part;  
(f) the manner in which the name, number assigned to the  Indian fishing boat and name of the 
port or place to which she belongs shall be painted;  
(g) the manner in which any change may be made in the name of an Indian fishing boat;  
(h) any exemption from the requirements relating to carriage of safety equipment  and 
appliances by an Indian fishing bo at that may be specially granted under section 435J in respect of 
such fishing boat;  191 
 (i) the manner in which alterations in Indian fishing boats shall be reported and applications 
for the registry of such alterations in the certificates of registry o f Indian fishing boats shall be 
made, the endorsement of the particulars of alterations on the certificates of registry, the grant of 
provisional certificates in cases where Indian fishing boats are directed to be registere d anew, 
cases in which Indian fishing boats shall be registered anew, the period for which provisional 
certificates shall be valid and all other matters ancillary to the registry of alterations;  
(j) the manner in which registry of an Indian fishing boat ma y be transferred from one port or 
place in India to another port or place in India;  
(k) the form in which statement of members of crew of an Indian fishing boat may be 
maintained;  
(l) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
435V . Application  to Indian fishing boats of other provisions relating to ships .―The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any provisions of this Act other 
than those contained in this Part which do not expressly apply to Indian fishing boats shall also apply 
to Indian fishing boats subject to s uch conditions, exceptions and  modifications as may be specified in 
the notification.  
435W . Fishery data to be furnished by Indian fishing boats .―The Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, require every Indian fishing boat or any specified class of 
Indian fishing boats to furnish such fishery data to the registrar in such form and at such periodical 
intervals as may be specified in that notification.  
 435X . Power to exempt .―Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Cent ral 
Govern ment  may, by order in writing and upon such conditions as it may think fit to impose, exempt 
any Indian fishing boat or class of Indian fishing boats or skipper, tindal or member o r crew of such 
fishing boat or class of fishing boats from any spec ified requirement contained in or prescribed by any 
rules made in pursuance of any provision of this Part or from any other requirement of this Act 
extended to Indian fishing boats or to personnel employed on Indian fishing boats by a notification 
issued u nder section 435 V, if it is satisfied that the requirement is substantially complied with or the 
compliance with the requirement may be impracticable or unreasonable in the circumstances attending 
the case.]  
PART XVI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
  Penalties  
436. Penalties .―(1)Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply 
with any provision thereof which it was his duty to comply with, shall be guilty of an  offence  and if in 
respect of any such offence no penalty is specially provided in sub -sectio n (2), he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
 (2) The offences mentioned in the second column of the following table shall be punishable to 
the extent mentioned in the fourth column of the same with reference to such offe nces respectively.  
 
Serial No.  Offences  Section of 
this Act to 
which 
offence has 
reference  Penalties  
           1 2 3 4 
1. If the owner or master of an Indian ship fails to comply with or 
contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 28.  28(2) Fine which may  extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
2. If a person willfully makes a false statement in the builder's 
certificate referred to in section 30.  30 Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  192 
            1 2 3 4 
3. If a person contravenes sub -section ( 2) of secti on 35.  35(2) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
4. If the owner or master of an Indian ship commits an offence 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 35.  35(4) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
5. If a master, without reasonable cause, f ails to comply with 
sub-section ( 4) of section 36.  36(4) Fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees.  
6. If a person makes illegal use of a certificate of registry stated 
to have been mislaid, lost or destroyed or if a person entitled to 
the certificate of registry obtains it at any time afterwards but 
fails to deliver the said certificate to the registrar as required 
by sub -section ( 5) of section 36.  36(5) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees . 
7. 
 If a master fails to deliver to the registrar th e certificate of 
registry as required by sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 38  38 (2), 
38 (3) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
8. 
 If an owner fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) of section 39 
or if a master fails to comply with s ub-section ( 2) of that 
section.  39 (1), 
39 (2) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
9. If any person contravenes  sub-section ( 1) of section 42.  42(1) Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
10. If any person acts or suffers any person unde r his control to act 
in contravention of section 55 or omits to do or suffers any 
person under his control to omit to do anything required under 
that section.  55 Fine which ma y extend to 
one thousand rupees;  but 
nothing herein shall affect the 
power to det ain the ship 
under  sub-section ( 4) of that 
section.  
11. 
  If an owner fails to make an application for registering anew a 
ship or for registering an alteration of a ship under section 56.  56 Fine which may e xtend to 
one thousand rupees; an d in 
addition, a fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees for 
every day during which the 
offence continues after 
conviction.  
12. If any distinctive national colours except those  declared under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 63 are hoisted on board any Indian 
ship.  63(1) The ma ster, owner and every 
other person hoisting the 
colours shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to five 
thousand rupees.  
13. If a person contravene s section 64.  64 Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or fine 
which may extend to five 
thousand rupe es, or both.  
14. If an owner or master contravenes section 65.  65 Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years, or fine 
which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or both.  
15. If default is made in complying with section 66.  66 The master shall be liable to  
fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
16. If any person in the case of any declaration made in the 
presence of or produced to a registrar under Part V or in any 
document or other evidence produced to such registrar ― 
(a) willfully makes or assists in making or procures to be 
made, any false statement concerning the title to or 
ownership of or the interest existing in any ship or any 
share in a ship; or  
(b) utters, produces or makes use of any declaration or 
document containing any such false statement knowing the 
same to be false.  General  Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both.  193 
            1 2 3 4 
1[17  If― 
(a) any person causes a ship or fishing vessel t o proceed to sea 
without the required certificated personnel.  
(b) any person having been engaged as one of the officers 
referred to in section  76 goes to sea a such officer without 
being duly certificated.  
(c) any master fails to submit the required crew l ist or fails to 
report the changes made in the list before commencing the 
relevant voyage.   
General  
 
76 
 
84(1)(c) Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or both.  
  
Imprisonment which may 
extend to six m onths or fine 
which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or both.  
  
Fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees and in 
addition, a fine which may 
extend to one thousand 
rupees for everyday during 
which the offence con tinues 
after conviction.]  
18. If a m aster or owner fails to comply with any of the 
requirements of section 93.  93 Fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees.  
19. If a master fails without reasonable cause to comply with any 
of the requirements of section 94.  94 Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees.  
20. If any person acts in contravention of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 95 or section 96 or section 97.  95(2), 
96, 97  Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every 
seaman in respect of whom 
the offence is committed.  
21. If a pe rson engages or carries any sea man to sea in 
contravention of sub -section ( 2) of section 98 or section 99.  98 (2), 99 Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every 
seaman in respect of whom 
the offence is committed.  
22. If a master carries any seaman to sea without entering into an 
agreement with him in accordance with this Act.  100 Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every 
seaman in respect of whom 
the offence is committed.  
23. 
  If a master enters into an agreement with any seaman for a 
scale of provisions less than the scale fixed under c lause ( g) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 101.  101(2)(g) Fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees.  
24. If a master fails without reasonable cause, to comply with any 
of the requirements of section 105,  sub-section ( 4) of section 
106 or section 107.  105, 
106(4),107  Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
25. If any person ― 
(a) is carried to sea to work in con travention of section 109   
2*** or section 111; or  
(b) is engaged to work in any capacity in a s hip in 
contravention of sec tion 109  2*** or section 111 on a false 
representation by his parent or guardian that the young 
person is of an age at which such engagement is not in 
contravention of those sections.   
109,  2*** 
111  
The master shall be liable to 
a fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees;  
The parent or guardian shall 
be liable to a fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees.  
26. If a master refuses or neglects to produce for inspection any 
certificate of physical fitness delivered to him under section  
111 when required to do so by a shipping Master.  General  Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 1987, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1989).  
2. The figures “110” omitted by Act 32 of 2014, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  194 
  
           1 2 3 4 
27. If the master of a ship, where there is no agreement with the 
crew, fails to keep the register of young  persons required to be 
kept under section 112 or refuses or neglects to produce such 
register for inspection when required so to do by a shipping 
master.  General  Fine which may extend two 
hundred rupees.  
28. If the master of a ship other than an Indian ship engages a 
seaman in Indi a otherwise than in accordance with section 
114. 114 Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees for every 
seaman so engaged.  
29. If any owner, master or agent willfully dis obeys any order 
under section 115.  115 Imprisonment which may 
extend to three mon ths, or 
fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both.  
30. If a master fails to comply with section 116.  116 Fine w hich may extend to 
one hundred  rupees.  
31. If any p erson obstructs any officer re ferred to in section 117 in 
the exercise of his po wers under that section.  General  Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
32. If a master or owner a cts in contravention of sub -section  (1) or 
sub-section ( 2) of sec tion 118.  118(1), 
118(2) Fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees.  
33. If a maste r fails to comply  with the provisions of sub -section  
(1) of section 119 or, without reasonable cause, fails to return 
the certificate of competency to the officer concerned as 
required by sub -section ( 2) of that section.  119(1), 
119(2). Fine which may exte nd to two 
hundred rupees.  
34. If a master fails to comply with section 120  120 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
35. If any person―  
(a) forges or fraudulently alters any cert ificate of discharge or 
a cer tificate as to the work of a seaman or a  continuous 
discharge certificate or a copy of any such certificate; or  
(b) fraudulently uses any certificate of discharge or a 
certificate as to the work of a seaman or a continuous 
discharge certificate or a copy of any such certificate 
which is forged o r altered or does not belong to him.  General  Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or both.  
36. If any person acts in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 
121. 121(1) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
37. If a master ― 
(a) fails without reasonable cause to comply with sub -section 
(1) or sub -section ( 3) of section 122; or  
(b) delivers a false statement for the purpose of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 122.   
122(1), 
122(3). 
 122 ( 2) Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees . 
38. If a master fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with 
section 125.  125 Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
39. If a master or owner pays the wages of a seaman in a manner 
contrary to sub -section ( 1) of section 128.  128(1) Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
40. If a master fails to comply with section 131  131 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
41. If any person fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with 
any requisition under s ection 133.  133 Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
42. If a seaman contravenes sub -section ( 3) of section 135.  135(3) Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month, or fine 
which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or both, but 
nothing herein shall take aw ay 
or limit any other remedy 
which any person would 
otherwise have for breach of 
contract or refund of the 
money advanced or otherwise.  195 
            1 2 3 4 
1[42A. If the master or owner contravenes the provisions of section 
138A  138A Fine which may extend  to 
double the average wages per 
hour payable to the seaman 
for working beyond forty -
eight hours .] 
43. If any person commits a breach of any term of any award 
which is binding on him under sub -section ( 5) of section 150  General  Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month, or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both.  
44. If a seaman or an owner contravenes section 151.  151 Imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both.  
45. If a master fai ls to comply with the provi sions of this Act with 
respect to taking charge of the property of a deceased seaman 
or apprentice or to making in the official log  book the proper 
entries relating thereto or to the payment or delivery of such 
property as requi red by sub -section ( 1) of section 154.  154(1) Fine which may extend to 
three times the value of the 
property not accounted for or 
if such value is not 
ascertained , to five hundred 
rupees , but nothing herein 
shall affect his liability under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 154 
to account for the property not 
accounted for.  
46. If the master of an Indian ship fails or refuses without 
reasonable  cause to receive on board, his  ship or to give a 
passage or subsistence to, or to provide for, any seaman 
contrary to sub -section ( 1) of section 163.  163(1) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees in respect of 
each such seaman.  
47. (a) If a master fails to comply with, or contravenes any 
provision of sub -section ( 3) of section 168;  
 
 
(b) if a master or any other perso n having charge of any 
provisions or water on board a ship liabl e to inspection 
under section 1 68 refuses or fails to give the person 
making the inspection reasonable facility for the purpose.  168 ( 3) 
  
 
 
168 ( 6) Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees , but nothing 
herein shall affect the power 
to detain the ship under             
sub-section ( 2) of section 168;  
 
Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
48. If a master fails to furnish provisions to a seaman in 
accordance with the agreement entered  into by him and the 
court considers the failure to be due to the neglect or default of 
the master, or if a master furnishes to a seaman provisions 
which are bad in quality or unfit for use.  General  Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, but nothing  
herein shall affect the claim 
for compensation under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 169.  
49. If a master fails without reasonable cause to comply with 
section 171.  171 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
50. (a) If any requirement of se ction 172 is not complied with in 
the case of any ship; or  
 
 
 
(b) if obstruction is caused to the port health officer in the 
discharge of his duty.  172 The owner shall be liable to 
fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees unless he can 
prove that the no n-compliance 
was not caused by his 
inattention, neglect or wil ful 
default;  
The owner or master shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees 
unless he can prove that the 
obstruction was caused 
without his knowledge or  
connivance.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1998, s. 6 (w.e.f. 26 -9-1997).  196 
  
           1 2 3 4 
51. If any foreign -going ship referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 173 does not carry on board a duly qualified medical 
officer.  173(1) The owner shall be liable for 
each voyage of the ship made 
without having on board a 
duty qualified  medical officer , 
a fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees.  
52. If a muster fails, without reasonable cause,  to comply with 
section 184.  184 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
53. If any p erson fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) of secti on 
187. 187(1) Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
54. If any person contravenes section 188.  188 Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
55. If any person goes on board a ship contrary to section 189.  189 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rup ees. 
56. If a ma ster, seaman or apprentice con travenes section 190.  190 Imprisonment which may 
extend to two years or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both.  
57. If a seaman or apprentice ― 
(a) deserts his ship;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 191(1) (a)  
He shall be liable to forfeit all 
or any part of the property he 
leaves on board and of the 
wages he has then earned and 
also if the desertion takes 
place at any place not in India, 
to forfeit all or any part of the 
wages which he may earn in 
any other ship in which he 
may be employed until his 
next return to India, and to 
satisfy any excess of wages 
paid by the master or owner of 
the ship from which he deserts 
to any substitute engaged in 
his place at a higher  rate of 
wages than the rate stipulated 
to be paid to him, and also to 
imprisonment which may 
extend to three months;  
 (b) contravenes clause ( b) of sub -section ( l) of section 191.  191 ( 1) (b) he shall, if the contravention 
does not amount to desertion, 
be liable to forfeit out of his 
wages a sum not exceeding 
two days pay and in addition 
for every twenty -four hours of 
absence either a sum not 
exceeding six days ‟ pay or 
any expenses properly 
incurred in hiring a sub stitute 
and also to imprisonment 
which m ay extend to two 
months  
58. If any person contravenes sub -section ( 3) of section 193.  193 (3)  Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  197 
  
           1 2 3 4 
59. If a seaman or apprentice is guilty of the offence specified             
in― 
(i) clause ( a) of section 194;  
 
 
(ii) clause ( b) of section 194;  
 
(iii) clause ( c) of section 194;  194  
 
Forfeiture out of his wages of 
a sum not exceeding one 
month ‟s pay.  
 
forfeiture out of his wages of 
a sum not exceeding two 
days‟ pay; 
 
imprisonment which may 
extend to one month and also 
for every twenty -four hours of 
continuance of such           
disobedi ence or neglect,  
forfeiture out of his wages of 
a sum not exceeding six days' 
pay or any expenses which 
may have been properly 
incurred in hiring a  substitute;     
 (iv) clauses ( d) and ( e) of section 1 94;   imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or fine 
which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or both;  
 (v) clause ( f) of section 194.    forfeiture out of his wages of 
a sum equal to the los s 
sustained and also 
imprisonment which may 
extend to three months.  
60. If any master fails to comply with section 197.  197 Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month, or fine 
which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or both.  
61. If a seaman on or before being engaged wil fully and 
fraudulently makes a false statement of the name of his last 
ship or alleged last ship or wil fully and fraudulently makes a 
false statement of his own name  General  Fine which may extend to 
fifty rupees.  
62. If a master or owner neglects or refuses to pay over the fine 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 202.  202 Fine which may extend to six 
times the amount of the fine 
retained by him.  
63. If any person contravenes section 203.  203 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
64. If any person contravenes section 204.  204 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
65. If any person goes to sea in a ship con trary to sub -section ( 1) 
of section 205.  205 (1)  Imprisonment which may 
extend to one month, or fine 
which may extend to tw o 
hundred rupees, or both.  
66. (a) If any person willfully disobeys the prohibition obtained in 
clause ( a) of section 206;  206 ( a) Imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees; or both;  
  (b)If any master  or owner refuses or neglects to deposit any 
wages, money, or other property or sum in the manner 
required by clause ( b)  of section 206.  206 ( b) Fine which ma y extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
67. If a master fails to deliver or transmit the documents refe rred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 208 or section 209 as provided 
therein.  208 ( 1), 209  Fine Which may extent to five 
hundred rupees . 198 
            1 2 3 4 
68. If a master contravenes sub -section ( 1) of section 210.  210(1) Imprisonment which may 
extend t o three months, or fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or both . 
69. If any person harbours or secretes any deserter knowing or 
having reason to believe that he has deserted  Genera l Fine which may extend to two 
hundred -rupees . 
70. If a master fa ils to comply with sub -section ( 2) of section 214.  214(2) Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
71. (a) If sub -section ( 1) of section 215 is not complied with;  
 
 
(b) If any person contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 215.  215(1)  
 
 
215(2) The mas ter shall be liable to 
fine, which may extend to 
fifty rupees, if no other 
penalty is provided in this 
Act; 
Fine which may extend to 
three hundred rupees.  
72. 
  If any person willfully destroys or mutilates or renders 
illegible any entry in any official l og book o r wilfully makes or 
procures to be made or assists in making a false or fraudulent 
entry in or omission from an official log book.  General  Imprisonment which may 
extend to one year.  
73. If a master fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with 
section 216.  216 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
74 If a master or owner fails, without reason able cause, to comply 
with section 217.  217 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
75. If an owner, agent or master without reasonable cause  neglects 
to give the notice required by sub -section ( 1) of section 229.  229(1) Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
76. If an owner or master, without reasonable cause, fails to 
deliver a certificate under section 230.  230 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees  
77. If a certificate or survey is not affixed or kept aff ixed as 
required by section 231.  231 The owner or master shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees.  
78. 
  If a ship carries or attempts to carry passenger s in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 220 or has on board 
a number of passengers in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 231.  220(1), 
232(1) The owner, agent or master 
shall be liable to fine which 
may extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
79. 
  (a) If a person is guilty of any offence specified in sub -section 
(1) of section 233;  
 
 
 
(b) If a person contravenes sub -section  (2) of section  233. 233(1) 
  
 
 
 
233(2) The person concerned shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees; but thi s 
liability shall not prejudice the 
recovery of the fare, if any, 
payable by him;  
 
Fine which may extend to 
three hundred rupees. .  
80. If  1[a special trade passenger] or pilgrim. ship departs or 
proceeds on a voyage from or discharges  2[special trade 
passengers] or pilgrims at any port or place within India in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 237, or if a person 
is received as  1[a special trade passenger] or pilgrim on board 
any such ship in contravention of sub -section ( 2) of that 
section.]  237(1),  
237(2) The master -owner or agent 
shall be liable to fine which 
may extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
81. If the master, owner or agent of   3[a special trade passenger] or 
pilgrim ship fails to give the notice required by sub -section ( 1) 
of section 23 8 238(1) Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “an unberthed passenger ship” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “an unberthed passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  199 
  
           1 2 3 4 
82. 
 If a person impedes or refuses to allow any 239 entry or 
inspection authorised by sub -section 239.  239 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
83. If a master or owner  fails to comply with  section 246.  246 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
84. If the master, owner or agent of  1[a special trade passenger] or 
pilgrim ship, after having obtained any of the certificates 
mentioned in Part VIII, fraudulently does or suffers to be done 
anything whereby the certificate becomes inapplicable to the 
altered state of the ship, or   2[special trade passengers] or 
pilgrims or other matters to which the certificate relates.  General  Imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to  six 
months, or fine which may 
extend to two thousand 
rupees, or both.  
85. 
 If the master of  1[a special trade passen ger] or pilgrim ship or 
any contractor employed by him for the purpose contravenes 
section 247.  247 Fine which may extend to 
thirty rupees  for every 
3[special trade passenger] or 
pilgrim, who has sustained 
detriment by the omission to 
supply the prescribed                  
provision s. 
86. 
 If 1[a special trade passenger] or pilgrim ship carries  2[special 
trade passengers] or pilgrims in con travention of                       
sub-section ( 1) section 248.  248(1) The master, o wner or agent 
shall be liable to fine which 
may extend to two thousand 
rupees.  
87. If a master, owner or agent contravenes  section 249.  249 Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
88. If an owner, agent or master contravenes section 252.  252 Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
89. If the master , owner or agent fails to  comply with sub -section 
(1) of section 255.  255(1) Fine which may extend to two 
hundred  rupees  
4[89A . If a master, ow ner or agent contravenes  sub-section ( 6) of 
section 255.  255(6) Fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees.]  
90. 
 If medical officers or medical attendants are not carried on  1[a 
special trade passenger ship] as required b y sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) of section 259 as the case may be ; or if the ship 
is not provided with a hospital, medical stores and equipment 
as required by sub -section ( 3) of that section.  259 The master, owner or agent 
shall be liable for each voy age 
made in contravention of 
section 259 to fine winch may 
extend to five hundred rupees.  
4[90A . (a) If medical officers and attendants are not carried on a 
pilgrim ship in accordance with clause ( a) of                  
sub-section ( 4) section 259; or  259(4)(a) The master, owner or agent 
shall be liable for each voyage 
made in contravention of 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) 
of section 259 to fine which 
may extend to three hundred 
rupees . 
 (b) If a medical officer or attendant or a pilgrim ship 
contravenes c lause ( c) of sub-section ( 4) of section 259.   259(4)(c) fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976 , s. 2, for “ an unberthed passengers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unberthed passeng ers” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “unberthed passenger” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  200 
  
         1 2 3 4 
91. If an owner, agent or master contravenes section 260 . 260 Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
1*                          *                                                   *                                *                                *  
94. If section 291 is not complied with in the case of a ship.  291 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to  one thousand 
rupees.  
95. If section 292 is not complied with in the case of a ship.  292 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees.  
96. If any ship proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea in 
contravention of sectio n 297.  297 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees.  
97. 
  If any ship proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea w ithout 
carrying on board the information required by  2* * *  section 
298. 298 3*** 
  The master or owne r shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to one thousand 
rupees.  
98. 
  If any ship proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea in 
contravention of section 307.  307 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to ― 
(a) in the case of a passenge r 
ship, to one hundred rupees 
for every passenger carried on 
board the ship but without 
prejudice to any other remedy 
or penalty under this Act; and  
(b) in the case of a ship other 
than a passenger ship, to one 
thousand rupees.  
4[98A . If the owner, agent or master fails to comply with section 309A.  309A  Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.]  
99. If any ship proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea in contravention of 
section 312.  312 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
100. If any ship is loaded in contravention of section 313.  313 The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees 
and to such additional fine not 
exceeding  5[five thousand 
rupees] for every inch or 
fraction of an inch by which 
the appropriate load lines on 
each side of the ship are 
submerged or would have 
been sub merged if the ship 
had been in salt waters and 
had no list, as the Court thinks 
fit to impose, having regard to 
the extent to which the 
earnin g capacity of the ship is 
or would have been increased 
by reason of the submersion:  
                                                      
1. Serial Nos. 92 and 93 omitted by Act 69 of 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1976).  
2. The words, brackets and figure “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 21 of 1966, s. 35 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).   
4. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
5. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 16, for “one thousand rupees” ( w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  201 
  
1 2 3 4 
   Provided that it shall be 
a good deference for the 
master or owner to prove that 
a contravention was due 
solely to deviation or delay 
caused solely by stres s of 
whether or other circumstance 
which neither the master nor 
the owner nor the cha rterer, if 
any, could have prevented or 
forestalled.  
101. 
  (a) If the owner or master of an Indian ship contravenes                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 314; or 
(b) If any person contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 314.  314(1) 
 
314(2) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees;  
102. 
  If a master or owner fails to deliver the certificate as required 
under sub -section 1[(8)] of section 317.  317 1[(8)] Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees. ] 
103. If a master proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 318.  318(1) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
104. (a) If the owner of an Indian ship fails to c omply with clause 
(a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 319, or  
(b) If a master fails to comply with clause (b) of                              
sub-section ( 1), or clause ( a) or clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 319.  319(1)(a) 
 
319(1)(b) 
319(2) 
  Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
105. If a master fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) of section 320.  320(1) Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
2[105A . If the owner, agent or master fails to comply with                          
sub-section ( 1) of section 331A.  331A  Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. ] 
106. 
  (a) If a master, owner or agent is guilty of an offence under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 332; or  
(b) If the owner or master of a ship is guilty of  an offence 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 332; or  
(c) If a master fails to deliver any notice required by                     
sub-section ( 3) of section 332 or if in any such notice he 
makes any statement which he knows to be false in a 
material particu lar or recklessly makes a statement which 
is false in a material particular.  332(1) 
  
332(2) 
  
332(3) 
  Fine which may extend to 
three thousand rupees.  
  
 Fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees.  
107. 
  If a ship is loaded in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 333.  
  333(1) 
  The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees 
and to an additional fine not 
exceeding one thousand 
rupees for every inch or              
fraction of an inch by which 
the appropriat e sub -division 
load line on each side was 
submerged or would have 
been submerged if the ship 
had no list, as the Court thinks 
fit to impose, having regard to 
the extent to which the 
earning capacity of the ship 
was, or would have been, 
increased by reason of the 
submersion.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s. 18, for “( 5)” (w.e.f.19 -12-1970).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 35 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  202 
  
         1 2 3 4 
108. 
  If a person is guilty of an offence under sub -section ( 1) 
or if a master is guilty of an offence under sub -section 
(2) of section 334.  334(1), 
334(2) Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which  may 
extend to one thousand rupees, 
or both.  
1[108A. 
  If an Indian nuclear ship proceeds or attempts to proceed 
to sea in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 
344C.  344C  
  The master or owner shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to ten thousan d rupees.  
108B . If an Indian nuclear ship, fails to comply with                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 344D.  344D  The master or owner or agent 
shall be, liable to imprisonment 
which may extend to six months 
or fine which may extend to ten 
thousand  rupees or both.  
108C . 
  If a nuclear ship other than an Indian ship enters the 
territorial waters of India in contravention of section 
344E  344E  
  The master shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees.  
108D . If the master of a nu clear ship fails to give the notice 
required by sub -section ( 1) of section 344F.  344F  Fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees.  
108E . (a) If the master of a nuclear ship fails to give the notice 
required by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section (5) of section 344G;  344G( 1), (2) 
and (5) Imprisonment which may extend 
to one year or fine which may 
extend to ten tho usand rupees or 
both.  
  
  (b) if the master of a nuclear ship fails to comply with 
any directions issued under sub -section ( 3) or             
sub-section ( 5) of section 344G.  344G( 3) and  
(5) 
  Imprisonment which may extend 
to one year or fine which may 
extend to ten th ousand rupees or 
both. ] 
109. 
  If a master or person in charge of a ship fails, without 
reasonable cause to comply wi th section 348.  348 Imprisonment which may extend 
to three months or fine which 
may extend to three thousand 
rupees, or both.  
110. If a master fails to comply with section 349.  349 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
111. If the owner or master fails, without reasonable cause, to 
comply with section 350.  350 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
112. If the owner or agent fails, without reasonable cause, to 
comply with section 351  351 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
113. If any person contravenes section 353.  353 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
114. If a master fails to comply with section 354.  354 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
115. (a) If a master fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) of section 355; or  355(1), 
355(2) Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, 
or both.  
  (b) If a master fails to comply with sub -section ( 5) of 
section 355.  355(5) Fine which may extend to one  
thousand rupees.  
1[115A . If a master fails to comply with section 355A.  355A  Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, 
or both.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 35 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  203 
  
1 2 3 4 
1[115B . (a) If oil or oily mixture is discharged in contraven tion of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 356 C―     
  (i) where such discharge is made from an Indian tanker 
anywhere into the sea;  356C( 1) The master of the tanker shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees.  
 (ii) where such foreign tanker anywhere within the 
coastal waters of In dia. 356C( 1) The master of the tanker or, if the 
tanker is unmanned, the person in 
charge of its operation shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees.  
 (b) If oil or oily mixture is discharged in contravention of 
sub-section ( 2) of secti on 356C―    
  (i) where such discharge is made by an Indian ship other 
than a tanker anywhere into the Sea  356C( 2) The mas ter, or if the ship is 
unmanned ; the person in charge 
of the operation shall, be liable to 
fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees.  
  (ii) where such discharge is made by a foreign ship oilier 
than a tanker anywhere within the coastal waters of 
India.   356C( 2) The master of the ship shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees.  
 (c) If oil or oily mixture is discharge d in contravention of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 356C.  356C( 3) The master of the offshore 
installation if it be a mobile craft 
or the owner, operator, lessee or 
licence of an offshore insulation 
of any other type shall be liable 
to fine which may extend to  five 
lakh rupees.  
115C . 
  If an Indian ship is not fitted with equip ment prescribed 
under section 356E.  356E  The owner, master or agent of 
Indian ship shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees.  
115D . 
  (i) If the master of an Indi an tanker or other ship fails to 
maintain an oil record book as required by section 
356F or contravenes any rule made under that section.  356F  The master of the Indian tanker 
or other Indian ship shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five thousand ru pees.  
 (ii) If any person wilfully destroys or mutila tes or renders 
illegible or pre vents the making of any entry in the oil 
record book or makes or causes to be made a false 
entry in such book in contravention of any rule made 
under section 356F.  356F  
  The offender shall be liable to 
penalty of imprisonment which 
may extend to six months or 
fine” which may extend to  ten 
thousand rupees or both.  
115E . 
  If master of any ship refuses to certify copy of any entry 
in the oil record book to be a true copy of  such entry as 
required under sub -section ( 2) of section 356G.  356G( 2) The master of the ship shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees.  
115F . 
  If any person fails to take action as required by a notice 
served on him under sub -section (1) of section 356J.  356J( 1). The o ffender shall be liable to 
pena lty of imprisonment which 
may extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees or both.  
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 12 of 1983, s. 1 6, for Serial Number s 115B, 115C a nd 115D and the entires relating thereto                
(w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  204 
  
        1 2 3 4 
115G . 
 If owner of any Indian ship, tug, barge or any other 
equipment fails to comply with any order issued under 
sub-section (l) of section 356L.  356L( 1) The of fender shall be liable to 
penalt y of imprisonment which 
may extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or both and if the offence 
is a continuing one the offender 
shall be liable to a further fine 
which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees per day for 
every day during which the 
offence continues after 
conviction.]  
1[115H.  If the owner of an Indian ship fails to comply with 
section 356R  356R  Fine which may extend to fifteen 
lakh rupees.  
115-I. If a master proceeds or attempts to proceed to sea in 
contravention of section 356S  356S  Fine which may extend to three 
lakh rupees.  
115J . If the owner of an Indian ship or any person fails to 
comply with the rules made or measures taken by the 
Central Government under section 356U  356U  Fine which may extend to one 
Lakh and fifty thousand rupees.  
115K . If the master of a ship fails to maintain records as 
required by section 356V  356V  Fine which may ex tend to one 
lakh and fifty thousand rupees.  
115L . If the master of a ship fails to comply with                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 356W  356W( 1) Fine which may extend to one 
lakh and fifty thousand rupees.]  
116. 
  If any person bound to give noti ce under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 358 fails to give such notice.  358(2) Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees and in default of 
payment, simple imprisonment 
which may extend to three 
months.  
117 If a master or ship ‟s offic er fails to comply with section 
378. 378 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
118. If any person wilfully disobeys any direction of the 
receiver of wreck under section 392.  392 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
119. If the owner or occupier of any land impe des or in any 
way hinders any person in the exercise of the right s given 
by section 393.  393 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
120. 
  (a) If any p erson omits to give notice of  the finding of 
any wreck to the receiver of wreck as required by 
clause ( a) of section 395; or  395(a) Fine which may extend, to one 
thousand rupees;  
  
  (b) if any person omits to deliver any wreck as required 
by clause ( b) of section 395.  395(b) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees and in addition 
forfeiture of all claims to salvage 
and payment to the owner of 
such wreck , if the same is 
claimed, or if the same is 
unclaimed, to the Government, a 
penalty, not exceeding twice the 
value of such wreck.  
121. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of section 
400. 400 Fine which may  extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2015).  205 
  
       1 2 3 4 
122. 
  (a) If a ship is taken to sea in contravention of                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 406 or if a ship engages in 
the coasting trade in contravention of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 407; or  
 
 
(b) if, without reasonable excuse, any limitation or 
condition contained in a licence granted under section 
406 or section 407 is contravened.  406(1), 
407(1) 
 
 
 
406, 407  The master or owner of the ship 
or in the case of a ship othe r than 
an Indian ship the master, agent 
in India of the owner or the 
charterer of the ship in respect of 
which the contravention has 
taken place  shall be liable to 
imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees , or 
both.  
 
123. 
  If a person to whom a licence under section 406 or 
section 407 has been granted fails to comply with section 
409. 409 Fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees.  
124. (a) If any directions given under section 411 are not 
complied with ; or 
 
 
(b) if the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 412 are 
contravened.  411 
 
 
 
412(3) The owner, master or agent shall 
be liable to imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six 
months, or to fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or 
both. 
125. If the owner, master or agent on whom a notice has been 
served under section 413 fails to furnish the information 
required within the time specified or furnishing the 
information makes any statement which he knows to be 
false on any material partic ular. 413 
  Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or 
both.  
126. 
  If a selling vessel required to be registered under section 
417 is not registered in accordance with the provisions of 
that section.  417 
  The owner or tindal shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees.  
127. If the owner f ails to comply with section 418.  418 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees . 
128. If the provisions of section 419 are contravened.  419 The owner or tindal shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to two hundred rupees.  
129. 
  If any sailing vessel attempts to ply or proceed to sea 
without free board markings or is so loaded as to 
submerge such markings, or plies or proceeds to sea 
without a certificate of inspection as re quired by                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 421, or if any of the terms and 
conditions specified in such certificate are contravened.  420(3), 
421 The owner or tindal shall be 
liable to imprisonment which 
may exten d to six months, or to 
fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or both.  
130. If the owner fails to comply with section 423.  423 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees and in addition a 
fine which may extend to twenty 
rupees for every day during  
which the offence continues a fter 
conviction.  
131. If the owner fails to comply with section 425.  425 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
132. If any person contravenes section 426.  426 Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  206 
  
           1 2 3 4 
133. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of 
section 428.  428 Imprisonment which may extend 
to three months, or fine which 
may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or both.  
134. If the owner or tindal fails to comply with any of the 
provisi ons of section 429.  429 Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
135. If the owner or tindal fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) 
of section 430.  430(1) Imprisonment which may extend 
to three months, or fine which 
may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or both 
136. (a) If a sailing vessel is engaged in the coasting trade in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 431; or  
 
(b) if any of the terms and conditions im posed under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 431 are contravened  431(1) 
 
 
431(2) The owner, ti ndal or agent shall 
be liable to imprisonment which 
may extend to six months, or fine 
which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or both.  
1[136A .] If any person is guilty of an offence under                            
sub-section ( 1) of section 432.  432(1) Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or 
both.  
2[137. If the owner fails to comply with sub -section ( 1) of 
section 43 4-A 434A( 1) Imprisonment which may extend 
to six months or fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees , 
or both.]  
3[137A.  If an Indian fishing boat required to be registered under 
section 435C is not registered in accordance with the 
provisions of that section.  435C  The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
137B . If the owner of an Indian fishing boat fails to comply 
with the provisions of section 435 -H. 435H  The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
137C . If the provisions of section 435 -1 are contravened.  435-I The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
137D . If the provisions of section 435J are contravened . 435J  The owner, skipper, tindal or any 
other person in charge of the 
Indian fishing boat shall be liable 
to fine which may exten d to one 
thousand rupees and in addition 
to fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every day during 
which the offence continues after 
conviction.  
137E . If the provisions of section 435K are contravened.  435K  The owner, skipper, tindal or any 
other pers on in charge of the 
Indian fishing boat shall be liable 
to fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees and in addition 
to fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every day during 
which the offence continues after 
conviction.  
137F . If the provisions of section 435M are contravened.  435M  The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees and in addition 
to fine which may extend to fifty 
rupees for every day during 
which the offence continues after 
conviction.  
                                                      
1. Serial No. 137 renumbered as serial No. 136A by Act 41 of 1984, s. 22 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
2. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 16 (w.e.f. 15 -7-1985).  207 
        1 2 3 4 
137G . If the provisions of section 435N are contravened.  435N  The owner shall he liable to fine 
which may extend to two 
hundred rupees and in addition 
to fine which may extend to 
twenty rupees for every day 
during which the offence 
continues after conviction.  
137H. If the provisions of section 435 P are contravened.  435P  The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
137-I. If any person contravenes the provisions of section 
435Q.  435Q  The offender shall be liable to 
fine which may ext end to five 
hundred rupees.  
137J . If any person contravenes the provisions of section 
435S.  435S  The offender shall be liable to 
imprisonment which may extend 
to three months or fine which 
may extend to two hundred 
rupees or both.  
137K . If  the provision s of section 435T are contravened.  435T  The owner, skipper, tindal or 
any other  person in charge of the 
Indian  fishing boat shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to two hundred rupees.]  
138. (a) If the master is guilty of an offence under                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 444; or  
(b) if the owner, master or agent is guilty of an offence 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 444.  444(2) 
 
444(3) Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
139. If' any person exercises the profession of a ship su rveyor 
in contravention of section 450;  450 Fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
140. If any person does any act in contravention of                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 454 in respect of which no 
other penalty is provided.  454(2) Fine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
141. If any person is guilty of an offence under                         
sub-section ( 2) of section 456.  456(2) Fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees  
Procedure  
 437. Place of trial .―Any person committing any offence under this Act or any rule or regulation 
thereunder may be tried for the offence in any place in which he may be found or which the Central 
Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, direct in this behalf, or  in any other place in 
which the might be tried under any other law for the time being in force.  
438. Cognizance of offences .―The penalties to which masters and owners of  1[special trade 
passenger] and pilgrim ships are made liable by section 436 shall be enforced only on information laid 
at the instance of the certifying officer, or, at any port or place where there is no such officer at the 
instance of such other officer as the Central Government may specify in his behalf.  
439. Jurisdiction of Magistrate .―No court inferior to that of  2[Metropolitan Magistrate or a, 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence under this Act or any rule or regulation 
thereunder.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 69 of 1976, s. 2, for “unberthed passenger ” (w.e.f.1 -2-1976).  
2. Subs.  by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Sch edule, for “presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class ” 
(w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  
 208 
 440. Special provision regarding punishment .―Notwithstanding anything contain ed in 
1[section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ,] it shall be lawful for a 
2[Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate] to pass any sentence authorised by or under this 
Act on any person convicted of an offence under this Act or any rule or regulation thereunder.  
441. Offences by companies .―(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was i n charge of, and was 
responsible  to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offen ce was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this act has 
been committed by a company, and it is p roved that the offence was committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be dee med to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .― For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) 3[“company ” includes a co -operative society , a firm] or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
442. Depositions to be received in evidence when witnes s cannot be produced .―(1) 
Whenever, in the course of any legal proceeding under this Act instituted at any place in India before 
any 4[court or Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate] or before any person 
authorised by law or by consent of parties to receive evidence, the testimony of any witness is 
required  in relation to the subject -matter, and the defend ant or the person accused (as the case may 
be), after being allowed a reasonable opportunity for so doing, does not produce th e witness before 
the 5[court or Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate] or person so authorised, 
any deposition previously made by the witness  in relation to the same subject -matter before any 
Court,6[or justice or Judicial Magis trate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate] in any other 
place in India or, if elsewhere before a Marine Board or before any Indian consular officer, shall be 
admissible in evidence ― 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the p residing officer of the Court or of 
the 7[justice or Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate] or Marine Board 
or consular officer, before whom it is made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused had an opportunity by himself or  his agent of            
cross -examining the witness;  
(c) if the proceeding is criminal, on proof that the deposition was made in the presence of the 
person accused.  
(2) It shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature or official character of the person 
appearing to have signed such deposition; and a certificate by such person that the defendant or 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Sch edule,  for “section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898                     
(5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).   
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule, ibid., for “presidency magistrate or a m agistrate of the first class”                              
(w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
3. Subs . by Act 43 of 1981, s. 11, for “Company includes a firm ” (w.e.f. 28-9-1981).   
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Sch edule,  for “court or magistrate" (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  
5.  Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule,  ibid., for “court, magistrate ”(w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  
6. Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule,  ibid., for  “, justice or  magistrate ” (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  
7. Subs. by s. 17 and the Sch edule,  ibid., for  “justice, magistrate ” (w.e.f.18 -5-1983).  209 
 person accused had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness, and that the deposition, if made in 
a criminal proceeding was made in the presence  of the person accused, shall, unless the contrary is 
proved, be sufficient evidence that he had that opportunity and that it was so made.  
443. Power to detain foreign ship that has occasioned damage .―(1) Whenever any damage 
has in any part of the world been caused to property belonging to the Government or to any citizen of 
India or a company by a ship other than an In dian ship and at any time there after that ship is found 
within Indian jurisdiction,  the High Court may, upon the application of any person who alleges that 
the damage was caused by the misconduct or want of skill of the master or any member of the crew of 
the ship, issue an order directed to any proper officer or other officer named in t he order requiring him 
to detain the ship until such time as the owner, master or consignee thereof has satisfied any claim in 
respect of the damage or has given security to the satisfaction of the High Court to pay all costs and 
damages that may be awarde d in any legal proceedings that may be instituted in respect of the 
damage, and any officer to whom the orders directed shall detain the ship accordingly.  
(2) Whenever it appears that before an application can be made under this section, the ship in 
respec t of which the application is to be made will have departed from India of the territorial waters of 
India, any proper officer may detain the ship for such time as to allow the application to be made and 
the result thereof to be communicated to the officer detaining the ship, and that officer shall not be 
liable for any costs or damages in respect of the detention unless the same is proved to have been 
made without reasonable grounds.  
(3) In any legal proceedings in relation to any such damage aforesaid, the  person giving security 
shall be made a defendant and shall for the purpose of such proceeding be deemed to be the owner of 
the ship that has occasioned the damage.  
444. Power to enforce detention of ship .―(1) Where under this Act a ship is authorised or 
ordered to be detained, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy or any port officer, pilot, 
harbour master, conservator of port or customs collector may detain the ship.  
(2) If any ship after detention , or after service on the master of any notice of, or order for, such 
detention proceeds to sea before she is released by competent authority, the master of the ship shall be 
guilty of an offence under this sub -section.  
(3) When a ship so proceeding to sea  takes to sea, when on board thereof in the execution of his 
duty any person authorised under  this Act to detain or survey t he ship, the owner, master or, agent of 
such ship shall each be liable to pay all expenses of, and incidental to, such person being so taken to 
sea and shall also be guilty of an offence under this sub -section.  
(4) When any owner, or master or agent is convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 3), the 
convicting magistrate may inquire into and determine the amount payable on account o f expenses by 
such owner, master or agent under that sub -section and may direct that the same shall be recovered 
from him in the manner provided for the recovery of fines.  
445. Levy of wages, etc., by distress of movable property or ship .―(1) When an order under 
this Act for the payment of any wages or other sums of money is made by a  1[court or Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate] or other officer or authority, and the money is 
not paid at the time or in the  manner directed, the sum mentioned in the order with such further sum 
as may be thereby awarded for costs, may be levied by distress and sale of the mov able property of 
the person directed to pay the same under a warrant to be issued for that purpose by  2[such a 
magistrate.]  
(2) Where any  3[court or Judicial Magistrate of the, first class or Metropolitan Magistrate or other 
officer] or authority has power under this Act, to make an order directing payment to be made of any 
seaman ‟s wages, fines or other su ms of money, then if the person so directed to pay the same is the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “court, magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “a magistrate” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “court, magistrate or other  officer” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  210 
 master, owner or agent of a ship and the same is not paid at the time or in the manner directed by the 
order of the  1[court or Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistr ate or officer] or 
authority may, in addition to any other power it or he may have for the purpose of compelling 
payment by warrant, direct the amount remaining unpaid to be levied by distress and sale of the ship 
and her equipment.  
446. Notice to be given  to consular representative of proceedings taken in respect of foreign 
ship.―If any ship other than an Indian ship is detained under this Act, or if any proceedings are taken 
under this Act against the master, owner or agent of any such ship, notice shall forthwith be served on 
the consular officer of the country in which the ship is registered, at or nearest to the port where the 
ship is for the time being, and such notice shall specify the grounds on which the ship has been 
detained or the proceedings hav e been taken.  
447. Application of fines .―2[A Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be,] imposing a fine under this Act may, if he thinks fit, direct the whole 
or any part thereof to be applied in compensating any person for any detriment which he ma y have 
sustained by the act or default in respect of which the fine is imposed or in or towards payment of the 
expenses of the prosecution.  
448. Service of documents .―Where for the purposes of this Act, any document is to be served 
on any perso n, that docu ment may be served ― 
(a) in any case by delivering a copy thereof personally to the person to be served, or by 
leaving the same at his last place of abode, or by post; and  
(b) if the document is to be served on the master of a ship, where there is one, or o n a person 
belonging to a ship, by leaving the same for him on board that ship, with the person being or 
appearing to be in command or charge of the ship; and  
(c) if the document is to be served on the master of a ship where there is no master and the 
ship is in India, on the owner of the ship, or if such owner is not in India, on some agent of the 
owner residing in India, or, where no such agent is known or can be found, by affixing a copy 
thereof to the master of the ship.  
PART XVII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
449. Power to appoint examiners and to make rule s as to qualifications of ship 
surveyors .―The Central Government may appoint persons for the purpose of examining the 
qualifications of persons desirous of practicing the profession of a ship surveyor at any por t in India 
and may make rules ― 
(a) for the conduct of such examinations and qualifications to be required;  
(b) for the grant of certificates to qualified persons;  
(c) for the fees to be paid for such examinations and certificates;  
(d) for holding inquiries into  charges of incompetency and misconduct on the part of holders 
of such certificates; and  
(e) for the cancellation and suspension of such certificates.  
 450. No person to practise as ship surveyor unless qualified .―No person shall in any port in 
which there  is a person exercising the profession of a ship surveyor and holding a certificate granted 
under section 449 exercise such profession in such port unless he holds a certificate granted under that 
section:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1983, s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “court, magistrate , officer ” (w.e.f. 18 -5-1983).  
2. Subs . by s. 17 and the Schedule,  for “A Magistrate ” (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).  
  211 
 Provided that nothing herein contained shall preve nt any person employed exclusively by Lloyd ‟s 
Register of Shipping or Bureau Veritas or any other classification society specified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf from discharging any of the duties of such 
employment or app ly to any person specially exempted by the Central Government from the operation 
of this section.  
451. Power of ship surveyor to inspect ship .―Any person holding a certificate granted under 
section 449 and exercising the profession of a ship surveyor at an y port in India may in the execution 
of his duties go on board a ship and inspect the same and every part thereof and the machinery, 
equipment and cargo and may require the unloading or removal of any cargo, ballast or tackle.  
452. Inquiry into cause of de ath on board Indian ship .―(1) if any person dies on board a 
foreign -going Indian ship, the proper officer at the port where the crew of the ship is discharged, or 
the proper officer  at any earlier port of call in India, shall, on the arrival of the ship at that port, inquire 
into the cause of death, and shall make in the official log book an endorsement to the effect, either that 
the statement of the cause of death in the book is in his opinion true, or the contrary, according to the 
result of the inquiry.  
(2) If, in the course of  any such inquiry, it appears to the proper officer that a death has been 
caused on board the ship by violence or other improper means, he shall either report the matter to the 
Director -General or, if the emergency of the case so requires, shall take immed iate steps for bringing 
the offender to trial.  
453. Certain persons deemed to be public servants .―The following persons shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely:―  
(a) every surveyo r; 
(b) every judge, assessor or other person acting under Part XII;  
(c) every person appointed under this Act to report information as to shipping casualties;  
(d) every person authorised under this Act to make any investigation or inquiry under Part X 
and all persons whom he calls to his aid;  
(e) every person directed to make an  investigation into an explosi on or fire on a ship under 
section 388;  
(f) every other officer or person appointed under this Act to perform any functions thereunder.  
 454. Powers of persons authorised to investigate, etc .―(1) Every judge, assessor, officer or 
other person who is empowered by this Act to make an investigation or inquiry or to board, su rvey, 
inspect or detain a ship―  
(a) may go on board any ship and inspect t he same or any part thereof, or any of the 
machinery, equipment or articles on board thereof, or any certificates of the master or other 
officer to which the provisions of this Act or any of the rules or regulations thereunder apply, not 
unnecessarily deta ining or delaying the ship from proceeding on any voyage, and if in 
consequence of any incident to the ship or for any other reason it is considered necessary so to do, 
may require the ship to be taken into dock for the purpose of inspection or survey;  
(b) may enter and inspect any premises, the entry and inspection of which appears to be 
requisite for the purpose aforesaid;  
(c) may, by summons under his hand, requires the attendance of all such persons as he thinks 
fit to call before him and examine them f or the purpose aforesaid, and may require answers or 
returns to any enquiries he thinks ” fit to make;  
(d) may require and enforce the production of all relevant books, papers, or documents;  
(e) may administer oaths or may in lieu of requiring or administer ing an oath, require every 
person examined by him to make and subscribe a declaration of the truth of the statements made 
by him in his examination; and  212 
 (f) may muster the crew of any such ship.  
(2) No person shall hinder or obstruct any officer or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) from 
going on board any ship or otherwise impede him in the execution of his duties or the exercise of his 
powers under this Act.  
Explanation .― In this section, “ship” includes a sailing vessel.  
1[454A. Power to prescribe alternative fittings, etc .―Where this Act requires that a particular 
fitting, material, appliances or apparatus or any type thereof shall be fitted or provided for in a ship or  
that any particular provision shall be made in a ship, the Central Government after satisfying itself by 
trials or otherwise that any other fitting, material, appliance or apparatus or type thereof or provision 
is as effective as that so required, may per mit, by general or special order, such other fitting, material, 
appliance or apparatus or type thereof or provision to be used or provided.]  
455. Exemption of public ships, foreign and Indian .―(1) This Act shall not except where 
specially provided, apply to ships belonging to any foreign prince or State and employed, otherwise 
than for profit in the public service of the foreign prince or State.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, direct that the, 
provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply to ships belonging to the Government or to any 
class of such ships.  
456. Power to exempt .―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central 
Governm ent may, by order in writing and upon such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, 
exempt any ship or sailing vessel or any master, tindal or seaman from any specified requirement 
contained in or prescribed in pursuance of this Act or dispense w ith the observance of any such 
requirement in the case of any ship or sailing vessel or any master, tindal or seaman, if it is satisfied 
that requirement has been substantially complied with or that compliance with the requirement is or 
ought to be dispens ed with in the circumstances of the case.  
2[Provided that no exemption which is prohibited by the Safety Convention shall be granted under 
this sub -section.]  
(2) Where an exemption is granted under sub -section ( 1) subject to any conditions, a breach of 
any of those conditions shall, without prejudice to any other remedy, be deemed to be an offence 
under this sub -section.  
457. General power to make rules .―Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rules generally to carry out the purposes of 
this Act.  
458. Provisions with respect to rules and regulations .―(1) All rules and regulations made 
under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) In making a rule or regulation under this Act, the Central Government may direct that a brea ch 
thereof shall be punishable―  
(a) in the case of a rule made under  3[section 331 or section 344 -I] with imprisonment which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both;  
(b) in the case of any other rule or regulation made under any other provision of this Act, with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupe es; 
and in either case if the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to fifty rupees 
for every day after the first during which the breach continues.  
4[(3) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be  after it is made 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1966, s. 36 (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
2. Added by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1966).  
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for “section 331” (w.e.f.28 -5-1966).  
4. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for sub -section (3)  (w.e.f.28 -5-1966).    213 
 comprised in one session or in  1[two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following, the se ssion or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or the regulations, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter, have effect only in such  modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.]  
459. Power to constitute committees to advise  on rules, regulations and scales of fees .―(1) 
The Central Government may, if it thinks fit, constitute one or more committees consisting of such 
number of persons as it may appoint thereto representing the interests principally affected or having 
special knowledge of the subject -matter, for the p urpose of advising it when considering the making 
or alteration of any rules, regulations or scales of fees under this Act or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act.  
(2) There shall be paid to the members of any such committee such travelling and ot her 
allowances as the Central Government may fix.  
(3) Committees may be constituted under this section to advise the Central Government either 
generally as regards any rules, regulations or scales of fees or as regards any class or classes of rules, 
regula tions or scales of fees in particular or for any other purpose connected with this Act.  
460. Protection of persons acting under Act .―No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any person for anything which is in good fa ith done or intended to be d one under this Act.  
2[460A. Removal of difficulties .―(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, in so far as they relate to the Safety Convention or to the Load Line Convention or to the 
Convention referred to in clause ( a) of section 356B, the Central Government may, by order published 
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty and giving effect to the provisions 
of such Convention : 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
date of publication of the Merchant Shipping (Am endment ) Act, 1970  (25 of 1970) , in the Official 
Gazette.  
(2) Every order ma de under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two successive sessions.]  
PART XVIII  
REPEALS AND SAV INGS  
461. Repeals and savings .―(1) The enactments specified in Part I of the Schedule  are hereby 
repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof.  
(2) The enactments specified in Part II of the Schedule, in so far as they extend to and operate as 
part of the law of India,  are hereby repealed.  
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of any enactment by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2),― 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye -law, order or exemption issued, made or granted 
under any enactment hereby repealed shall, until revok ed, have effect as if it had been issued, 
made or granted under the corresponding provision of this Act;  
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 69 of 1976, s. 26, for  “two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so 
laid or the session immediately following ”(w.e.f.1 -12-1976).   
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1970, s.19, for section 460A (w.e.f.19 -12-1970).  
 214 
 (b) any officer appointed and any body elected or constituted under any enactment hereby 
repealed shall continue and shall be deemed to have been appoin ted, elected or constituted, as the 
case may be, under this Act;  
(c) any document referring to any enactment hereby repealed shall be construed as referring to 
this Act or to the corresponding provision of this Act;  
(d) any fine levied under any enactment hereby repealed may be recovered as if it had been 
levied under this Act;  
(e) any offence committed under any enactment hereby repealed may be prosecuted and 
punished as if it had been committed under this Act;  
(f) sailing vessels registered under any enac tment hereby repealed shall be deemed to have 
been registered under this Act;  
(g) mortgages of ships recorded in any register book maintained at any port in India under any 
enactment hereby repealed shall be deemed to have been recorded in the register boo k under the 
corresponding provision of this Act;  
(h) any licence, certificate of competency or service, certificate of survey, A or B certificate, 
safety certificate, qualified safety certificate, radio telegraphy certificate, radio telephony 
certificate, safety equipment certificate, exemption certificate, international or Indian load line 
certificate or any other certificate or document issued, made or granted under any enactment 
hereby repealed and in force at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed  to have been 
issued, made or granted under this Act and shall, unless cancelled under this Act, continue in 
force until the date shown in the certificate or document, as the case may be.  
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be h eld to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 215 
 THE SCHEDULE  
ENACTMENTS REPEALED  
PART I  
[See section 461 ( 1)] 
 
Year  No. Short title  Extent of repeal  
1838  19 The Coasting Vessels Act, 1838.  In so far as it applies to sea -going ships 
fitted with mechanical means of propulsion 
and to sailing vessels.  
1841  10 The Indian Registration of Ships Act, 
1841  The whole.  
1850  11 The Indian Registration of Ships Act 
(1841) Amendment Act, 1850.  The whole.  
1923  21 The Indian Merchant Shipping Act, 
1923.  The whole.  
1946  21 The Merchant Seamen (Litigation) 
Act, 1946.  The whole.  
1947  26 The Control of Shipping Act, 1947.  The whole.  
1949  18 The Merchant Shipping Law s 
(Extension to Acceding States and 
Amendment) Act, 1949.  The whole.  
 
PART II  
[See section 461  (2)] 
 
Year  Short title  
1823  Lascars Act (4 Geo. 4 c. 80).  
1894  Merchant Shipping Act (57 and 5 8 Vict., c.  60). 
1897  Merchant Shipping Act (60 and 61 Vict., c . 59).  
1898  Merchant Shipping (Liability of Ship -owners) Act (61 and 62 Vict., c. 14).  
1898  Merchant Shipping (Mercantile Marine Fund) Act (61 and 62 Vict., c. 44).  
1900  Merchant Shipping (Liability of Ship -owners and others) Act (63 and 64 Vict., c. 32 ). 
1906  Merchant Shipping Act (6 Edw. 7, c. 48).  
1907  Merchant Shipping Act (7 Edw . 7, c. 52).  
1911  Merchant Shipping (Seamen ‟s Allotment) Act (1 and 2 Geo. 5, c. 8).  
1911  Merchant Shipping Act ( 1 and 2 Geo. 5, c. 42).  
1911  Maritime Conventions Act (1  and 2 Geo. 5, c. 57).  
1914  Merchant Shipping (Certificate) Act (4 and 5 Geo. 5, c. 42).  
1916  Merchant Shipping (Salvage) Act (6 and 7 Geo. 5, c. 41).  216 
  
Year  Short title  
1919  Merchant Shipping (Wireless Telegraphy) Act (9 and 10 Geo. 5, c. 38).  
1921  Merchant Shipping Act (11 and 12 Geo. 5, c. 28).  
1923  Merchant Shipping Act (Amdt.) Act (13 and 14 Geo. 5, c. 40).  
1925  Merchant Shipping (Equivalent Provisions) Act (15 and 16 Geo. 5, c. 37).  
1932  Merchant Shipping (Safely and Load Line Conventions) Ac t (22 and 23 Geo. 5, c. 9).  
1936  Merchant Shipping (Carriage of Munitions to Spain) Act (1 Edw. 8 and 1 Geo. 6, c. 1),  
1937  Merchant Shipping (Spanish Frontiers Observation) Act (1 Edw. 8 and 1  Geo. 6, c. 19).  
1937  Merchant Shipping Act (1 Edw. 8 and 1 Geo. 6, c. 23).  
1937  Merchant Shipping (Superannuation Contributions) Act (1 Geo. 6, c. 4).  
1940  Merchant Shipping (Salvage) Act (3 and 4 Geo. 6, c. 43).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
--------------------------The Orissa Weights and Measures (Delhi Repeal) Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE ORISSA WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (DELHI REPEAL) ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1958  
[30th December, 1958 .] 
An Act to provide for the repeal of the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 1943, in its application 
to the Union territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Orissa Weights and Measures (Delhi Repeal) Act, 1958.  
2. Definition .―In this Act, ― 
(a) “Orissa Act ” means the Orissa Weights and Measures Act, 1943 (Orissa Act 7 of 1943), as 
extended to Delhi by notification under section 7 of the Delhi Laws Act, 1912 (13 of 1912);  
(b) “Rajasthan Act ” means the Rajasthan Weights and Measures (Enforcement)                        
Act, 1958 (Rajasthan Act 32 of 1958),  as extended to the Union territory of Delhi by notification 
under section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950).  
3. Repeal of Orissa Act .―On the date on which the Rajasthan Act  or any provision contained 
therein comes into force by virtue of a notification issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 of that Act in 
the Union territory of Delhi or any part thereof in respect of any class of undertakings or any class of 
goods, the Or issa Act or any provision contained therein, which is applicable to those undertakings or 
goods in the said territory or part thereof, as the case may be, shall stand repealed:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of the Ac t so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so 
repealed; or  
(c) any  penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the 
Act so repealed; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishm ent as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if that Act had not been repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE PROBATION OF OFFENDERS ACT, 1958  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power of court to release certain offenders after admonition.  
4. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation of good conduct . 
5. Power of court to require released offenders to pay compensation and costs . 
6. Restrictions on imprisonment of offenders under twenty -one years of age . 
7. Report of probation officer to be confidential . 
8. Variation of conditions of proba tion. 
9. Procedure in case of offender failing to observe conditions of bond . 
10. Provision as to sureties . 
11. Courts competent to make order under the Act, appeal and revision and powers of courts in 
appeal and revision.  
12. Removal of disqualification attaching to con viction . 
13. Probation officers . 
14. Duties of probation officers . 
15. Probation officers to be public servants . 
16. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
17. Power to make rules . 
18. Saving of operation of certain enactments . 
19. Section 562 of the Code not to apply in certain areas.  
 
  2 
 THE PROBATION OF OFFENDERS ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1958  
[16th May, 1958 .] 
An Act to provide for the release of offenders on probation or after due admonition and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Probation of Offenders 
Act, 1958.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and K ashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette , appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different parts of the State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the conte xt other wise requires ,— 
(a) “Code ” means the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ); 
(b) “probation officer ” means an officer appointed to be a probation officer or reco gnised as such 
under section 13 ; 
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Cod e of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ), shall have the me anings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
3. Power of court to release certain offenders after admonition .—When any person is found guilty 
of having committed an offence punishable under section  379 or section  380 or section  381 or 
section  404 or section  420 of the Indian Penal Code, (45  of 1860) or  any offence punishable with 
imprisonment for not more than two years, or with fine, or with both, under the Indian Penal Code or 
any other  law, and  no previous conviction is proved against  him and the court by which the person is 
found guilty is of opinio n that, having regard to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the 
offence, and the character of the offender, it is expedient so to do,  then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any  other  law for the time being in force, the court may, i nstead of sentencing  him to any 
punishment or releasing  him on probation of good conduct under section  4, release  him after due 
admonition.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, previous conviction against a person  shall include any 
previous  order  made against  him under this section or section  4. 
4. Power of court to release certain offenders on probation of good conduct .—(1) When any 
person is  found guilty of having committed an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment  for life 
and the court by which the person is found guilty is of  opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of 
the case including the  nature of the offence and the character of the offender, it is expedient to  release  him 
on probation of good conduc t, then, notwithstanding  anything contained in any  other  law for the time 
being  in force, the court may, instead of sentencing  him at once to any  punishment direct that he be 
released on  his entering into a bond,  with or without sureties, to appear and rec eive sentence when called 
upon during  such period, not exceeding three years, as the court may direct, and in  the meantime to keep 
the peace and be of good behaviour:  
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an offender unless it is satisfi ed that the 
offender or his surety , if any, has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place over which the 
court exercises jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live during the period for which he enters 
into the bond.  
(2) Before  making any  order under  sub-section  (1), the court  shall take into consideration the report, 
if any, of  the probation officer concerned in relation to the case.  3 
 (3) When an order under sub -section ( 1) is made, the court may, if it is of opinion that in the  interests 
of the offender and of the public it is expedient so to do, in addition pass a supervision order directing that 
the offender shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named in the order during such 
period, not being less than one  year, as may be specified therein, and may in such supervision order 
impose such conditions as it deems necessary for the due supervision of the offender.  
(4) The court making  a supervision  order under  sub-section ( 3) shall  require the offender, before he  is 
released, to enter into a bond, with or  without sureties, to observe the conditions specified in such  order 
and such additional conditions with respect to residence, abstention from  intoxicants or any  other  matter 
as the court may,  having regard to the  particular circumstances, consider fit to impose for  preventing a 
repetition of the same offence or a commission of  other  offences by the offender.  
(5) The court making a supervision order under sub-section ( 3) shall explain to the offender the terms 
and conditio ns of the order and shall forth with furnish one copy of the supervision order to each of the 
offenders, the sureties , if any, and the probation officer concerned.  
5. Power of court to require released offenders to pay compensation and costs .—(1) The court 
directing the release of an offender under section  3 or section  4, may, if it thinks fit, make at the same 
time a further  order directing  him to pay — 
(a) such compensation as the court thinks reasonable for loss or injury caused to any person by 
the commission of the offence; and  
(b) such costs of the proceedings as the court thinks reasonable.  
(2) The amount  ordered to be paid under  sub-section ( 1) may be recovered as a fine in accordance 
with the provisions of sections  386 and 387 of the Code.  
(3) A civil court trying any suit, arising out of the same matter for which the offender is 
prosecuted,  shall take into account any amount paid or recovered as compensation under  sub-section ( 1) 
in awarding damages.  
6. Restrictions on imprisonment of offend ers under twenty -one years of age .—(1) When any 
person under twenty -one years of age is found guilty of having committed an offence punishable with 
imprisonment (but not with imprisonment for life), the court by which the person is found guilty  shall not 
sentence  him to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances of the case 
including the nature of the offence and the character of the offender, it would not be desirable to deal 
with him under section  3 or section  4, and if t he court passes any sentence of imprisonment on the 
offender, it  shall record its reasons for doing so.   
(2) For the purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not be desirable to deal under section  3 or 
section  4 with an offender referred to in sub-section ( 1), the court  shall call for a report from the probation 
officer and consider the report, if any, and any  other  information available to it relating to the character 
and physical and  mental condition of the offender.  
7. Report of probation officer to be confidential .—The report of a probation officer referred to 
in sub-section ( 2) of section  4 or sub-section ( 2) of section  6 shall be treated as confidential : 
Provided that the court may, if it so thinks fit, communicate the  substance thereof to the offender and 
may give  him an opportunity of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated in                  
the report.  
8. Variation of condition s of probation .—(1) If, on the application  of a probation officer, any court 
which passes an  order under section  4 in respect of an  offender is of opinion that in the interests of the 
offender and the public it  is expedient or necessary to vary the conditions of any bond entered into by  the 
offender, it may, at any time during the period when the bond is effective,  vary the bond by extending or 
diminishing the duration thereof so, however,  that it  shall not exceed three years from the date of the  
original  order or by altering the conditions thereof or by  inserting additional conditions therein:  4 
 Provided  that no such variation  shall be made without giving the offender and the  surety or 
sureties  mentioned in the bond an opportunity of being heard.  
(2) If any surety refuses  to consent to any variation proposed to be made under  sub-section  (1), the 
court may require the offender to enter into a fresh bond and if the  offender refuses or fails to do so, the 
court may sentence  him for the  offence of which he  was found guilty.  
(3) Notwithstanding  anything hereinbefore contained, the court which passes an  order under  
section  4 in respect of an offender may, if it is satisfied on an application made by the probation officer, 
that the conduct of the offender  has been such as to make it unnecessary that he  should be kept any longer  
under supervision, discharge the bond or bonds entered into by  him. 
9. Procedure in case of offender failing to observe conditions of bond .—(1) If the court which 
passes an  order under section  4 in respect of an offender or any court which could have dealt with the 
offender in respect of  his original offence has reason to believe, on the report of a probation officer 
or otherwise, that the offender has failed to observe any of the condit ions of the bond or bonds entered 
into by  him, it may issue a warrant for  his arrest or may, if it thinks fit, issue a summons to  him and  his 
sureties, if any, requiring  him or them to attend before it at such time as may be specified in the summons.  
(2) The court before which an offender is so brought or appears may either remand  him to custody 
until the case is concluded or it may grant  him bail, with or without surety, to appear on the date which it 
may fix for hearing.  
(3) If the court, after hearing th e case, is satisfied that the offender has failed to observe any of the 
conditions of the bond or bonds entered into by  him, it may forthwith — 
(a) sentence  him for the original offence; or  
(b) where the failure is for the first time, then, without prejudic e to the continuance in force of the 
bond, impose upon  him a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees.  
(4) If a penalty imposed under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) is not paid within such period as the court 
may fix, the court may sentence the offender for the o riginal offence.  
10. Provision as to sureties .—The provisions of sections  122, 126, 126A, 406A, 514, 514A, 514B 
and 515 of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of bonds and sureties given under this Act.  
11. Courts competent to make order un der the Act, appeal and revision and powers of courts in 
appeal and revision .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any  other  law, an  order 
under this Act, may be made by any court  empowered to try and sentence the offender to imprisonment 
and also by the  High Court or any  other  court when the case comes before it on appeal or in revision.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, where an  order under section  3 or section  4 is 
made by any court trying the offender (other than a  High Court), an appeal  shall lie to the court to which 
appeals  ordinarily lie from the sentences of the former court.  
(3) In any case where any person under twenty -one years of age is found guilty of having committed 
an offence and the court by which he is fo und guilty declines to deal with  him under section  3 or 
section  4, and passes against  him any sentence of imprisonment with or without fine from which no 
appeal lies or is preferred, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any  other  law, th e 
court to which appeals  ordinarily lie from the sentences of the former court may, either of its own motion 
or on an application made to it by the convicted person or the probation officer, call for and examine the 
record of the case and pass such  order t hereon as it thinks fit.  
(4) When an  order has been made under section  3 or section  4 in respect of an offender, the Appellate 
Court or the  High Court in the exercise of its power of revision may set aside such  order and in lieu 
thereof pass sentence on su ch offender according to law:  
Provided that the Appellate Court or the  High Court in revision  shall not inflict a greater punishment 
than might have been inflicted by the court by which the offender was found guilty.  5 
 12. Removal of disqualification attaching to conviction .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other  law, a person found guilty of an offence and dealt with under the provisions of section  3 or 
section  4 shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attachin g to a convicti on of an offence under such law : 
Provided that nothing in this section  shall apply to a person who, after  his release under section  4 is 
subsequently  sentenced for the original offence.  
13. Probation officers .—(1) A probation officer under t his Act  shall be — 
(a) a person appointed to  be a probation officer by the State Government or recognised as such by 
the State Government; or  
(b) a person provided for  this purpose by a society recognised in this behalf by the State 
Government; or  
(c) In any exceptional  case, any  other  person who, in the opinion of the court, is fit to act as a 
probation officer  in the special circumstances of the case.  
(2) A court which passes an  order under section  4 or the district magistrate of the district in  which the 
offender for the time being resides may, at any time, appoint any  probation officer in the place of the 
person named in the supervision  order.  
Expla nation.—For the purposes of this section, a presidency town shall be deemed to be a district and 
chief p residency magistrate shall be deemed to be the district magistrate of that district.  
(3) A probation officer, in the exercise of his duties under this Act, shall be subject to the control of 
the district magistrate of the district in which the offender for  the time being resides.  
14. Duties of probation officers .—A probation officer  shall,  subject to such conditions and 
restrictions, as may be  prescribed, — 
(a) inquire, in accordance  with any directions of a court, into the circumstances or home 
surroundings of  any person accused of an offence with a view to assist the court in determining  the 
most suitable  method of dealing with  him and  submit reports to the court;  
(b) supervise probationer s and other  persons placed under  his supervision and, whe re necessary, 
endeavour to find them suitable  employment;  
(c) advise and assist  offenders in the payment of compensation or costs  ordered by the Court;  
(d) advise and assist, in  such cases and in such manner as may be prescribed, persons who have 
been  released under section  4; and  
(e) perform such  other duties as may be prescribed.  
15. Probation officers to be public servants .—Every probation officer and every other officer 
appointed in pursuance of this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or  other  legal proceeding  shall lie against the 
State Government or any probation officer or any  other  officer appointed under this Act in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules 
or orders made thereunder.  
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, with the approval of the Central 
Government, by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) appointment of prob ation officers, the terms and conditions of their service and the area 
within which they are to exercise jurisdiction;  
(b) duties of probation officers under this Act and the  submission of reports by them;  6 
 (c) the conditions on which societies may be recog nised for the purposes of clause ( b) of                 
sub-section (1) of section  13; 
(d) the payment of remuneration and expenses to probation officers or of a  subsidy to any society 
which provides probation officers; and  
(e) any  other  matter which is to  be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) All rules made under this section  shall be  subject to the condition of previous publication 
and shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before the State Legislature.  
18. Saving of operation of certain enactments .—Nothing in this Act  shall affect the provisions of 
section  31 of the Reformatory  Schools Act,  1897  (8 of 1897), or  sub-section ( 2) of section  5 of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act,  1947 (2  of 1947),  1* * * or of any law in force in any State relating to  
juvenile offenders or  Borstal Schools.  
19. Section 562 of the Code not to apply in certain areas .—Subject to the provisions of                    
section 18   section 562 of the Code shall cease to apply to the States or parts thereof in which this Act is 
brought into force.  
 
 
                                                           
1. The words and figures “or the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls A ct, 1956” omitted by Act 46 of 1978,               
s. 20 (w.e.f. 2 -1-1979 ). 
--------------------------The Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1958--------------------------
1 THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (SALARIES AND CONDITIONS  
OF SERVICE) ACT, 1958  
―― 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
―― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II  
LEAVE 
3. Kinds of leave admissible to a Judge. 
4. Leave account showing the amount of leave due.
4A. Leave encashment. 
5. Aggregate amount of leave which may be granted. 
5A. Commutation of leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances. 
6. Grant of leave not due. 
7. Special disability leave. 
8. Extraordinary leave. 
9. Leave allowances. 
10. Combining leave with vacation. 
11. Consequences of over staying leave or vacation. 
12. Authority competent to grant leave. 
CHAPTER III 
SALARIES AND  PENSIONS 
12A. Salaries of the Judges. 
13. Pension payable to Judges. 
13A. Benefit of added years of service.
14. Special provisions for pension in respect of Judges who are members of service. 
15. Power of President to add to the service for pension. 
16. Extraordinary pension. 2 16A. Family pension and gratuity. 
SECTIONS
16B. Additional quantum of pension or family pension. 
17. Pension payable to a Judge who was in receipt of pension at the time of appointment as such. 
18. [Omitted .] 
19. Commutation of pension. 
20. Provident fund. 
20A. Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme. 
21. Authority competent to grant pension. 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
22. Travelling allowance to a Judge. 
23. Facilities for rent-free houses and other conditions of service. 
23A. Conveyance facilities.  
23B. Sumptuary allowance. 
23C. Medical facilities for retired Judges. 
23D. Exemption from liability to pay Income-tax on certain perquisites received by a Judge .
24. Power to make rules. 
25. Savings. 
THE SCHEDULE. 3 4 THE SUPREME COURT JUDGES (SALARIES AND CONDITIONS  
OF SERVICE) ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1958  
[17th October , 1958.]  
An Act to regulate 1[salaries and certain conditions of service] of the Judges of the Supreme 
Court. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Supreme Court Judges 2[(Salaries and Conditions of 
Service)] Act, 1958. 
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―  
(a) “acting Chief Justice” means a Judge appointed under article 126 of the Constitution to 
perform the duties of the Chief Justice of India;  
(b) “actual service” includes― 
(i) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge, or in the performance of such other functions 
as he may, at the request of the President, undertake to discharge; and  
(ii) vacations;  
(c) “Chief Justice” means the Chief Justice of India, but does not include an acting Chief 
Justice; 
(d) “High Court” means the High Court for a State; 
(e) “Judge” means a Judge of the Supreme Court and includes the Chief Justice and an acting 
Chief Justice; 
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) “service as a Judge in India” means service rendered 3[in the Supreme Court] and in one 
or more of the High Courts, and “Judge in India” and “service for pension as a Judge in India” 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(h) “service for pension” includes―  
(i) actual service; 
 (ii) time spent by a Judge of a High Court in attending the sittings of the Supreme Court 
as an ad hoc  Judge under article 127 of the Constitution, if he is subsequently appointed as a 
Judge:  
4[(iii) the amount, actually taken, of each period of leave on full allowances at a rate equal 
to the monthly rate of the salary;]  
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1998, s. 5, for “certain conditions of service” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “(Conditions of Service)” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 18, for certain words (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
4. Subs. by Act 57 of 1980, s. 7, for sub-clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 10-12-1980). 5 (i) “vacation” means such period or periods during a year as may be fixed as vacation by or 
under the rules of the Supreme Court made with the prior approval of the President. 
CHAPTER II  
LEAVE
3. Kinds of leave admissible to a Judge .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, leave granted 
to a Judge may be at his option either― 
1[(a) leave on full allowances (including commuted leave on half allowances into leave on full 
allowances on medical certificate); or] 
(b) leave on half allowances; or 
(c) leave partly on full allowances and partly on half allowances. 
(2) For the purposes of this Chapter, any period of leave on full allowances shall be reckoned as 
double that period of leave on half allowances. 
2[(3) For the purposes of this Chapter, casual leave may be admissible to a Judge in a calendar 
year, for such number of days and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.] 
4. Leave account showing the amount of leave due .―(1) A leave account shall be kept for each 
Judge showing therein the amount of leave due to him in terms of leave on half allowances. 
(2) In the leave account of a Judge― 
(a) there shall be credited to him― 
(i) one-fourth of the time spent by him on actual service; 3*** 
(ii) where the Judge, by reason of his having been detained for the performance of duties 
not connected with the Supreme Court, cannot enjoy any vacation which he would otherwise 
have been entitled to enjoy had he not been so detained, as compensation for the vacation not 
enjoyed, a period equal to double the period by which the vacation enjoyed by him in any 
year falls short of one month; 
4[(iii) where the Judge was, prior to his appointment as such, a Judge of a High Court, the 
period of leave earned by him as a Judge of the High Court, 5***; and]  
(b) there shall be debited to him all leave with allowances taken by him.  
(3) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of May, 1958. 
6[4A. Leave encashment.―A Judge shall be entitled in his entire service, including the period of 
service rendered either as a Judge of a High Court or in a pensionable post under the Union or a State 
or on re-employment, if any, to claim the cash equivalent of leave salary on his retirement 7[in respect 
respect of the period of leave at his credit, calculated on full allowances basis,] to the extent of the 
1. Subs. by Act 77 of 1971, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e. f. 15-1-1972). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 19 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 77 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-5-1958). 
4.  Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-5-1958). 
5. The certain words omitted by Act 7 of 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 8-1-1999).
6. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 8-1-1999). 
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 20, for “in respect of the period of earned leave at his credit” (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 6 maximum period prescribed for encashment of such leave under the All India Service (Leave) Rules, 
1955.] 
5. Aggregate amount of leave which may be granted .―(1) The aggregate amount of leave 
which may be granted to a Judge during the whole period of his service as such shall not exceed in 
terms of leave on half allowances three years 1[including the period credited to his leave account 
under sub-section ( 2) (a) (iii) of section 4 as leave earned by him as a Judge of a High Court] together 
with the aggregate of the periods, if any, credited to his leave account under sub-section ( 2) (a) (ii) of 
section 4 as compensation for vacation not enjoyed.   
(2) The aggregate amount of leave on full allowances which may be granted to a Judge during the 
whole period of his service as such shall not exceed one-twenty-fourth of the period spent by him on 
actual service together with one-half of the aggregate periods, if any, 2[credited to his leave account―  
(a) under sub-section ( 2) (a) (ii) of section 4 as compensation for vacation not enjoyed, and  
(b) under sub-section ( 2) (a) (iii) of section 4 as leave earned by him as a Judge of a High 
Court.]  
 (3) 3[Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2) of section 5A, the maximum period of leave 
which may be granted] at one time shall be, in the case of leave on full allowances, five months and in 
the case of leave with allowances of any kind, sixteen months.  
4[5A. Commutation of leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances .―(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2) of section 5, a Judge may be permitted to 
commute leave on half allowances into leave on full allowances on medical certificate up to a 
maximum of three months during the whole period of his leave as a Judge.  
(2) In computing the maximum period of leave on full allowances which may be granted at one 
time to a Judge under sub-section ( 3) of section 5, the amount of commuted leave permitted to him 
under this section shall not be taken into account.] 
6. Grant of leave not due.―Subject to the maximum limit specified in sub-section ( 1) of    
section 5, leave on half allowances may be granted to a Judge in excess of the amount at his credit―  
(i) on medical certificate; or  
(ii) otherwise than on medical certificate, for a period not exceeding six months, or for two or 
more periods not exceeding in the aggregate six months, during the whole period of his service as 
a Judge:  
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if the Judge is not expected to return to duty at the 
end of such leave and earn the leave granted. 
7. Special disability leave .―Special disability leave may be granted to a Judge under such 
circumstances, on such allowances and for such periods as may be prescribed. 
8. Extraordinary leave .―Extraordinary leave may be granted to a Judge for a period not 
exceeding six months, or for two or more periods not exceeding in the aggregate six months, during 
1. Ins. by Act 77 of 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 17-10-1958). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for  “credited to his leave account under sub-section ( 2) (a) (ii) of section 4 as compensation for 
vacation not enjoyed” (w.e.f. 17-10-1958). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “The maximum period of leave which may be granted” (w.e.f. 17-10-1958). 
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-1-1972). 7 the whole period of his service as a Judge in excess of any leave permissible under the foregoing 
provisions of this Chapter, but no salary or allowances shall be payable in respect of such leave.  
1[9. Leave allowances .―The monthly rate of leave salary payable to a Judge shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 3.]  
10. Combining leave with vacation .―A Judge may be permitted to combine vacation on full 
salary with leave, if― 
(a) where the vacation consists of one continuous period, the leave is taken either at the 
commencement or at the end of the vacation but not at both; 
(b) where the vacation is divided into two periods, the leave is taken for the interval, or part of 
the interval, between the two periods of that vacation, or for the interval, or part of the interval, 
between the second period of that vacation and the commencement of the next ensuing vacation: 
Provided that no such permission to combine vacation with leave shall be granted, if it becomes 
necessary to appoint an acting Chief Justice during the period of vacation or if the Judge is not 
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave. 
11. Consequences of over staying leave or vacation .―(1)If a Judge overstays his leave or any 
vacation, whether combined with leave or not, he shall receive no salary in respect of the period of his 
absence in excess of the leave granted to him or beyond the end of the vacation, as the case may be:  
Provided that, if such absence is due to circumstances beyond his control, the period thereof may 
be treated as leave and may be debited to his leave account.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as requiring a Judge to rejoin on the expiration of the 
period of leave when that period expires immediately before the commencement of a vacation, nor as 
authorising any acting Chief Justice to continue to hold the acting appointment during the vacation. 
12. Authority competent to grant leave .―The authority competent to grant or refuse leave to a 
Judge or to revoke or curtail the leave already granted to a Judge shall be the President who shall 
exercise the power after consultation with the Chief Justice. 
CHAPTER III 
2[SALARIES AND PENSIONS] 
3[12A. Salaries of the Judges.―(1) There shall be paid to the Chief Justice of India, by way of 
salary, 4[ 5[two lakh eighty thousand rupees per mensem]]. 
(2) There shall be paid to a Judge of the Supreme Court, by way of salary, 6[ 7[two lakh fifty 
thousand rupees per mensem] ]. 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 21, for section 9 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1998, s. 7, for the heading “PENSIONS” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
4. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 8, for “thirty-three thousand rupees per mensem” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 6, for "one lakh rupees per mensem" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
6. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 8, for “thirty thousand rupees per mensem” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s 6, for "ninety thousand rupees per mensem” (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 8 13. Pension payable to Judges. ―Subject to the provisions of this Act, a pension shall be payable 
in accordance with the provisions of Part I of the Schedule to a Judge of the Supreme Court on his 
retirement if, but only if,― 
1*                                   *                                   *                                  *                                 * 
(b) he has attained the age of sixty-five years; or  
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated by ill-health.  
2[Explanation .―In this section, “Judge” means a Judge who has not held any other        
pensionable post under the Union or a State and includes a person who was in service as a Judge on 
the 20th May, 1954, and also includes a Judge having held any other pensionable post under the 
Union or a State, who has elected to receive the pension payable under Part I of the Schedule .] 
3[13A. Benefit of added years of service.―Subject to the provisions of this Act, a period of ten 
years shall be added to the service of a Judge for the purposes of his pension, who qualified for 
appointment as such judge under sub-clause ( b) of clause (3) of article 124 of the Constitution.] 
14. Special provisions for pension in respect of Judges who are members of service .―4[(1) 
Every Judge who has held any other pensionable post under the Union or a State shall, on his 
retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the provisions of Part III of the Schedule: 
Provided that every such Judge shall elect to receive the pension payable to him either under      
Part I of the Schedule, or as the case may be, Part III of the Schedule, and the pension payable to him 
shall be calculated accordingly.] 
5[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), any Judge to whom that sub-section 
applies and who is in service on or after the 1st day of October, 1974, may, if he has elected under the 
proviso to that sub-section to receive the pension payable to him under 6*** Part III of the        
Schedule before the date on which the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment 
Act, 1976 (36 of 1976), receives the assent of the President, cancel such election and elect afresh to 
receive the pension payable to him under Part I of the Schedule and any such Judge who dies before 
the date of such assent, shall be deemed to have elected afresh to be governed by the provisions of the 
said Part I if the provisions of that Part are more favourable in his case.] 
15. Power of President to add to the service for pension .―The President may, for special 
reasons, direct that any period not exceeding three months shall be added to the service for pension of 
a Judge, and any such period so added shall count for pension purposes― 
(a) in the case of a Judge who has served in the Supreme Court as Chief Justice, as service as 
Chief Justice; and  
(b) in the case of any other Judge, as service as any other Judge. 
16. Extraordinary pension .―Extraordinary pensions and gratuities may be granted to a Judge 
under such circumstances and on such scales as may be prescribed. 
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 46 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-4-2004). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 22, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-4-2004). 
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 23, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f 1-10-1974).
6. The words and figures “ Part II or, as the case may be,” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 23 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016).9 1[16A. Family pension and gratuity.―2[(1) Where a Judge who, being in service on or after the 
commencement of the High Court and Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment 
Act, 1986 (38 of 1986),― 
(a) dies before retirement, 3[family pension calculated at the rate of fifty per cent. of his 
salary] 4*** on the date of his death shall be payable to the person or persons entitled thereto and 
the amount so payable shall be paid from the day following the date of death of the Judge for a 
period of seven years or  for a period up to the date on  which the Judge would have  attained  the 
age of sixty-five years, had he survived, whichever is earlier, 5[and thereafter at the rate of thirty 
per cent. of his salary] 6***; and 
7[(b) dies after retirement on attaining the age of sixty-five years, 8[family pension shall be 
thirty per cent. of his salary] 2*** and shall be payable to the person or persons entitled thereto; 
(c) dies after retirement after seeking premature retirement and before attaining the age of 
sixty-five years, family pension shall be calculated at the rates specified in clause ( a) shall be 
payable to the person or persons entitled thereto.] 
9[Provided that in no case the amount of family pension calculated under this sub-section shall 
exceed the pension payable to the Judge under this Act.] 
Explanation .―For the purposes of determining the person or persons entitled to family pension 
under this sub-section,― 
(i) in relation to a Judge who elects or is eligible to receive pension under Part I of the 
Schedule, the rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force with regard to the person 
or persons entitled to family pension in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services,          
Group ‘A’, shall apply; 
(ii) in relation to a Judge who elects to receive pension under 10* * * Part III of the Schedule, 
the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge with respect to the person or 
persons entitled to family pension shall apply and his service as a Judge being treated as service 
therein.] 
(2) The rules, notifications and orders for the time being in force with respect to the grant of 
death-cum-retirement gratuity benefit to or in relation to an officer of the Central Civil Services,   
Class I (including the provisions relating to deductions from pension for the purpose) shall apply to or 
in relation to the grant of death-cum-retirement gratuity benefit to or in relation to a Judge who, being 
in service on or after the 1st day of October, 1974, retires, or dies in circumstances to which       
section 16 does not apply, subject to the modifications that― 
(i) the minimum qualifying service for the purpose of entitlement to the gratuity shall be two 
years and six months; 
7.Ins. by Act 36 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-10-1974).      
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 8, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f.1-11-1986). 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 2003, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 01.01.1996). 
2. The words “plus fifty per cent. of his dearness pay” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 2003, s. 2, for “and thereafter at the rate of half of the family pension so admissible” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
4. The words “plus thirty per cent. of his dearness pay” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1989, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 30-8-1989). 
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 2003, s. 2, for “family pension shall be thirty per cent. of the pension eligible” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
7. The proviso ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
8. The words and figures “Part II or” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 24 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016).10 (ii) the amount of gratuity shall be calculated on the basis of 1[ten days] salary for 2[each 
completed six months period] of service as a Judge; 3*** 
9. Subs. by Act 7 of 1999, s. 9, for “twenty days” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996).
10. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “each completed year” (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
11. The word “and” omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-1-1986). 11 1* * * * * 
Explanation .―2[In sub-section ( 2)], the expression “Judge” has the same meaning as in            
section 13.] 
3[16B. Additional quantum of pension or family pension.―Every retired Judge or after his 
death, the family, as the case may be, shall be entitled to an additional quantum of pension or family 
pension in accordance with the following scale:― 
__________________________________________________________________________________  
Age of Pensioner or family Pensioner  Additional quantum of pension or family pension 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
From eighty years to less than eighty-five years Twenty per cent. of basic pension or family 
pension 
From eighty-five years to less than ninety years  Thirty per cent. of basic pension or family 
pension 
From ninety years to less than ninety-five years  Forty per cent. of basic pension or family 
pension 
From ninety-five years to less than hundred years Fifty per cent. of basic pension or family 
pension 
From hundred years or more  Hundred per cent. of basic pension or family 
pension.] 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
17. Pension payable to a Judge who was in receipt of pension at the time of appointment as 
such.―If, at the time of his appointment to the Supreme Court, a Judge is in receipt of a pension in 
respect of any previous service either as a Judge of a High Court or in any other pensionable civil post 
under the Union or a State, the pension payable to him under this Act shall be an additional pension 
for service in the Supreme Court equal to the difference between his original pension and the pension 
to which he would have been entitled under this Act, if his service in the Supreme Court had been 
rendered in continuation of the previous service for which his original pension was granted. 
18. [Conversion of sterling pension into rupees .]Omitted by the High Court and the            
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service ) Amendment Act , 2016 (13 of 2016), s. 25 
(w.e.f. 5-4-2016).
19. Commutation of pension .―The Civil Pensions (Commutation) Rules for the time being in 
force shall, with necessary modifications, apply to Judges. 
20. Provident fund .―Every Judge shall be entitled to subscribe to the General Provident Fund 
(Central Services): 
1. Clause ( iii) omitted by Act 20 of 1988,  s. 5 . (w.e.f. 1-1-1986). 
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 8, for “In this section” (w.e.f. 1-11-1986).
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 12 Provided that a Judge who 1*** has held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a 
State shall continue to subscribe to the provident fund to which he was subscribing before his 
appointment as a Judge: 
Provided further that a Judge who was appointed before the commencement of this Act may 
continue to subscribe to the provident fund to which he was subscribing immediately before such 
commencement. 
2[20A. Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme .―The Deposit Linked Insurance Scheme for the time 
being in force under the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, shall apply to every 
Judge whether he subscribes to the General Provident Fund (Central Services) or any other Provident 
Fund referred to in section 20.] 
21. Authority competent to grant pension .―Save as may be otherwise expressly provided in 
the relevant rules relating to the grant of extraordinary pensions and gratuities, the authority 
competent to grant pension to a Judge under the provisions of this Act shall be the President.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS
22. Travelling allowance to a Judge .―A Judge shall receive such reasonable allowance to 
reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within the territory of India and shall be 
afforded such reasonable facilities in connection with travelling as may, from time to time, be 
prescribed. 
23. Facilities for rent-free houses and other conditions of service .―(1) Every Judge shall be 
entitled without payment of rent to the use of an official residence in accordance with such rules as 
may, from time to time, be made in this behalf.  
3[ 4[(1A) Where a Judge does not avail himself of the use of an official residence, he may be paid 
every month an allowance equivalent to an amount of twenty-four per centum of the salary which 
shall be increased at the rate of—  
(a) twenty-seven per centum, when Dearness Allowance crosses twenty-five per centum; and 
 (b) thirty per centum, when Dearness Allowance crosses fifty per centum.] 5***]].
(2) Every Judge and the members of his family shall be entitled to such facilities for medical 
treatment and for accommodation in hospitals as may, from time to time, be prescribed.  
(3) The conditions of service of a Judge for which no express provision has been made in this Act 
shall be such as may be determined by rules made under this Act.  
6[(4) Sub-sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of             
January, 1950 and sub-section ( 1A) shall be deemed to have come into force on the 9th day of      
May, 1986 and any rule made under any of the said sub-sections may be made so as to be 
retrospective to any date not earlier than the commencement of the respective sub-section.]  
1. The words “is a member of the Indian Civil Service or” omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 26 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
2. Ins. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 9 (w.e.f. 5-9-1977). 
3. Ins. by Act 72 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-12-1993). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 7 for “sub section ( 1A)” (w.e.f. 1-7-2017). 
5. The words “plus thirty per cent. of the dearness pay” omitted by Act 23 of 2009, s. 11 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
6. Subs. by Act 72 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-12-1993).13 1[2[23A. Conveyance facilities .―Every Judge shall be entitled to a staff car and 3[two hundred 
litres of fuel every month or the actual consumption of fuel] per month, whichever is less.]] 
23B. Sumptuary allowance.―The Chief Justice and each of the other Judges shall be entitled to 
a sumptuary allowance of 4[ 5[forty-five thousand] ] rupees per month and 6[7[thirty-four thousand] ] 
thousand] ] rupees] per month respectively. 
23C. Medical facilities for retired Judges .―Every retired Judge shall, with effect from the date 
on which the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1976 (36 of 1976) 
receives the assent of the President, be entitled, for himself and his family, to the same facilities as 
respects medical treatment and on the same conditions as a retired officer of the Central Civil 
Services, Class I and his family, are entitled under any rules and orders of the Central Government for 
the time being in force.] 
8[9[23D. Exemption from liability to pay Income-tax on certain perquisites received by a 
Judge.―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961),― 
(a) the value of rent-free official residence provided to a Judge under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 23 10[or the allowance paid to him under sub-section ( 1A) of that section]; 
(b) the value of the conveyance facilities provided to a Judge under section 23A; 
(c) the sumptuary allowance provided to a Judge under section 23B, 
shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head “Salaries” under 
section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).] 
11[(d) the value of leave travel concession provided to a Judge and members of his family.]
24. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:― 
(a) leave of absence of a Judge, including special disability leave; 
12[(aa) the number of casual leaves and the conditions subject to which it may be allowed 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 3;] 
(b) pension payable to a Judge, including extraordinary pensions and gratuities; 
(c) travelling allowances to a Judge; 
(d) use of official residence by a Judge; 
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1974).
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1986, s. 10, for section 23A (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1996, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 11-1-1996).
4. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 12, for “ten thousand” (w.e.f.16-3-2009). 
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 8, for “twenty thousand” (w.e.f. 22-9-2017). 
6. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 12, for “seven thousand five hundred” (w.e.f. 16-3-2009). 
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 8, for " fifteen thousand " (w.e.f. 22-9-2017). 
8. Ins. by Act 57 of 1980, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-4-1975). 
9. Subs. by Act 20 of 1988, s. 6, for section 23D (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
10. Ins. by Act 72 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9-5-1986). 
11. Ins. by Act 2 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4-1-1994). 
12. Ins. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 27 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 14 (e) facilities for medical treatment and other conditions of service of Judge; 
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.] 
25. Savings .―Nothing contained in this Act shall have effect so as to give to a Judge who is 
serving as such at the commencement of this Act less favourable terms in respect of his privileges and 
allowances or his rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave allowances) or pension than 
those to which he would have been entitled, if this Act had not been passed.  
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1976, s. 5, for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1-10-1974). 15 THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 13 and 14) 
PENSIONS OF JUDGES 
PART I 
1[1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who has not held any other pensionable post 
under the Union or a State and also apply to a person who was in service as a Judge on the 20th     
May, 1954 (28 of 1954), and to a Judge who, having held any other pensionable posts under the 
Union or a State, has elected to receive the pension payable under this Part.] 
2. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the pension payable to a Chief Justice to whom this Part 
applies 2*** shall be an amount equal to the sum of the following amounts, that is to say,― 
(a) an amount equal to the pension which would have been payable to him in accordance with 
the scale and provisions in Part 1 of the First Schedule to the High Court Judges (Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1954 (28 of 1954), if his service as a Judge had been rendered as the Chief Justice of 
a High Court; 
(b) an additional amount of 3[ 4[Rs. 34,104] ] per annum for each completed year of service as 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court until he has become entitled to a pension of 5[ 6[Rs. 
10,34,040] ] per annum, and thereafter an additional amount of 7[ 8[Rs. 86,884] ] for each 
completed year of such service: 
Provided that the aggregate amount of his pension shall in no case exceed 9[ 10[Rs. 16,80,000] ] 
per annum. 
3. The pension payable to any other Judge to whom this part applies 2*** shall be an amount 
equal to the pension which would have been payable to him in accordance with the scale                  
and provisions in Part 1 of the First Schedule to the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service)        
Act, 1954 (28 of 1954), if his service as a Judge had been rendered as the Chief Justice of a High 
Court: 
11[Provided that the pension under this paragraph shall in no case exceed 12[ 13[Rs. 15,00,000] ] 
per annum.] 
4. If Judge of the Supreme Court who has served as an acting Chief Justice thereof is 
subsequently appointed Chief Justice, his service as acting Chief Justice shall, for the purposes of 
paragraph 2 of this Part, be treated as service as Chief Justice. 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2016, s. 28, for Paragraph 1 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
2. The words “and who has completed not less than seven years of service for pension as a Judge in India” omitted by         
Act 46 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f.1-4-2004). 
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs. 6,030” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9, for ‘Rs. 12,180” (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009,  s. 13, for “Rs. 1,82,820” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9, for “Rs. 3,69,300” (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
7. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs. 15,360” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9, for “Rs.31,030” (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
9. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13,  for “Rs. 2,97,000” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s.9 for "Rs. 6,00,000" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
11. The proviso inserted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
12. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs. 2,70,000” (w.e.f. 16-3-2009).    
13. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9, for "Rs. 5,40,000" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 16 1*  * * * * 
2*   *              * * * 
3*                                    *                                      *                                       *                                 * 
* 
PART III 
1. The provisions of this Part apply to a Judge who has held any 4[pensionable post] under the 
Union or a State (but is not a member of the Indian Civil Service) and who has not elected to receive 
the pension payable under Part 1. 
2. The pension payable to such a Judge shall be― 
(a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not 
been appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge in India being treated as service therein for the 
purpose of calculating that pension; and 
(b) a special additional pension of 5[ 6[Rs. 45,016] ] per annum in respect of each completed 
year of service for pension as a Judge in India 7***. 
8[Provided that the pension under clause ( a) and the additional pension under clause ( b) together 
shall in no case exceed 9[ 10[Rs. 16,80,000] ] per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and 11[ 12[Rs. 
15,00,000] ] per annum in the case of any other Judge.] 
13*   *  *  *  * 
1. Paragraph 5 omitted by Act 46 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-4-2004). 
2. Paragraphs 6 and 7 omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
3. Part II omitted by Act 13 of 2016, s. 28 (w.e.f. 5-4-2016). 
4. Subs. by Act 57 of 1980, s. 9, for “pensionable civil post” (w.e.f. 1-4-1975). 
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs. 7,800” (w.e.f. 1-1-2006). 
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9, for "Rs. 16,020" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
7. The certain words omitted by Act 7 of 1999, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-1-1996). 
8. The proviso ins. by Act 20 of 1988, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
9. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs. 2,97,000”(w.e.f. 16-3-2009). 
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9 for "Rs. 6,00,000" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
11. Subs. by Act 23 of 2009, s. 13, for “Rs.2,70,000” (w.e.f. 16-3-2009). 
12. Subs. by Act 10 of 2018, s. 9 for "Rs. 5,40,000" (w.e.f. 1-1-2016). 
13. Paragraphs 3 and 4 omitted by Act 20 of 1988, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986). 
--------------------------The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958--------------------------
1 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES  OF WAGES) ACT, 1958  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Constitution of Committee . 
4. Functions of Committee . 
5. Powers of Committee . 
6. Power of Central Government to enforce recommendations of Committee . 
7. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than those specified in the order . 
8. [Omitted. ]  
9. Recovery of money due to working journalists . 
10. Authentication of orders, letters, etc., of the Committee . 
11. Effect of Act on Working Journalists Act, etc . 
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Committee.  
  12A. Penalty.  
13. Power to make rules.  
14. [Repealed ]. 
 
  2 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES  OF WAGES) ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1958  
[16th September , 1958.]  
An Act to provide for the fixation of rates of wages in respect of working journalists and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages)  
Act, 1958.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires, ― 
(a) “Committee ” means the Committ ee constituted under section 3;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “Wage Board ” means the Wage Board constituted under the Working Journalists Act by 
notification No. S.R.O. 1075 of the Government of India in the Ministry of L abour, dated the 2nd 
May, 1956;  
(d) “Wage Board decision ” means the decisions of the Wage Board published in the Gazette of 
India Extraordinary, Part II, Secti on 3, dated the 11th May, 1957;  
(e) “Wages ” means wages as defined in the Industrial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
(f) “Working Journalists Act ” means the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Pro visions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955);  
(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, and defined in the Working 
Journalists Act, shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to th em in that Act.  
3. Constitution of Committee .―(1) For the purpose of enabling the Central Government to fix rates 
of wages in respect of working journalists in the light of the Judgment of the Supreme Court, dated the 
19th day of March, 1958, relating to the Wage Board decision, and in the light of all other relevant 
circumstances, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Committee consisting of the following persons, nam ely:― 
(i) an officer of the Ministry of Law  not below the rank of Joint Secretary, nominated by the 
Central Government, who shall be  the Chairman of the Committee,  
(ii) three persons nominated by the Central Government from among the officers of each of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs, Labour and Em ployment an d Information and Broadcasting,  
(iii) a chartered accountant nomin ated by the Central Government.  
(2) If for any reason a vacancy (other than a vacancy by reason of temporary absence) occurs in the 
office of the Chairman or any other member of t he Committee, the Central Government may appoint 
another person in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) to fill the vacancy, and the inquiry 
before the Committee may be continued from the stage which had been reached when the vacancy arose.  
(3) The Central Government may appoint a Secretary to the Committee, and may also provide the 
Committee with such o ther staff as may be necessary.  
(4) The Secretary shall perform such functions of a ministerial or other nature as the Committee or the 
Chairma n thereof  may assign or delegate to him.  
4. Functions of Committee .―(1) The Committee shall, by notice published in such manner as it 
thinks fit, call upon newspaper establishments and working journalists and other persons interested in the 
Wage Board deci sion to make such representations as they may think fit as respects the Wage Board 
decision and the rates of wages which may be fixed under this Act in respect of working journalists.  3 
 (2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall be made with in such period not exceeding 
thirty days, as the Committee may specify i n the notice, and shall state — 
(a) the specific grounds of objection, if a ny, to the Wage Board decision,  
(b) the rates of wages which, in the opinion of the person making the representation, would be 
reasonable, having regard to the capacity of the employer to pay the same or to any other 
circumstance, whichever may seem relevant to the person making the representation in rela tion to his 
representation,  
(c) the alterations or m odifications, if any, which, in the opinion of the person making the 
representation, should be made in the Wage Board dec ision and the reasons therefor.  
(3) The Committee shall take into account the representations  aforesaid, if any, and after examining 
the materials placed before the Wage Board and such further materials as have since been obtained by or 
made available to it under this Act, make such recommendations, as it thinks fit, to the Central 
Government for the fixation of rates of wages in respect of working journalists, whether by way of 
modification or otherwise, of the Wage Board decision; and any such recommendation may specify, 
whether prospectively or retropectively, the date from which the rat es of wages should take effect.  
(4) In making any recommendations to the Central Government, the Committee shall have regard to 
all the matters set out in sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the Working Journalists Act.  
(5) The Committee may, if it thinks fit, take up for consideration separately groups or cl asses of 
newspaper establishments, whether on the basis of regional classification or on any other basis, and make 
recommendations from time to time in rega rd to each such group or class.  
5. Powers of Committee .―(1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 2), the Committee 
may exercise all or any of the powers which an industrial tribunal, constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), exercises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute referred to it and 
shall, subject t o the provisions contained in this Act and the rules, if any, made thereunder, have power  to 
regulate its own procedure.  
(2) Any representations made to the Committee and any documents furnished to it  by way of 
evidence, shall be open to inspection on paym ent of such fee as may be prescribed, by any p erson 
interested in the matter.  
(3) If in th e course of any inquiry it appe ars to the Committee that it is necessary to examine any 
accounts or documents or obtain any statements from any person, the Committee may authorise any 
officer of the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) in that behalf; and the 
authorised officer shall, subject to the directions of the Committee, if any, examine the accounts or 
documents or obtain the st atements from the person.  
(4) The authorised officer may, subject to the directions of the Committee, if any, exercise all or any 
of the powers which an industrial tribunal may exercise under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of  
section 11 of the Industr ial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
(5) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) of section 54 of the Indian Income -tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or in 
any corresponding provision in any other law for the time being in force relating to the levy of any tax 
shall apply to  the disclosure of any of the particulars referred to therein in any report made to the 
Comm ittee by an authorised officer.  
(6) Any information obtained by an authorised  officer in the exercise of any of his powers and any 
report made by him shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be treated as confidential, but 
nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the disclosure of any such information or report to t he Central 
Government or to a court in relation to any matter concer ning the execution of this Act.  
(7) The authorised officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
6. Power of Centra l Government to enforce  recommendations of Committee .―(1) As soon as 
may be, after the receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, the Central Government shall make 4 
 an order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such modifications, if any, as it thinks fit, being 
modifications which, in the opinion of the Central Government, do not effect important alterations in the 
character of the recommendations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Gove rnment may, if it th inks 
fit,― 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, not being modifications of the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1),as it thinks fit:  
Provided that before making any such modifications, the Central Government shall cause notice 
to be given to all persons likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall 
take into account any representations which they may ma ke in this behalf in writing,  or 
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to the Committee, in which  case the Central 
Government shall consider its further recommendations and make an order either in terms of the 
recommendations or with such modifications of the nature referred to in su b-section ( 1) as it thinks 
fit. 
(3) Every order made by the Central Government shall be published in the Official Gazette together 
with the recommendations of the Committee relating to the order, and the order shall come into operation 
on the date of publication or on such date, whether pr ospectively or retrospectively, as may be specified 
in the order.  
7. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than  those specified in the 
order .―Subject to the provisions contained in section 11, on the coming into operation of an order of the 
Central Government, every working journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at a rate 
which shall in no case be less than the rate o f wages specified in the order.  
8. [Review of  order of Central Government .]―Omitted by the Working J ournalists (Amendment) Act , 
1962  (65 of 1962) , s. 10 (w.e.f.  15-1-1963.).  
9. Recovery of mon ey due to working journalists .―(1) Where any amount is due under this Act to 
a working  journalist from an employer, 1[the working journalist himself, or any other person authorised 
by him in writing in this behalf  or in the cas e of the death of the working journalist, any member of his 
family may], without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to t he State 
Government for the recovery of the money due to him, and if the State Government, or such authority as 
the State Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any money is so due, it shall issue a 
certificate for that amount to the Coll ector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the 
same manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
2[(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a working journalist from his 
employer, the State Government may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question 
to any Labour Court constituted by it under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or under any 
corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State and 
the said Act or law shall have effect in relation to the Labour Court as if the question so referred were a 
matter referred to the Labour Court for adjud ication under that Act or law.]  
(3) The decision of the Labour  Court shall be forwarded by it to the State Government which made 
the reference, and any amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the mann er provided 
in sub -section ( 1). 
10. Authentication of orders, le tters, etc., of the Committee .―All no tices, letters, authorisations, 
orders or other documents to be issued or made by the Committee under this Act may be authenticated by 
the Chairman or the Secretary thereof or any other officer authorised by the Committee in this behalf and 
any notice, let ter, authorisation, order or other document so authenticated shall be presumed to have been 
duly i ssued or made by the Committee.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 10, for “the working journalist may” (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  5 
 11. Effect of Act on  Working Journalists Act, etc .―(1) Sections 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the 
Working Journalists Act shall have  no effec t in relation to the Committee.  
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in the 
terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or afte r the commencement of 
this Act : 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise, a working 
journalist is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to 
which he would be entitled under this Act, the wor king journalist shall continue to be entitled to the more 
favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect o f other 
matters under this Act.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude any working journalist from entering 
into any agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter which 
are more favourable to him than those to which he wo uld be entitled under this Act.  
12. Vacancies, etc., not to in validate proceedings of Committee .―No act or proceeding of the 
Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of any vacancy among its members or any 
defect in the constitution thereof.  
1[12A. Penalty .―(1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall be punishable 
with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
(2) Whoever, having been conv icted of any offence under sub -section ( 1), is again convicted of an 
offence under that sub -section, shall be punishable with fine wh ich may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(3) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company, as w ell as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this  section if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), where an offence under this section has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable, to any gross negligence on the part of 
any director, manager, secretary or other offi cer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst 
and punished accordingly.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “company ” means any bo dy corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.]  
13. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which notices u nder this Act may be published;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Committee in the exerci se of its power s under this Act;  
(c) the powers and functions of the Committee which may be d elegated to any of its members;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 65 of 1965, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  6 
 (d) the fees to be paid for inspection of docume nts furnished to the Commit tee. 
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and  if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eff ect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
14. [Repeal and saving .].―Rep. by the Repe aling and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
