--------------------------The Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 THE ANDHRA PRADESH AND MADRAS (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES) ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories.  
4. Changes of territorial divisions in Andhra Pradesh.  
5. Changes of territorial divisions in Madras.  
6. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution.  
7. Saving powers of State Government.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
8. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
9. Bye -election to fill the additional seat.  
The House of the People  
10. Amendment of First Schedule to the Delimitation Order.  
11. Provision as to sitting members.  
The Legislative Assemblies  
12. Strengt h of Legislative Assemblies.  
13. Amendment of Second Schedule to Delimitation Order.  
14. Amendment of Delimitation Commission’s Final Order No. 19.  
15. Provisions as to certain sitting member . 
The Legislative Councils  
16. Extent of Council constituencies.  
17. Sitting members.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
18. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of procee dings to, Andhra Pradesh High Court.  
19. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to, Madras High Court.  2 SECTIONS  
20. Right to appear or act in any proceedings transferred under section 18 or section 19.  
21. Interpretation.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
22. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing appropriation 
Acts.  
23. Reports relating to the acc ounts of Andhra Pradesh and Madras.  
24. Distribution of revenues.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
25. Land and goods.  
26. Arrears of taxes.  
27. Right to recover loans and advances.  
28. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
29. Deposits.  
30. Provident Funds.  
31. Pensions.  
32. Contracts.  
33. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
34. Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies.  
35. Items in suspense.  
36. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
37. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund.  
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
38. Provision as to certain financial Corporations.  
39. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942.  
40.  Provisions as to State Electricity Boards and apportionment of their assets and liabilities.  
41. Special provisions with regard to Araniar Project.  
42. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
43. Provisions relating to services.  
44. Provisions as to the continuance of off icers in the same posts.  
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
45. Territorial extent of laws.  
46. Power to adapt laws.  
47. Power to construe laws.  
48. Power to name authorities , etc., for exercising statutory functions.  3 SECTIONS  
49. Legal proceedings.  
50. Transfer of pending proceeding s. 
51. Right of pleaders to practise in certain courts.  
52. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws . 
53. Power to remove  difficulties.  
54. Power to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 4 THE ANDHRA PRADESH AND MADRAS (ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES)  ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1959  
[24th December, 1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the alteration of boundaries of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras 
and for matters connected there with.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh and Madras 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 1 for the coming 
into force of this Act;  
(b) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(c) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument hav ing the force of law in the whole or in any part of Andhra Pradesh 
or Madras;  
(d) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a p erson who , immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(f) “transferred territories ” means— 
(i) in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh, the territories specified in the Second Schedule 
and transferred from that State to Madras; and  
(ii) in relation to the State of Madras, the territories specified in the First Schedule and 
transferred fr om that State to Andhra Pradesh;  
(g) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury;  
(h) any reference to a district, taluk, firka, village or other territorial  division of a State shall be 
construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division on the 1st day of July, 
1957.  
PART II  
TRANSFER OF TERRITORIES  
3. Transfer of territories .—As from the appoi nted day, there shall be added — 
(a) to the State of Andhra Pradesh, the territories specified in the First Schedule which shall 
thereupon cease to form part of the State of Madras; and  
(b) to the State of Madras, the territories specified in the Second Schedule which shall thereupon 
cease to fo rm part of the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
                                                           
1. 1st April , 1960, vide Notification No. S.O. 2863 , dated 29th December , 1959, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3( ii). 5 4. Changes of territorial divisions in Andhra Pradesh .—(1) The territories specified in Part I of 
the First Schedule shall be included in, and form part of, Chittoor district; and the said territories, together 
with the territories comprised in the villages of Puttur taluk specified in the Third Schedule and the 
territories which immediately before the appointed day were comprised in Kanak ammachatram and 
Tiruttani firkas of Tiruttani taluk but are not transferred by v irtue of section 3 of the State of Madras, shall 
form a taluk to be known as Sathyavedu taluk in Chittoor district.  
(2) The territories which immediately before the appointed day were comprised in Palliputtu and 
Erumbi firkas of Tiruttani taluk but are not  transferred by virtue of section 3 to the State of Madras shall 
be included in , and form part of , Puttur taluk.  
(3) The territories which immediately before the appointed day were comprised in Melpadi firka of 
Chittoor taluk but are not transferred by vir tue of section 3 to the State of Madras shall be included in , and 
form part of, Chittoor firka of Chittoor taluk.  
(4) The territories specified in Part II of the First Schedule shall be included in, and form part of, 
Kuppam West firka of Palmaner taluk in Chitto or district.  
5. Changes of territorial divisions in Madras .—(1) The territories which immediately before the 
appointed day were comprised in Sathyavedu firka of Ponneri taluk and Uttukkottai firka of Tiruvallur 
taluk but are not transferred by virtue  of section 3 to the State of Andhra Pradesh shall be included in, and 
form part of , Gummidipundi firka of Ponneri taluk.  
(2) The territories specified in Parts I and II of the Second Schedule shall be included in and form a 
separate taluk to be known as T iruttani taluk of Chingleput district; and in that taluk , the territories 
specified in Part II of that Schedule shall form a separate firka to be known as Kanakammachatram firka.  
(3) The territories specified in Parts III, IV, V, VI, VII and VIII of the Se cond Schedule shall 
respectively be i ncluded in, and form part of, — 
(a) Mappe du firka of Tiruvallur taluk of Chingleput district , 
(b) Paranji firka of Arkonam taluk of North Arcot district , 
(c) Arkonam firka of Arkonam taluk of North Arcot district , 
(d) Ranipe t firka of Walajapet taluk of North Arcot district , 
(e) Gudiyattam East Firka of Gudiyattam taluk of North Arcot district, and  
(f) Vaniyambadi firka of Tiruppattur taluk of North Arcot district.  
6. Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, unde r the heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(a) for the entry against “1. Andhra Pradesh ”, the following shall be substituted, namely :— 
“The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953,              
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and the First Schedule to the 
Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, but excluding the territories 
specified in the Second Schedule to the last mentioned Act ,”; and  
(b) in the entry against “7. Madras ”,— 
(i) after the words and figures “section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 ”, the words, 
brackets and figures “and the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Act, 1959 ,” shall be inserted; and  
(ii) for the words, brackets, letters and figures “and the territories specified in clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 5, section 6 and clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 ”, the following shall be substituted, namely :— 
“the territories specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5, section 6 and                
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the 
territories specified in the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Act, 1959 ”. 6 7. Saving powers of State Government .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be 
deemed to a ffect the power of the State Government of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to alter after the 
appointed day the name, extent or boundaries of any district, taluk, firka or village in the State.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
8. Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution, in the second column of the Table, — 
(a) for the figures “17” against Madras, the figures “18” shall be substituted; and  
(b) for the figures “220”, the figures “221” shall be substituted.  
9. Bye-election to fill the additional seat .—(1) As soon as may be after the appointed day, a                   
bye-election shall be held to fill the additional seat allotted to the State of  Madras in the Council of States 
by virtue of section 8.  
(2) The term of office of the member elected to the Council of States in pursuance of this section shall 
expire on the 2nd day of April , 1962.  
The House of the People  
10. Amendment of First Schedule to the Delimitation Order .—The First Schedule to the 
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order , 1956, shall have effect subject to the 
modifications specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.  
11. Provision as to sitting members .—Every sitting member of the House of the People representing 
a constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of section 10 shall be deemed to have been elected 
to the said House by that constituency as so altered.  
The Legislative Assemblies  
12. Strength of Legislative Assemblies .—The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of 
Andhra Pradesh to be filled by persons chosen by  direct election shall be reduced from 301 to 300 and 
that in the Legislative Assembly of Madras shall be increased fr om 205 to 206; and, accordingly, in the 
Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) , for the figures “301” against 
“Andhra Pradesh ”, the figures “300” shall be substituted, and for the figures “205” against “Madras ”, the 
figures “206” shall be substituted.  
13. Amendment of Second Schedule to Delimitation Order .—The Second Schedule to the 
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall have effect subject to the 
modifications specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act.  
14. Amendment of Delimitation Commission ’s Final Order No. 19 .—The Delimitation 
Commission ’s Final Order No. 19, dated the 4th October, 1954, s hall have effect subject to the 
modifications specified in the Sixth Schedule.  
15. Provisions as to certain sitting members .—(1) The sitting members of the Legislative 
Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the Vadamalpet, Vepanjeri, Chittoor and Kuppam 
constituencies shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the extent thereof by the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been respectively elected to the said  Assembly by the said  constituencies as so altered.  
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Madras representing the Gummidipundi, 
Tiruvallur, Arkonam, Sholinghu r, Ranipet, Gudiyattam, Vaniyam badi and Uddanapalli constituencies 
shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the extent thereof by the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 
been respectively elected to the said Assembly by the said constituencies as so al tered.  
(3) The sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the Tiruttani 
constituency shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to that Assembly by the 
Sathyavedu constituency in the State of Andhra Pra desh.  7 (4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh representing the  
Ramakrishnarajupet constituency shall, as from the appoint ed day, cease to be a member of that 
Assembly and be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Madras from the Tiruttani 
constituency in the State of Madras.  
The Legislative Councils  
16. Extent of Council constituencies .—(1) Any reference in  the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Andhra Pradesh) Order, 1957, to the State of Andhra Pradesh or to Chittoor district shall 
be construed as excluding the territories transferred from that State or district, as the case may be, to the 
State of Ma dras and as including the territories transferred to that State or district, as the case may be, 
from the State of Madras.  
(2) Any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madras) Order , 1951, to the State of 
Madras or to Chingleput, North Arcot or Salem district shall be construed as excluding the territories 
transferred from that State or district, as the case may be, to the State of Andhra Pradesh, and as including 
the territories transferred to that State or district, as the case may be,  from the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
17. Sitting members .—Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Andhra Pradesh or of 
Madras representing a Council constituency the extent of which is altered by virtue of section 16 shall, as 
from the appointed day, be deemed to have been elected to the said Council by that constituency as so 
altered.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURTS  
18. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceeding s to, Andhra Pradesh High                    
Court .—(1) Except as hereinafter provided, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as from the appointed day, extend 
to the territories specified in the First Schedule ; and 
(b) the High Court at Madras shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the said 
territories.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Madras immediately before the appointed day as 
are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of 
action and other circumstanc es, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court at Madras shall have, and the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall not have, jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications 
for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order 
passed by the High Court at Madras before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Madras, it  appears 
to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order mad e by the High Court at Madras — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
by virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Madras retains jurisdiction by 
virtue  of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Madras, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  8 (5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh,  any such 
person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court at 
Madras as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
having regard to the transfer of territori es from the State of Madras to the State of Andhra Pradesh, shall 
be recogni sed as an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.  
19. Extension of jurisdiction of, and transfer of proceedings to , Madras High Court .—(1) Except 
as hereinafter provided, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court at Madras shall, as from the appointed day, extend to the 
territories specified in the Second Schedule; and  
(b) the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall, as from that day, have no jurisdiction in respect of 
the said territories.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh immediately before the appointed 
day as are certified by the Chief Justice of the High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the 
cause of action and  other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the 
High Court at Madras shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court at 
Madras.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), but save as hereinafter provided, 
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh shall have, and the High Court at Madras shall not have, jurisdiction to 
entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, application s 
for review and other proceedings, where any such proceedings seek any relief in respect of any order 
passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh before the appointed day:  
Provided that if, after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, 
it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court at 
Madras, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by th e High Court of Andhra Pradesh — 
(a) before the appointed day in any proceedings transferred to the High Court at Madras by virtue 
of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Andhra Pradesh retains 
jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only as an order of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh, but also as 
an order made by the High Court of Madras.  
(5) Subject to any rule made or direction given by the High Co urt at Madras, any such person who 
immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh as may be specified in this behalf by the Chief Justice of the High Court at Madra s having regard 
to the transfe r of territories from the State of Andhra Pradesh to the State of Madras , shall be recognised 
as an advocate entitled to practi se in the High Court at Madras.  
20. Right to a ppear or act in any proceedings  transferred under section 18 or section 19 .—Any 
person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate entitled to practi se, or an attorney 
entitled to act, in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court at Madras and was authorised to 
appear or to act in any proceedings transferred under  section 18 or section 19 shall have the right to 
appear, or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court to which the proceedings have been transferred, in 
relation to those proceedings.  
21. Interpretation .—For the  purposes of sections 18 and 19, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High 
Court at Madras until that Court has disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issue 
with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings and sh all include appeals, applications for 
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for 
writs;  9 (b) references to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh or the High Court at Madras shall be 
construed as includ ing references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order 
made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or 
decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
22. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing 
appropriation Acts .—(1) As from the appointed day, an y Act passed by the Legislature of the State of 
Andhra Pradesh or Madras before that day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State to meet any expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1959 -60 shall have 
effect also in relation to the territories transferred to that State by the provisions of Part II and it shall be 
lawful for the State Government to spend any amount in those territories out of the amount authorised by 
such Act to be expended for any service  in that State.  
(2) The Governor of Andhra Pradesh or of Madras may, after the appointed day, authorise such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in 
the territories transferred to that State f or a period of not more than three months beginning with the 
appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State.  
23. Reports relating to the accounts of Andhra Pradesh and Madras .—The reports of the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in clause (2) of article  151 of the Constitution 
relating to the accounts of the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor o f each of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras 
who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.  
24. Distribution of revenues .—Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution)                           
Act, 1957  (55 of 1957) , sections 3 and 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares 
(Distribution) Act, 1957  (57 of 1957) , section 4 of and the Second Schedule to the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957  (58 of 1957)  and paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Constitution 
(Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, shall, as from the appointed day , have effect subject to 
such modifications as the President may, by order published in the Official Gazette, specify having regard 
to the transfer of territo ries effected by the provisions of Part II of this Act.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
25. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods, including cash balances in all treasuries in the territories specified in the First Schedule 
or the Second Schedule shall, as from the appointed day, pass to the State to which the territories are 
transferred.  
(2) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of eve ry kind and any rights in 
or over such property.  
26. Arrears of taxes .—The right of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to recover arrears of any tax or duty 
on property situate in the transferred territories , including land revenue, or to recover arrears of any other 
tax or duty in any case where the place of assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferred territories 
shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
27. Right to recover loans and advances .—The right to recover any loa ns or advances made before 
the appointed day by Andhra Pradesh or Madras to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in 
the transferred territories shall belong to the State to which the territories are transferred.  
28. Refund of taxes collec ted in excess .—The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras to refund any 
tax or duty on property situate in the transferred territories, including land revenue, collected in excess 
shall be the liability of the State to which the territories are transferred,  and the liability of Andhra 
Pradesh or Madras to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess in any case where the place of 
assessment of that tax or duty is in the transferred territories shall also be the liability of the State to 
which those terri tories are transferred.  10 29. Deposits .—The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of any civil deposit or local fund 
deposit made in the transferred territories shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State to 
which the territori es are transferred.  
30. Provident funds .—The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of the provident fund 
account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of 
the State to which the Government servant is permanently allotted.  
31. Pensions .—The liability of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in respect of pensions shall be apportioned 
between those States in such manner as may be agreed upon between them or , in default of such 
agreement, in such  manner as the President may, by notified order, specify having regard to the transfer 
of territories effected by this Act and the principles underlying the provisions of the Fifth Schedule to the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) . 
32. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras has 
made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall 
be deemed to have been made in the ex ercise of the executive power, — 
(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, purposes relatable exclusively to the transferred 
territories , of the State to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, of the State which made the contract;  
and all rights and liabilit ies which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they are rights or liabilities of the State which made the contract, be rights or liabilities of 
the State specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) above.  
(2) For the  purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or  may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or  award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contra ct; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guara ntees and other financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
33. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras is subject to any liability in respect of an actionable wrong, other than 
breach of c ontract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the transferred territories,  be a liability of the State 
to which they are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State which, immediately before that day, 
was subject to  such liability.  
34. Liability as guarantor of co-operative societies .—Where, immediately before the appointed 
day, the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered 
co-operative society, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the area of the society ’s operations is limited to the  transferred territories, be a liability of 
the State to which the territories are transferred; and  
(b) in any other case, continue to be a liability of the State which, immediately before that day,  
was subject to such liability.  
35. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  11 36. Power of Central Government to order allocatio n or adjustment in certain cases .—Where 
either Andhra Pradesh or Madras becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes 
subject to any liability, and the Central Government, on a reference made within a period of three years 
from the ap pointed day by either of the States, is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property 
or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribution towards 
that liability should be made by the other State,  the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such 
manner between the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such 
contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the tw o State 
Governments, by order determine.  
37. Certain expenditure to be charged on the Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable by either 
Andhra Pradesh or Madras to the other State by virtue of the provisions of this Part shall be charged on 
the Consolidated Fund of the State by which such sums are payable.  
PART VII  
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS  
38. Provision as to certain financial Corporations .—(1) As from the appointed day, the Financial 
Corporation constituted under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the State of 
Andhra Pradesh shall be deemed to have been constituted for that State with its area as altered by the 
provisions of Part II of this Act.  
(2) As from the appointed day, the Madras Industrial Investment Corporation constituted for the State 
of Madras shall be deemed to have been constituted for that State with its area as altered by the provisions 
of Part II of this Act.  
39. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 .—In the Multi -Unit Co -operative Societies Act, 1942, in               
section 5A, in sub -section ( 1), for the words and figures “any co -operative society which, immediately 
before the 1st day of November, 1956 ”, the words “or any other enactment relating to reorganisation of 
States, any co -operative society which, immedi ately before the day on which the reorganisation takes 
place ” shall be substituted.  
40. Provisions as to State Electricity Boards an d apportionment of their assets and                 
liabilities .—(1) As from the appointed day, the State Electricity Boards  constituted under the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , for the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras shall be deemed to have 
been constituted for those States with their areas as altered by the provisions of Part II of this Act.  
(2) The undertak ings and assets of a State Electricity Board referred to in sub -section ( 1), situated in 
the territories specified in the First Schedule or, as the case may be, the Second Schedule shall, as from 
the appointed day, pass to the State to which the territorie s are transferred.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the assets and liabilities of the State Electricity 
Boards referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be apportioned between them in such manner as may be agreed 
upon between the Governments of  Andhra Pradesh and Madras within one year from the appointed day, 
or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order determine.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the arrangement which, immediately 
before the a ppointed day, was in force in regard to the generation or supply of electric power for the 
territories specified in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule shall continue to be in force after the 
appointed day on such terms and conditions and for such pe riod as may be agreed upon between the 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Madras, or, in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may by order direct.  
41. Special provisions with regard to Araniar Project .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, all rights and liabilities of the State of Madras in relation to the Araniar Project or the 
administration thereof shall, on the appointed day, be the rights and liabilities of the States of Andhra 
Pradesh and Madras, subject to such adjustmen ts as may be made by agreement entered into by the said 
States or, if no such agreement is entered into within a period of one year from the appointed day, as the 
Central Government may by order determine having regard to the purposes of the Project, and a ny such 
order may provide for the management of the Project jointly by the said States or otherwise:  12 Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any subsequent 
agreement entered into by the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras . 
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall provide also for the rights and liabilities 
of the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras in relation to any extension or further development of the 
Project after the appointed day.  
(3) The righ ts and liabilities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include — 
(a) the rights to receive and to utilise water which may be available for distribution as a result of 
the Project; and  
(b) the rights and liabilities in respect of the administration  of the Project and the construction, 
maintenance and operation thereof,  
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointed day by 
the Government of Madras.  
(4) The Central Government may, from time to time, give such directions as may appear to it 
necessary generally in regard to any of the matters specified in the foregoing provisions of this section 
and, in particular, for the completion of the Project and it s operation and maintenance thereafter:  
Provided that no such direction shall be issued or have effect after an agreement has been entered into 
by the States of Andhra Pradesh and Madras under sub -section ( 1) or after an order has been made by the 
Central Government under that sub -section, whichever is earlier.  
42. Temporary provisions as to the continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939  (4 of 1939) , a permit 
granted by the State Transport Authority of Andhra Pradesh or Madras or by any Regional Transport 
Authority in such State shall, if such permit was immediately before the appointed day valid and effective 
in any area within the transferred terri tories, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area 
after that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall 
not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the S tate Transp ort Authority or any 
Regional Transport Authority in the State to which the territories are transferred for the purpose of 
validating it for use in such area : 
Provided that the Central Government may, after consult ation with the State Government , add to, 
amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted.  
43. Provisions relating to services .—(1) Every person  who, immediately before the appointed day, 
is serving in connection with the affairs of Andhra Pradesh or Madras shall, as from that day, continue so 
to serve, unless he is required by general or special order of the Central Government to serve 
provisionally in connection with the affairs of the other State.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed  day, the Central Government shall, by general or special 
order, determine the State to which every person provisionally allotted to Andhra Pradesh or Madras shall 
be finally allotted for service and the date from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to 
have taken effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to Andhra Prades h or 
Madras shall, if he is not  already serving therein, be made available for serving in that State from such 
date as may be a greed upon between the two State Governments or in default of such agreement, as may 
be determined by the Central Government.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, after the appointed day, the operation of the 
provisions of Chapter I of Pa rt XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions 
of service of persons serving in connection with the affa irs of Andhra Pradesh or Madras : 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of 
any person provisionally or finally allotted to Andhra Pradesh or Madras under this section shall not be 
varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.  13 (5) The Central Government may at any time befor e or after the appointed day give such directions to 
either State Government as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the 
foregoing provisions of this section and the State Government shall comply with such directions.  
44. Provisions as to the continu ance of officers in the same pos ts.—Every person who, 
immediately before the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in 
connection with the affairs of Andhra Pradesh or Madras in any area which on  that day falls within the 
other State shall continue to hold the same post or office in the State in which such area is included on 
that day and shall be deemed as from that day to have been duly appointed to that post or office by the 
Government of, or o ther appropriate authority in, such State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the competent authority, after the 
appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or 
office . 
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
45. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of section 3 shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies,  and territorial references in any such law to Andhra Pradesh or Madras shall, until otherwise 
provided by a competent legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories 
within that State immediately before the appointed day.  
46. Power to ad apt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to 
Andhra Pradesh  or Madras , the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from the 
appointed day, by order make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to 
the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent authori ty or 
competent legislature.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law, 
the State Government.  
47. Power to constru e laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required 
or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to Andhra 
Pradesh or Madras, construe the law in such manner , without affecting the substance, as may be necessary 
or pr oper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
48. Power to name authorities , etc., for exercising statutory functions .—The Government of the 
State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras, as respects any territory transferred to that State by t he provisions of 
Part II, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, as from 
the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under any law in force on 
that day as may be mentione d in that notification, and such law shall have effect accordingly.  
49. Legal proceedings .—Where , immediately before the appointed day, the State of Andhra Pradesh 
or Madras is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabil ities transferred 
to the other State under this Act, the other State shall be deemed to be substituted for the State from which 
such property, right s or liabilities are transferred as a party to those proceedings, or added as a party 
thereto, as the case m ay be, and the proceedings may continue accordingly.  
50. Transfer of pending proceeding s.—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State of Andhra Pradesh or Madras shall, if it is a proceeding relatable 
exclusively to any part of the territories which as from that day are the territories of the other State, stand 
transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the other State.  14 (2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court having jurisdiction in respect of the area in which the court, tribunal,  
authority or officer before which, or before whom, such proceeding is pending on the appointed day, is 
functioning and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corre sponding court, tribunal, authority  or officer ” in a State means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom , the proceeding would 
have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed day 
by the Government of the other State, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authori ty or officer.  
51. Right of pleaders to practise in certain courts .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practi se in any subordinate courts in the transferred 
territories shall, for a period of six months from that day, continue to be entitled to practi se in those 
courts, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts 
has been transferred to another State.  
52. Effect of provisions inconsistent wi th other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
53. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President  may by order do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him 
to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
54. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that th e rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done un der that rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for  “in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following”  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  15 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 3( a) and 4]  
Territories transferred from the S tate of Madras to the State of Andhra Pradesh  
(Any reference in this Schedule to a census code number in relation to a village means the code number 
assigned to  that village in the census of 1951. ) 
PART I 
1. The following villages in Po nneri taluk of Chingleput district: — 
 
 Census Code  No. 
Santhavelur      .       .       .       .       .        .  1 
Ayyavaripalayam     .       .       .       .       . 2 
Ambur      .       .       .       .       .       .       .  3 
Nelvoy      .       .       .       .       .       .       .  4 
Marudavada     .       .       .       .        .       .  5 
Kalathur    .       .       .       .       .       .       .  6 
Gudalavaripalayam   .       .       .       .       .        7 
Narasingapura Agaharam  .      .       .       .  8 
Karipakkam      .       .       .       .       .       .  9 
Pulivallam        .       .       .       .       .       .  10 
Kadur  .     .       .       .       .       .       .       .  11 
Bangaruthimma Boopalapuram        .       .       12 
Vittayapalayam   .     .       .       .       .       .       13 
Varadayapalayam      .       .       .       .      .        14 
Kambakkam       .       .       .       .       .      .   15 
Arudur       .       .       .       .       .       .       .  16 
Bathalavallam    .       .       .       .       .       .      17 
Kummarapeddavenkatapuram   .       .       .       18 
Chedulapakkam    .     .       .       .       .      .        19 
Vidiakadu       .     .      .      .       .        .      .       20 
Shola Agraharam         .       .       .       .      .      21 
Silamathur        .      .     .       .      .      .      . 22 
Matterimitta     .       .     .       .      .      .      .    23 
Thondur Agraharam      .       .      .      .      .      24 
Chintamani Thangal       .      .       .     .      .      25 
Chinnapudi Agraha ram    .     .       .      .      .      26 
Enadivettu     .      .       .       .      .       .      . 27 
Racherla      .      .      .        .       .       .        .  28 
Kovurpadu           .      .        .       .      .       .                  29 16  Census Code No.  
Mopurpalli  .      .       .       .       .      .        .  30 
Cheng ambakkam  .     .       .       .       .       .  31 
Chiddama Agraharam  .     .       .       .       .      32 
Ramachandrapuram  .        .       .       .       .      33 
Thondambattu   .       .        .       .       .       .  34 
Ambikapuram   .       .        .        .       .      .  35 
Pandur  .      .     .       .        .        .      .       .  36 
Padirikuppam    .       .        .        .      .       .  37 
Chinnapandur    .       .        .        .       .      .  38 
Madanapalayam  .     .        .        .        .      .  39 
Gollavaripalay am .     .        .        .       .       .  40 
Chervi   .      .       .      .       .        .       .       .  41 
Appayapalayam  .      .       .       .       .        .  44 
Mallavarpal ayam  .      .       .       .       .      .  46 
Samurthikandiga i .      .       .       .       .       .  53 
Repallavada  .      .       .        .       .       .      .  54 
Rajagopalapuram  .      .       .       .       .       .  55 
Balagopalapuram  .      .       .       .       .       .  56 
Rangan athapuram  .       .       .       .       .      .  57 
Dwarakapuram      .      .       .       .       .       .  58 
Rallakuppam.  .     .       .      .       .       .       .  59 
Kolladam   .     .     .       .      .       .       .       . 60 
Prava laverneswarapuram      .       .       .       .      61 
Mettupalayam        .       .       .       .       .      .  62 
Govindapuram       .       .       .       .       .      .  63 
Vanalu ir   .       .      .      .       .       .       .      .  64 
Lakshm puram  .     .      .       .       .       .      .  65 
Peddaittivakkam     .      .       .       .       .       .  66 
Chinnaittivakkam   .      .       .       .       .       .  67 
Irugalam  .      .       .      .        .       .      .       .     68 
Arur  .      .      .      .       .       .        .      .      .  69 
Alamelumangapuram     .       .       .       .      .      130 
Venkatarajukandigai      .       .       .       .      .   131 
Kadirvedu  .      .       .       .       .     .      .      .  135 
Sirunam budur  .      .       .       .       .      .     .  136 
Peradam    .      .       .       .       .      .      .      . 137 17  Census Code No.  
Ambakkam      .      .       .       .       .       .     . 138 
Pudukuppam   .      .       .       .       .      .      .  139 
Madanambedu .      .       .       .       .      .      .  140 
Sathiavedu      .       .       .       .      .      .       .  141 
Kothamarikuppam .       .       .      .      .       .  142 
Madanancheri  .      .       .       .      .      .       .  144 
Thondukuli      .      .       .       .       .      .      .  145 
2. The entire forest areas situated in P onneri taluk of Chingleput district and lying to the west of any 
of the villages specified in item I.  
3. The following villages in Tiruvallur taluk of Chingleput district: — 
 Census Code No.  
Mudi yur .      .       .       .       .       .     1 
Rappalpattu   .       .        .       .       .     2 
Sadasivasankarapuram  .       .        .   3 
Jamoukesavapuram        .      .        .       4 
Vengalampattu      .        .      .        .   5 
Vellur     .       .       .       .      .        . 6 
Beerakuppam  .      .       .       .       .       7 
Lakshmikanthapuram     .       .       .  8 
Kadivedu  .      .       .      .        .       .  9 
Janakipuram   .        .      .       .       .       10 
Rajulukandigai  .     .      .       .       .    11 
Anamathukandigai  .      .       .       .  12 
Vijjarvarikandigai  .      .       .       .  13 
Kannavaram    .      .       .       .       .  14 
Tirupuranthakapuramkottai    .      .        15 
Chinthalakunta   .      .       .       .       .       16 
Raghunathapuram alias  Chengalvara ya andigai  17 
Naidugunta  .      .       .       .     .       .  18 
Bhoopathiswarapuram      .      .       .   19 
Pisatoor      .      .       .       .       .       .  20 
Appambattu       .      .       .       .       .     21 
Ramagir i    .      .       .       .       .       .  22 
  18  
 Census Code No.  
Krishnapuram  .      .       .       .       .   23 
Kalancheri .      .       .      .       .       .  24 
Nagalapuram    .      .       .       .       .  25 
Vembakkam     .      .       .       .       .  26 
Kottakkadu      .       .       .       .       .  27 
Nandanam        .       .       .       .       .  28 
Baitakodiyambedu    .      .       .       .       29 
Balijakandigai   .      .       .       .       .   30 
Mavettimolakandigai  .    .       .       .  31 
Neervoy    .      .       .       .       .       .  32 
Velur  .      .       .       .       .       .      .  33 
Rajanagaram     .      .       .       .       .      34 
Alapakkam       .       .       .       .       .    35 
Alappakkamkandigai        .      .       .        36 
Urur   .      .       .       .       .       .      .  37 
Agaram     .      .       .       .       .       .   38 
Devadarikodiyambedu     .      .       .      39 
Vengalathur       .      .       .       .      .     40 
Kuppamkandigai      .      .       .       .        41 
Pillarikandigai   .      .       .       .       .       42 
Kottur .      .       .       .       .       .      .  43 
Sidderajulkandigai     .      .       .       .     44 
Pulipedu alias  Govardhanagiri  .      .        45 
Mithilapuram    .      .       .       .       .        46 
Obularajukandigai    .      .       .       .       47 
Narayanarajukandigai      .      .       .        48 
Karu r alias  Krishnagiri      .      .       .       49 
Adivikodiyambedu   .      .       .       .       50 
Pulikundram     .      .       .       .       .        51 
Adivisankarapuram  .      .       .       .      52 
Krishnapuramkandigai     .      .       .      53 
Silamathur alias  Bangala  .      .       .     54 
Nallappanaidu Kandigai   .      .       .     55 
Yalur Ravannavaradanna Kandigai . 56 
Chinnapattu      .       .       .       .      . 57 19 Subbanaidukandigai  .      .       .       .      58 
 Census Code No.  
Achama Kandigai   .      .       .       .        59 
Karana i  .      .       .       .       .       .  60 
Pallampattadai     .       .       .       .  61 
Krishnapuram Agraharam     .       .  62 
Surattupalli    .       .       .       .       .   63 
Ururpet   .       .       .       .       .      .  64 
Thimm anambakkam   .      .       .       .     65 
Athur.      .       .       .       .       .      .  66 
Sivagiri    .       .       .       .       .      .  67 
Hanumanthapuram .      .       .       .        73 
Alagirikandigai .      .      .       .       .  74 
Shamshedbahadhurpet   .       .       .  75 
Sriramapuram  .      .      .       .       .  76 
Sidda vinayakapuram     .       .       .       77 
Chengalarayapuram       .       .       .  78 
Poliche ttigunta .      .       .       .       .  80 
Desikuppam    .      .       .       .       .  84 
Senneri     .      .       .       .       .       .  85 
4. The entire forest area lying to the north of the villages specified in Item 3 and the forest area lying 
to the north of the village Desikuppam (Census Code No. 84.)  
PART II 
The following villages in Krishna giri taluk of Salem district: — 
 Census Code No.  
Onnappan aikenkothur      .      .       .      18 
Thaliagraharam       .       .      .       .       23 
Kotamaganapalli     .      .       .       .       24 
 
  20 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 3( b) and 5]  
Territories transferred from the State of Andhra Pradesh to the State of Madras  
(Any reference in this Schedule to a census code number in relation to a village means the code 
number assigned to that village in the census of 1951 .) 
PART I 
1. The following village in Puttur  taluk of Chittoor dis trict:— 
 Census Code No.  
Gopalakrishnapuram . .      .       .       .  134 
2. The following villages in Tirut tani tal uk of Chittoor district: — 
          Veligaram .      .       .       .       .  5 
          Melkalpatteda  .       .       .       .  6 
          Pallipat             .       .       .       .  7 
Surarajupatteda       .       .       .  8 
Rangepalle       .       .       .       .  9 
Kolathur            .       .       .       .  10 
Kolathur -Ramiahkandriga .       .      11 
Nediyam     .      .       .       .       .  12 
Aravasipatteda   .       .       .       .  13 
Samanthavada    .       .       .       .  14 
Karimbedu          .       .       .       .  15 
Kesavarajupuram        .       .       .  16 
Ramachandrapuram    .       .       .  17 
Chinnatimmarajupatteda     .       .      18 
Venkatarajukuppam     .      .       .        19 
Sangeethakuppam        .      .       .  20 
Thirumalrajupet    .      .       .       .        21 
Tirunadharajupuram    .       .       .      22 
Kumararajupeta   .       .       .       .  23 
Melapudi       .      .       .       .       .  24 
Reddipalli Subbar aokhandriga      . 25 
Puranam Sanjeevirayunikhandriga . 26 
Punyam     .       .      .       .       .       .  27 
Patnam Sesha yyakhandriga      .      .  28 
Kadapanthangal        .       .       .      .  29 
Kaverirajupeta alias  Sri Kaverirajulungaripet  30 
  Bommarajupeta       .       .       .       .  31 21  Census Code No.  
Gollalakuppam           .       .       .       .        . 32 
Chandrappanaidukhandriga          .      .       .  33 
Chinnamudipalli         .       .       .       .       .  34 
Kesavarajukuppam     .      .       .       .       .  35 
Nallattur              .       .      .       .       .       .  45 
Chivvada             .       .      .       .       .       .  46 
Siddanthipuram          .      .       .       .       .  47 
Kondapuram              .      .       .       .       .  48 
Proddatturpet (Non -City Urban)       .       .  49 
Ragimanukhandrigai          .      .       .       .   50 
Pandravedu                 .      .       .       .       .  51 
Gantavarikuppam       .      .       .       .       .  52 
Sitaramapuram           .      .       .       .       .  53 
Vadakuppam    .        .       .       .       .         . 54 
Karlambakkam            .      .       .       .       .  55 
Konasamu dram           .      .       .       .       .  56 
Kakalur                       .      .       .       .       .  57 
Vengalrajukuppam      .      .       .       .       .  58 
Ramapuram                 .      .       .       .       .  59 
Poonimangadu              .      .       .       .       .  60 
Venkatapura Agraharam     .       .       .       .  61 
Kodivalasa                          .       .       .       .  63 
Athimanjeri                 .      .       .       .       .  64 
Venkatapuram             .      .       .       .       .  65 
Kothakuppam            .      .       .       .       .  66 
Petakandriga             .      .       .       .       .  67 
Jangalapalli                .      .       .       .       .  68 
Nedigallu                   .      .       .       .       .  69 
Ponbadi Gollakuppam     .       .       .       .  70 
Kodanda Ramapuram      .       .       .       .  71 
Nemali            .          .      .       .       .       .  72 
Madduru           .        .      .       .       .       .  74 
Chinn a Athimanjeri    .      .       .       .       .  79 
Nochili              .         .      .       .       .       .  81 
Keechalam          .       .      .       .       .       .  82 
          Ramasamudram           .       .       .       .      .  83 22  Census Code No.  
Ulchiguruvarajukhandrig a    .       .       .  84 
Konugarikuppam .        .       .       .       .  85 
Gownipuram Badrarajukhandriga        .  86 
Alimelumangapuram    .       .       .       .  87 
Singarajapuram     .      .       .       .       .  88 
 Thayamambapuram      .       .       .       .  89 
Pompadi alias  Pommadi       .       .       .  90 
 Korakuppam           .      .       .       .       .  97 
Narasampeta          .      .       .       .       .  99 
Rajanagaram Santhayatham .       .       .  100 
Kannikambapuram       .       .       .       .  101 
Balakrishnapuram        .       .       .       .  102 
Dwarakapuram            .       .       .       .  103 
Krishnam arajukuppam        .       .       .  104 
Venugopalapuram        .       .       .       .  105 
   Royasam Venkatakrishnayya Khandri ga     106 
Krishnasamudram .      .       .       .       .  107 
Tiruvengalanadharaj apuram  .       .       .  109 
Ramachandrapuram     .       .       .       .  110 
Talavedu       .         .      .       .       .       .  111 
Narayanasamudram Agraharam  .       .  112 
Balakrishnapuram .      .       .       .       .  120 
Murukambattu      .       .       .       .       .  121 
Subramanyapuram .      .       .       .       .  123 
Ramachandrapuram      .       .       .       .  124 
Sathrunjay apuram   .      .       .       .       .  125 
Medinipuram          .      .       .       .       .  126 
Srinivasapuram      .      .       .       .       .  127 
Srinivasayya Khandrig a         .       .       .  128 
Gownipuram Chinnasubbaraju Khandriga  135 
Siddayyagunta Khandriga      .        .       .  136 
Madirajuperumalraju Khandriga     .       .   137 
Elavarthimu mmalraju Khandriga      .      .     138 
Chiralagurrappa Khandriga     .       .       .      139 
Nallur Perumalraju Khandriga .       .       .  140 
Ulchirangaraju Khandriga .       .       .       .  141 23  Census Code No.  
Chinthalangunta Khandriga     .       .       .       .  142 
Nalluru Venkataraju Khnadriga      .       .       .  143 
Sirugumi        .         .       .      .       .       .       .  144 
Veeranaidupalem             .      .       .       .       .  145 
Rajakallarapuram            .      .       .       .       .  146 
Suryanagaram                 .      .       .       .       .  147 
Shotriam Bo mmarajapur am     .       .       .       .  148 
    Tekku lur    .       .       .       .      .       .       .       .  149 
Singasamudram       .       .      .       .       .       .  161 
Perumkanchi Narasimhuni Khandriga    .       .       162 
Veerakav erirajapuram     .      .       .       .       .  163 
Erramasetti Narasimhuni Khandriga       .       .        164 
Kumara Bom marajapuram       .       .       .       .  165 
Chengalvapuram Agraharam   .       .       .       .  166 
Dharanivarahapuram        .      .       .       .       .  167 
Velanjeri          .        .       .      .       .       .       .  168 
Srinivasapuram                .      .       .       .       .  169 
Sandayatham Anjaneyapuram .       .       .       .  175 
Anjaneyapuram                 .      .       .       .       .  176 
Pakala Narayana Reddikhandrig a     .       .       .  178 
Rajanagram (included in Village No. 100) .      .        179 
Thaduru          .        .         .      .       .       .       .  180 
Talari Thangal                   .      .       .       .       .  181 
Errappanaidukhandriga    .      .       .       .       . 182 
Veerakanellore         .        .      .       .       .       .  183 
Netterikhandriga      .       .      .       .       .       .  184 
Makamambapuram  .       .      .       .       .       .  185 
Narayana Puram      .       .      .       .       .       .  186 
Kasinadhapuram      .        .      .       .       .       .  187 
Pattabiramapuram    .       .      .       .       .       .  188 
Velayudakuppam     .       .      .       .       .       .  189 
Vinayakapuram       .        .      .       .       .       . 190 
Kadananagaram       .       .      .       .       .       .  192 
Yagnapuram    .         .     .      .       .       .       .  193 
Janakarajakuppam    .      .      .       .       .      . 194 
Anandhavallipuram         .      .       .       .       .  196 24  Census Code No.  
Tyagapuram         .      .       .       .       .  197 
Mohinipura m       .      .       .       .       .  198 
Appukondayyakhandriga     .       .       .     199 
Mutyalavaripalle    .      .       .       .       .  200 
Lakshmipuram       .      .       .       .       .  201 
Raghavanaidukuppam   .       .       .       .  202 
Ayyavarinaidu Khandrig a      .       .       .  203 
Kondapuram          .      .       .       .       .  204 
Ammavarikuppam .      .       .       .       .  205 
Narayanapuram      .      .       .       .       .  206 
Mosur      .      .       .      .       .       .       .  207 
Vanganur                .      .       .       .       .  208 
Krishnakuppam      .      .       .       .       .  209 
Chengalvarayudukhandriga   .       .       .  210 
Sirigirirajubadrarajukhandriga       .       .  211 
Madurapu ram          .      .       .       .       .  212 
Changareddi Narayanareddikhandriga    . 213 
Santhana Venugopalapuram           .       .  214 
Koramangalam        .      .       .       .       .  215 
Pratapa Uddandamakarajapuram   .       .  216 
Agoor              .       .      .       .       .       .  217 
Amruthapuram        .      .       .       .       .  218 
Tiruttani (Non City Urban)    .       .       .  219 
Tiruttani (Rural)      .      .       .       .       .  220 
Meldevadhanam       .      .       .       .       .  221 
Keeldevadhanam       .      .       .       .       .  222 
Kaveripuram             .      .       .       .       .  226 
Khandapuram           .      .       .       .       .  227 
Ramakrishnarajupet   .      .       .       .       .  228 
Bhadrarajukhandriga  .      .       .       .       .  229 
Srikrishnapuram         .      .       .       .       .  230 
Thummalcheruv ukhandriga       .       .       .  231 
Muharaj apuram          .      .       .       .       .  232 
Akkachikuppam         .      .       .       .       .  233 
Beerakuppam             .      .       .       .       .  234 
Perumalmanyamkhandriga        .       .       .  235 25  Census Code No.  
Veerakaverirajapuram     .      .       .       .       .  236 
Kanchi guruvarajakhandriga  .       .       .       .  237 
Devasenapuram       .       .      .       .       .       .  240 
Mahankalipuram             .      .       .       .       .  242 
Ramajos yulukhandriga    .      .       .       .       .  243 
Balapuram               .       .      .       .       .       .  244 
Sreekalikapuram             .      .       .       .       .  245 
Chandravilasapuram       .      .       .       .       .  246 
Ramapura Agraharam     .      .       .       .       .  247 
Govatsapuram         .      .      .       .       .       .  248 
Srikrishnapuram    .       .      .       .       .       .  249 
Velurukrishnamanaidukha ndriga     .       .       .  250 
Lakshminarasimhapuram .      .       .       .       .  251 
Thondamanatinarayanareddikhandriga   .      .     252 
Senagalathur Agraharam .      .       .       .       .  253 
Cherukunur       .      .      .      .       .       .       .  254 
Perumathangal   .      .      .      .       .       .       .  255 
Kannikapuram         .       .      .       .       .      . 256 
Valliyammapuram    .       .      .       .       .      . 257 
Padmapuram            .       .      .       .       .       .  258 
Karthikeyapuram     .       .      .       .       .       .  259 
Perumalthangal        .       .      .       .       .       .  260 
Damaneri        .        .      .      .       .       .       . 266 
Swethavarahapuram       .      .       .       .       .  267 
Vellatur          .      .       .       .       .        .      .  268 
Ammaneri       .       .        .      .       .       .      . 269 
Kondapuram   .        .      .      .       .        .       .  270 
Venkataperumalrajupuram    .       .       .       .  272 
Tirunadharajapuram        .      .       .       .       .  275 
Veeramangalam        .      .      .       .       .       .  277 
Audivarahapuram    .       .      .       .       .       .  278 
Mambakkam            .       .      .       .       .       .  279 
Peddakadambur      .        .      .       .       .       .  280 
      Peddangapudi  .       .      .       .       .       .        . 281 
      Devakipuram  .       .      .       .       .       .         . 282 
Kasavarajupet          .      .       .       .       .       . 283 26  Census Code No.  
Bikkasanivengamanaidulkhandrig a    .       .  284 
Chinnakadambur        .      .       .       .       .  285 
Nayudu Thopu           .      .       .       .       .  289 
Vediyangadu               .      .       .       .       .  291 
Devalambapuram Makaraj apuram    .       .  292 
Chinna nagapudi      .       .      .       .       .       .  293 
Eerumbi alias  Aswarevanthapuram    .      .       294 
Viranathur          .        .      .       .       .       .  295 
Ayyaneri            .       .      .       .       .       .  296 
Singarajapuram   .      .      .       .       .       .  300 
Gopalapuram .           .      .       .       .       .  301 
Chinnaramapuram     .      .       .       .       .  302 
Peddaramapuram       .      .       .       .       .  303 
Chanurmall avaram     .      .       .       .       .  304 
Koleri alias  Sahasrapadanapuram     .       .  305 
Mylarwada         .       .      .       .       .       .  311 
 Makamambapuram     .      .       .       .       .  312 
 Tirumalambapuram     .      .       .       .       .  313 
 Parabhayankarapuram .      .       .       .       .  314 
 Meesaragantapuram      .      .       .       .        . 315 
 Makamambapuram       .      .       .       .       .  316 
 Nilotalapuram       .      .      .       .       .       .  317 
 Padmapuram        .       .      .       .       .       .  318 
Paivalasa       .       .      .      .       .       .        . 319 
Katarikuppam  .     .      .      .       .       .       .  320 
PART II 
The following villages in Tiruttani taluk of Chittoor district: — 
 
 Census  Code No.  
Arumbakkam        .      .       .       .       .  75 
Arumgolam           .      .       .       .       .  91 
Thirukkolamkhandriga .       .       .       .  92 
Mamandur       .     .      .       .       .       .  113 
Nekkiniagraharam .      .       .       .       .  115 
Nikkinipeta            .      .       .       .       .  116 
Venugopalakrish napuram    .       .       .  117 27  Census code No.  
Nedambaram        .      .       .       .       .  129 
Ragunadhapuram .      .       .       .       .  130 
Sithapuram     .      .      .       .       .       .  131 
Patramthangal       .      .       .       .       .  132 
Panapakkam         .      .       .       .       .  133 
Arcotkuppam        .      .       .       .       .  150 
Gulur       .     .       .      .       .       .       .  151 
Kanjipadi       .      .      .       .       .       . 152 
Rangapuram .       .      .       .       .       .  153 
Nabaloor       .      .      .       .       .       .  170 
Kunnathur    .      .      .       .       .       .  171 
Illupur         .       .      .       .       .       .  172 
 Muddukondapura m      .       .       .       .  173 
Ramapuram  .       .      .       .       .       .  223 
Kaverirajupuram   .      .       .       .       .  238 
Kurmavi lasapuram .      .       .       .       .  239 
Ramalingapuram    .      .       .       .       .  261 
Parasapuram          .      .       .       .       .  262 
Venugopalapuram   .      .       .       .       .  263 
Veerarag havapuram .      .       .       .       .  286 
Tiruv elangadu        .      .       .       .       .  287 
Narthavada      .       .      .       .       .       .  288 
Dhanush ayapuram    .      .       .       .       .  290 
Palayanur        .       .      .       .       .       .  297 
Bhagavatha Pattabhiramapuram    .       .  298 
Pulavanalluru   .       .      .       .       .       .  299 
Banapuram              .      .       .       .       .  306 
Vyasapuram    .       .      .       .       .       .  307/1 and 307/2  
Rajapadmapuram    .      .       .       .       .  308 
Rajaratnapuram     .      .       .       .       .  309 
Jagirmangalam   .      .      .       .       .       .  310 
Shrotriam Pattabhiramapuram       .       .   
alias  Chinnamapet   .      .       .       .       .  324 
Tholudavoor      .      .      .       .       .       .  325 
Marudavallipuram    .      .        .       .       .  326 
Manoor            .        .      .       .       .       .  327 28  Census Code No.  
Kuppam Khandriga    .      .       .       .       .  328 
Harischandrapuram    .      .       .       .       .  329 
Lakshmivilas apuram   .      .       .       .       .  330 
Saunakapuram           .      .       .       .       .  331 
Orathur       .      .        .      .       .       .       .  332 
Paakasala     .       .      .      .       .       .       .  333 
Japti Shrotrium Ramapuram      .       .       .  334 
Peddakalakattur   .       .      .       .       .       .  335 
Chinnamandali            .      .       .       .       .  336 
Kalambakam        .       .      .       .       .       .  338 
PART III 
The following village in Tiruttan i taluk of Chittoor district :— 
 Census Code No.  
Chitrambakkam .      .       .       .       .  337 
PART IV 
The following villages in Tiruttani taluk of Chitt oor district: — 
 Census Code No.  
Perumalrajup eta.      .       .       .       .  321/1 and  321/2  
Thandlam           .      .       .       .       .  322 
Nandhimangalam      .       .       .       .  323 
PART V 
The following hamlets in Tiruttan i taluk of Chittoor district :— 
 Census Code No.  
Ambaris hapuram      .       .       .       .  307/3  
Sukapuram         .      .       .       .       .  307/4  
PART VI 
1. The following villages in Chittoo r taluk of Chittoor district: — 
 
 Census Code No.  
Avularangaiahpalle  .      .       .       .  248 
Gollavaripalle   .      .       .       .       .  277 
Thengal     .      .      .       .       .       .  279 
Balekuppam     .      .       .       .       .  280 
Ammavaripalle .      .       .       .       .  337 
Konda manayanipalem     .       .       .  351 
Paramasattu      .      .       .       .       .  352 29  Census Code No.  
Madandakuppam      .       .       .       .  353 
Gollapalle           .      .       .       .       .  354 
Mahimandalam  .      .       .       .       .  363 
Perumallakuppam    .       .       .       .  364 
Erukambat        .      .       .       .       .  365 
Vellimalai          .      .       .       .       .  366 
Mutharasikuppam    .       .       .       .  368 
Vennampalle            .       .       .       .  369 
Kodukka nthangal    .       .       .       .  370 
Elayanellore      .      .       .       .       .  371 
Thempalle         .      .       .       .       .  372 
Sripadanellore   .      .       .       .       .  373 
Veppalai           .      .       .       .       .  374 
Melpadi            .      .       .       .       .  375 
2. The entire forest area lying to the north and south of the village of Mahimandalam                          
(Census Code No. 363).  
PART VII 
1. The following villages in Chitto or taluk of Chittoor district: — 
 
 Census Code No.  
Dakshinapathapalle  .       .       .       .  290 
Puttavaripalle           .       .       .       .  295 
Rangasamudram       .       .       .       .  297 
Vidyasankarapuram .       .       .       .  298 
Viludonapoliem .      .       .       .       .  299 
Varadareddipalle      .       .       .       .  300 
Veerisettipa lle   .      .       .       .       .  301 
Paradarami        .      .       .       .       .  302 
 
2. The forest area lying between the above village s and Gudiyat tam taluk.  
PART VIII 
The following areas in Palmane r taluk of Chittoor district: — 
(a) the area surrounding the Javv ajiramasa mudram tank bounded — 
(i) on the east , by the existing boundary between Javvajiramasamudram village included in 
Alasandapuram village (Census Code No. 33) of Tiruppa ttur taluk of North Arcot district of 
Madras State and the State of Andhra Pradesh.  
(ii) on the south, by the existing boundary be tween the said Javvajiramasamudram village and 
the State of Andhra Pradesh and its con tinuation directly westwards to the top of the ad joining 
hill, 30 (iii) on the west, by a line running along the top of the two hills lying to the west of the said 
tank, and  
(iv) on the north, by a line running along the peaks of the four hills lying to the north of the 
said tank and joined up to the north -west corner of the said Javvajiramasamudram village;  
(b) the area surroundin g the Gollapalle tank bounded — 
(i) on the east an d the south , by the existing bound ary between Gollapalle village included in 
Alasandapuram village (Census Code No. 33) of Tirup pattur taluk of North Arcot district of 
Madras State and the State of Andhra Pradesh,  
(ii) on the west, by a line running along  the bottom of the hill situated to the west of the said 
tank, and  
(iii) on the north, by a line running along the bottom of the hill situated to the north of the 
said tank . 
  31 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See section 4( 1)] 
(Any reference in this Schedule to a census code number in relation to a village means the code 
number assigned to that village in the census of 1951. ) 
The following villages of Nagari firka in Puttur taluk :— 
 
 Census Code No.  
Padiri         .      .       .       .       .  147 
Aroor         .      .       .       .       .  150 
Kunamarajupaliem   .       .       .   
151  Ellassamudram .       .       .       .  
Kaipakam         .       .       .       .  
Kalikapuram      .       .       .       .  152 
Buchivanath am        .       .       .   
 
153 
 Samireddikandiga i    .       .       .  
Ishtakameswarapuram      .       .  
Seetharamapuram Agraharam   . 
Gangamambapuram   .       .       .  
Ammagunta       .       .       .       .  
Pannur               .       .       .       .  154 
Jagannadhapura m     .       .       .  155 
Kaliambakam   .       .       .       .   
156 
 Madhavaram     .       .       .       .  
Chavarambakam        .       .       .  157 
 Kachervedu .      .       .       .       .  158 
 Elakatoor    .      .       .       .       .   
 
159 
  Mathu sri Venk atamambapuram .  
 Thippapuram      .       .       .       .  
 Illupururamiah Khandriga   .       .  
 Sriramapuram     .       .       .       .   
173 
  Paddapa tteda      .       .       .       .  
 Sadasivapuram     .       .       .       .  
 Kavanur         .      .       .       .       .   
174 
  Palukuru Subbarayu du Khandrig a       
 Koppedu Acharyulu Khandriga      .         
175 
 Koppedu Kapulu Khandriga  .       .  
 Keelapudi         .      .       .       .       .   
176 
  Gajasingarajapuram        .       .       .  
 Akkagaripeta      .      .       .       .       .  32   Census Code No.  
 Nindra         .      .       .       .       .   
177 
  Samayapuram    .       .       .       .  
 Netteri         .      .       .       .       .  178 
 
  33 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 10)  
Modifications of the First Schedule to the De limitatio n of Parliamentary and Assembly                   
Constitu encies  Order , 1956.  
1. The Note at the end of the Part “1—ANDHRA PRADES H” shall be numbered as “N OTE 1” and 
the following s hall be added thereto, namely :— 
“NOTE 2:—Any reference to Chi ttoor district in column 3 of this Part shall be taken to mean the 
area comprised within that district on the appointed day as defined in the Andhra Pradesh and Madras 
(Alter ation of Boundaries) Act, 1959 .”. 
2. In the Part “7—MADRAS ”,— 
(a) in the entry in column 3 against serial No. 194, for the words “Gummidipundi and Sathya vedu 
firkas in Ponneri taluk ” the words “Gummidipundi firka in Ponneri taluk ” shall be substituted.  
(b) in the entry in column 3 against serial No. 195 , for the words “Tiruvallur taluk, and, 
Gummidipundi and Sathyavedu firkas ”, the words “Tiruvallur and Tirut tani taluks and 
Gummidipundi firka ” shall be substituted;  
(c) the Note at the end shall be numbered as “NOTE 1” and the following  shall be added thereto, 
namely :— 
“NOTE 2:—Any reference in column 3 of this Part to a district, taluk or firka the extent  of 
which has been altered by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Al teration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that district, taluk or firka on the appointed day 
as defined in that Act. ” 
  34 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 13)  
Modifications of the Second Schedule to the De limitation of Parliamentary and Assembly                 
Constitu encies Order,  1956.  
1. In the Part “1—ANDHRA P RADESH” ,— 
(a) for the entries in columns 2 and 3 against serial No. 118, the entries “Sathyavedu ” and 
“Sathyavedu taluk ; and Nagari f irka in Puttur taluk ” shall, respectively, be substituted;  
(b) the whole of serial No. 119 shall be omitted;  
(c) the Note at the end shall be numbered as “NOTE 1” and the following s hall be added thereto, 
name ly:— 
“NOTE 2:— Any reference in column 3  of thi s Part to a district, taluk or firka the extent of 
which has been altered by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Al teration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that district,  taluk or firka on the appoin ted day 
as defined in that Act.” ; 
(d) in the Annexure, the whole of parts (63) and (64) shall be omitted and for part (62) , the 
following shall be substituted, namely :— 
“(62) 
Villages comprising the firka of Nagari in Puttur Taluk  
1. Satravada . 
2. Mittapalem.  
3. Mudipalle.  
4. Saraswathivil asapuram.  
5. Melapat tu. 
6. Therani.  
7. Ekambarakuppam.  
8. Salvapatteda.  
9. Nagari.  
10. Taduku.  
11. Tadukupet.  
12. Veerakaverirajapuram.  
13. Keelapattu.  
14. Nettamkhandigai.  
15. Sri Venkataperumalarajapuram.  
16. Nagarajakuppam.  
17. Dharmavarm Venkat ramiah Khandriga.  
18. Kannikapuram.  
19. Tirumalraj Kandigai.  
20. Sriranga nagara Agraharam.  
21. Velavadi.  35 22. Mangadu.  
23. Bugga Agraharam.  
24. Damarapakam.  
25. Ayanambakam.  
26. Thirupathi V enkatacharyulu Khandriga.  
27. Agaram.  
28. Iruguvoi.  
29. Thumbur.  
30. Nainaru.  
31. Palamangalam Dakshinapu Khandriga.  
32. Palamangalam Uttarapu Khandriga. ”. 
2. In the Part “ 7—MADRAS ”,— 
(a) in the entry in column 3 against serial No. 13, for the words “Gumm idipundi and Sath yavedu 
firkas ”, the words “Gummidipundi firka ” shall be sub stituted;  
(b) for the entry in column 3 against serial No. 14, the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“Gummidipundi firka in Ponneri taluk and Kannigaipper firka [excluding the villages 
specified in item (1) of the Appendix ] in Tiruvallur tatuk. ”; 
(c) for the entry in column 3 against serial No. 15 , the following ent ry shall be substituted, 
namely :— 
“Tiruvallur taluk [excluding Kannigaipper firka but including the v illages specified in                
item (1) of the Appendix ]; and Kanakammachatram firka in Tiruttani taluk ”; 
(d) after serial No. 15, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :— 
“15A              Tiruttani                              Tiruttani taluk        1      Nil             Nil”.  
                                                                  (excluding  
                                                                 Kanakammachatram firka)  
(e) in the entry in column 3 against serial No. 32 and serial No. 34, for the brackets and                
figure “(1)” the brackets, figure and letter “(1A)” shall be substi tuted;  
(f) the Note at the end shall be numbered as “NOTE 1” and the following shall  be added thereto, 
namely:— 
“NOTE 2:— Any reference in column 3 of this Part to a district, taluk or firka the extent of 
which has been altered by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Al teration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that district, taluk or firka on the appointed day 
as defined in that Act .”; 
(g) in the Appendix, the heading “NORTH ARCOT DISTRICT ” which bears the number “(1)” 
shall be re -numbered as “(1A) ” and before that heading as so re -numbered, the  following shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“CHINGLEPUT DISTRICT  
(1) 
Villages in Kannigaipper firka in Tiruvallur taluk included in Tiruvallur constituency.  
1. Sembedu.  36 2. Vengal.  
3. Avanambakkam.  
4. Agaram.  
5. Magar.  
6. Sethupakkam.  
7. Guruvayal.  
8. Arkampa ttu. 
9. Damarapakkam.  
10. Komaka mbedu.  
11. Karani.  
12. Koduvali.  
13. Singilicuppam.  
14. Ayalacheri.  
15. Puducuppam .”. 37 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
Modifications of the Delimitation Commission ’s Final Order No. 19 dated the 4th October , 1954.  
1. In Table B, — 
(a) for the entries in columns 2 and 3 against serial No. 121, the entries “Sathyav edu” and 
“Sathyavedu taluk ; and Nagar i firka in Puttur taluk ” shall, respectively, be substituted;  
(b) the whole of serial No. 122 shall be omitted;  
(c) the Note a t the end shall be numbered as “NOTE 1” and the following sh all be added thereto, 
namely:— 
“NOTE 2:—Any reference in column 3 of this Part to a district, taluk or firka, the extent of 
which has been altered by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that district, taluk or firka on the appointed day 
as defined in that Act. ” 
2. In the Schedule, the whole of parts (63) and (64) shall be omitted and for part (62), the following 
shall be substituted, namely :— 
“(62) 
Villages comprising the firka of Nagari in Puttur Taluk.  
1. Satravada.  
2. Mittapal em. 
3. Mudipalle.  
4. Saraswathivilasapuram . 
5. Melapattu.  
6. Therani.  
7. Ekambarakuppa m. 
8. Salvapatteda.  
9. Nagari.  
10. Taduku.  
11. Tadukupet.  
12. Veerakaverirajapuram.  
13. Keelapattu.  
14. Nettamkhandiga i. 
15. Sri Venkataperumalarajapuram.  
16. Nag arajakuppam.  
17. Dharmavaram Venkat ramiah Khandriga.  
18. Kannikapuram.  
19. Tirumalraj Kandigai.  
20. Sriranganagara Agraharam.  
21. Velavadi.  
22. Mangadu.  38 23. Bugga Agraharam.  
24. Damarapakam.  
25. Ayanambakam.  
26. Thirupathi Venakatacharyulu Khandriga.  
27. Agaram.  
28. Iruguvoi.  
29. Thumbur.  
30. Nainaru.  
31. Palamangalam Dakshinapu Khandriga.  
32. Palamangalam Ut tarapu Khandriga”.  
 
--------------------------The Arms Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMS  ACT, 1959  
――  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
――  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition s and interpretation.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION, POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE, SALE, IMPORT, EXPORT AND TRANSPORT OF  
ARMS AND AM MUNITION  
3. Licence for acquisition and possession of firearms and ammunition.  
4. Licence for acquisition and possession of arms of specified description in certain cases.  
5. Licence for manufacture, sale, etc., of arms and ammunition.  
6. Licence for the s hortening of guns or conversion of imitation firearms into firearms.  
7. Prohibition of acquisition or possession, or of manufacture or sale of prohibited arms or 
prohibited ammunition.  
8. Prohibition of sale or transfer of firearms not bearing identificati on marks.  
9. Prohibition of acquisition or possession by, or of sale or transfer to, young persons and certain 
other persons of firearms, etc.  
10. Licence for import and export of arms, etc.  
11. Power to prohibit import or export of arms, etc.  
12. Power to  restrict or prohibit transport of arms.  
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES  
13. Grant of licences.  
14. Refusal of licences.  
15. Duration and renewal of licence.  
16. Fees, etc., for licence.  
17. Variation, suspension and revocation of licences.  
18. Appeals . 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND PROCEDURE  
19. Power to demand production of licence, etc.  
20. Arrest of persons conveying arms, etc., under suspicious circumstances.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Deposit of arms, etc., on possession ceasing to be lawful.  
22. Search and s eizure by magistrate.  
23. Search of vessels, vehicles for arms, etc.  
24. Seizure and detention under orders of the Central Government.  
24A. Prohibition as to possession of notified arms in disturbed areas, etc.  
24B. Prohibition as to carrying of notified a rms in or through public places in disturbed areas etc.  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
25. Punishment for certain offences.  
26. Secret contraventions.  
27. Punishment for using arms, etc.  
28. Punishment for use and possession of firearms or imitation fir earms in certain cases.  
29. Punishment for knowingly purchasing arms, etc., from unlicensed person or for delivering 
arms, etc., to person not entitled to possess the same.  
30. Punishment for contravention of licence or rule.  
31. Punishment for subsequent offences.  
32. Power to confiscate.  
33. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Sanction of Central Government for warehousing of arms.  
35. Criminal responsibility of persons in occupation of premises in certain cases.  
36. Information to be giv en regarding certain offences.  
37. Arrest and searches.  
38. Offences to be cognizable.  
39. Previous sanction of the district magistrate necessary in certain cases.  
40. Protectio n of action taken in good faith.  
41. Power to exempt.  
42. Power to take census of firearms.  
43. Power to delegate.  
44. Power to make rules.  
45.  Act not to apply in certain cases.  
46. Repeal of Act 11 of 1878.  
 3 
 THE ARMS ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 54 OF 19591 
[23rd December , 1959.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to arms and ammunition.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Arms Act, 1959.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by  notification in the 
Offici al Ga zette, appoint.  
2. Definition s and interpretation .―(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “acquisition ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes hiring, 
borrowing, or accepting as a gift;  
(b) “ammunitio n” means ammunition for any firearm, and includes — 
(i) rockets, bombs, grenades, shells 3[and other missiles ,]  
(ii) articles designed for torpedo service and submarine mining,  
(iii) other articles containing, or designed or adapted to contain, explosive,  fulminating or 
fissionable material or noxious liquid, gas or other such thing, whether capable of use with 
firearms or not,  
(iv) charges for firearms and accessories for such charges,  
(v) fuses and friction tubes,  
(vi) parts of, and machinery for manuf acturing , ammunition, and  
(vii) such ingredients of ammunition as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;  
(c) “arms ” means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for offence or 
defence, and includes firearms, sharpedged and other deadly weapons, and parts of, and 
machinery for manufacturing, arms, but does not include articles designed solely for domestic or 
agricultural uses such as a lathi or an ordinary walking stick and weapons i ncapable of being used 
otherwise than as toys or of being converted into serviceable weapons;  
 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to  Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.; and comes into 
force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963); and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965); Sik kim vide Notification No. G.S.R. 461 (E), dated 21 -7-1976 
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. 1st October, 1962, vide notification No. G.S.R. 992, dated 13 th July,  1962, see Gaze tte of India, Extraordinary, Part II,           
sec. 3( i). 
3. Subs.  by Act 42 of 1988, s. 2, for “ and other like missiles ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).   
 4 
  
 1[(d) “district magistrate ”, in relation to any area for which a Commissioner of Police has 
been appointed, means the Commissioner of Police thereof and inclu des any such Deputy 
Commissioner of Police, exercising jurisdiction over the whole or any part of such area, as may 
be specified by the State Government in this behalf in relation to such area or part;]  
(e) “firearms ” means arms of any description designe d or adapted to discharge a projectile or 
projectiles of any kind by the action of any explosive or other forms of energy, and includes — 
(i) artillery, hand -grenades, riot -pistols or weapons of any kind designed or adapted for 
the discharge of any noxious liquid, gas or other such thing,  
(ii) accessories for any such firearm designed or adapted to diminish the noise or flash 
caused by the firing thereof,  
(iii) parts of, and machinery for manufacturing, firearms, and  
(iv) carriages, platforms and applianc es for mounting, transporting and serving artillery ;  
(f) “licensing authority ” means an officer or authority empowered to grant or renew licences 
under rules made under this Act, and includes the Government;  
2[(ff) “magistrate ” means an Executive Magistr ate under the Code of Criminal              
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);]  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act ;  
(h) “prohibited ammunition ” means any ammunition containing , or designed or adapted to 
contain, any noxious liquid, gas or other such thing, and includes rock ets, bombs, grenades, 
shells, 3[missiles ,] articles designed for torpedo service and submarine mining and such other 
articles as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be 
prohibited ammunition;  
(i) “prohibited arms ” means — 
(i) firearms so designed or adapted that, if pressure is applied to the trigger, missiles 
continue to be discharged until pressure is removed from the trigger or the magazine 
containing the missiles is emp ty, or  
(ii) weapons of any description designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxious 
liquid, gas or other such thing,  
and includes artillery, anti -aircraft and anti -tank firearms and such other arms as the Central 
Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify to be prohibited arms;  
(j) “public servant ” has the same meaning as in section 21 of the Indian Penal                   
Code (45 of 1860 ); 
(k) “transfer ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes let ting on 
hire, lending, giving and parting with possession.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1971, s. 2, for c lause  (d) (w.e.f. 13 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
3. Ins. by Act 42  of 19 88, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  
 5 
 (2) For the purposes of this Act, the length of the barrel of a firearm shall be measured from the 
muzzle to the point at which the charge is exploded on firing.  
(3) Any reference in this Act to  any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that 
area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
(4) Any reference in this Act to any officer or authority shall, in relation to any area in wh ich 
there is no officer or authority with the same designation, be construed as a reference to such officer 
or authority as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION, POSSESSION, MANUFACTURE , SALE, IMPORT, EXPORT AND TRANSPORT OF  
ARMS AND AMMUNITION  
3. Licence for acquisition and possession of firearms and ammunition .―1[(1)] No person 
shall acquire, have in his possession, or carry any firearm or ammunition unless he holds in this behalf 
a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that a person may, without him self holding a licence, carry any firearm or ammunition 
in the presence, or under the written authority, of the holder of the licence for repair or for renewal of 
the licence or for use by such holder.  
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), no person, other than a person 
referred to in sub -section ( 3), shall acquire, have in his possession or carry, at any time, more than 
three firearms:  
Provided that a person who has in his possession more firearms than three at the commencement 
of the Arms (Amendment) Act, 1983  (25 of 1983) , may retain with him any three of such firearms 
and shall deposit, within ninety days from such commencement, the remaining firearms with the 
officer in charge of the nearest police station or, subject to the con ditions prescribed for the purposes 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 21, with a licensed dealer or, where such person is a member of the 
armed forces of the Union, in a unit armoury referred to in that sub -section.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall apply to any dealer in firearms or to any member of 
a rifle club or rifle association licensed or recognised by the Central Government using a point 22 
bore rifle or an air rifle for target practice.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 6) (both  inclusive) of section 21 shall apply in relation 
to any deposit of firearms under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) as they apply in relation to the deposit 
of any arm or ammunition under s ub-section ( 1) of that section. ]  
4. Licence for acquisition and poss ession of arms of specified description in certain       
cases .―If the Central Government is of opinion that having regard to the circumstances prevailing in 
any area it is necessary or expedient in the public interest that the acquisition, possession or c arrying 
of arms other than firearms should also be regulated, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that this section shall apply to the area specified in the notification, and thereupon no person 
shall acquire, have in his possession or carry in that area arms of such class or description as may be 
specified in that notification unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Section 3 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 25 of 1983, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).    
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  6 
 5. Licence for manufacture, sale, et c., of arms and ammunition .―1[(1)] No person shall — 
(a) 2[use, manufacture] sell, transfer, convert, repair, test or prove, or  
(b) expose or offer for sale or transfer or have in his possession for sale, transfer, conversion, 
repair, test or proof,  
any f irearm or any other arms of such class or description as may be prescribed or any ammunition, 
unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder:  
3*    *    *    *    *  
4[(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person may, without holding a 
licence in this behalf, sell or transfer any arms or ammunition which he lawfully possesses for his own 
private use to another person who is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force to have, or is not prohibited by this Act or such other law from having in his possession such 
arms or ammunition:  
Provided that no firearm or ammunition in respect of which a licence is required under section 3 
and no arms in respect of which a licence is required under section 4 shall be so sold or transferred by 
any person unless — 
(a) he has informed in writing the district magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer in 
charge of the nearest police station of his intention to sell or transfer such firearms, ammunition or 
other arms and the name and address of the person to whom he intends to sell or transfer such 
firearms, ammunition or the other arms, and  
(b) a period of not less than forty -five days has expi red after the giving of such information.]  
6. Licence for the shortening of guns or conversion of imitation firearms into firearms .―No 
person shall shorten the barrel of a firearm or convert an imitation firearm into a firearm unless he 
holds in this behalf a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  
Explanation .―In this section, the expression “imitation firearm ” means anything which has the 
appearance of being a firearm, whether it is capable of discharging any shot, bullet or other missile or 
not. 
7. Prohibition of acquisition or possession, or of manufacture or sale of prohibited a rms or 
prohibited ammunition .―No person shall ― 
(a) acquire, have in his possession or carry; or  
(b) 5[use, manufacture] sell, transfer, convert, repair, test or prove; or  
(c) expose or offer for sale or transfer or have in his possession for sale, transfer, conversion, 
repair, test or  proof;  
any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition unless he has been specially authorised by the Central 
Government in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Section  5 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 25 of 1983, s. 4 (w .e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1988, s. 3, for “manufacture ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  
3. The proviso omitted by Act 25 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
4. Ins. by s.  4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1988, s. 4, for “manufacture ” (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  7 
 8. Prohibition of sale or transfer of firearms not bearing identification marks .―(1) No 
person shall obliterate, remove,  alter or forge any name, number or other identification mark stamped 
or otherwise shown on a firearm.  
(2) No person shall sell or transfer any firearm which does not bear the name of the maker, 
manufacturer ’s number or other identification mark stamped o r otherwise shown thereon in a manner 
approved by the Central Government.  
(3) Whenever any person has in his possession any firearm without such name, number or other 
identification mark or on which such name, number or other identification mark has been obliterated, 
removed, altered or forged, it shall be presumed unless the contrary is proved, that he has obliterated, 
removed, altered or forged that name, number or other identification mark:  
Provided that in relation to a person who has in his possessio n at the commencement of this Act 
any firearm without such name, number or other identification mark stamped or otherwise shown 
thereon, the provisions of this sub -section shall not take effect until after the expiration of one year 
from such commencement.  
9. Prohibition of acquisition or possession by, or of sale or transfer to, young persons and 
certain other persons of firearms, etc. ―(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of 
this Act, ― 
(a) no person, ― 
(i) who  has not completed the age o f 1[twenty -one years], or  
(ii) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence involving violence or moral 
turpitude to imprisonment for 2[any term], at any time during a period of five years after the 
expiration of the sentence, or  
(iii) who has bee n ordered to exec ute under Chapter VIII of the 3[Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),] a bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour, at any time 
during the term of the bond,  
shall acquire, have in his possession or carry any firearm or ammun ition;  
(b) no person shall sell or transfer any firearm or ammunition to, or convert, repair, test or 
prove any firearm or ammunition for, any other person whom he knows, or has reason to 
believe — 
(i) to be prohibited under clause ( a) from acquiring, havi ng in his possession or carrying 
any firearm or ammunition, or  
(ii) to be of unsound mind at the time of such sale or transfer, or such conversion, repair, 
test or proof.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), a person who has 
attained the prescribed age -limit may use under prescribed conditions such firearms as may be 
prescribed in the course of his training in the use of such firearms:  
Provided that different age -limits may be prescribed in relation to different  types of firearms.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 5, for “sixteen  years ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “a term of not less than six months” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ” (w.e .f. 22 -6-1983).  8 
 10. Licence for import and export of arms, etc .―(1) No person shall bring into, or take out of, 
India by sea, land or air any arms or ammunition unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that — 
(a) a person who i s entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being in force to 
have, or is not prohibited by this Act or such other law from having, in his possession any arms or 
ammunition, may without a licence in this behalf bring into, or take out of , India such arms or 
ammunition in reasonable quantities for his own private use;  
(b) a person being a bona fide  tourist belonging to any such country as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, who is not prohibited b y the 
laws of that country from having in his possession any arms or ammunition, may, without a 
licence under this section but in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed, bring with 
him into India arms and ammunition in reasonable quantities f or use by him for purposes only of 
sport and for no other purpose;  
Explanation .―For purposes of clause ( b) of this proviso, the word “tourist ” means a person who 
not being a citizen of India visits India for a period not exceeding six months with no other object than 
recreation, sight -seeing, or participation in a representative capa city in meetings convened by the 
Central Government or in international conferences, associations or other bodies.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sub -section ( 1), where the 
1[Commissioner  of Customs ] or any other officer empowere d by the Central Government in this 
behalf has any doubt as to the applicability of clause ( a) or clause ( b) of that proviso to any person 
who claims that such clause is applicable to him, or as to the reasonableness of the quantities of arms 
or ammunition  in the possession of any person referred to in such clause, or as to the use to which 
such arms or ammunition may be put by such person, may detain the arms or ammunition in the 
possession of such person until he receives the orders of the Central Governm ent in relation thereto.  
(3) Arms and ammunition taken from one part of India to another by sea or air or across any 
intervening territory not forming part of India, are taken out of, and brought into, India within the 
meaning of this section.  
11. Power t o prohibit import or export of arms, etc .―The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit the bringing into, or the taking out of, India, arms or 
ammunition of such classes and descriptions as may be specified in the notifica tion. 
12. Power to restrict or prohibit transport of arms .―(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, ― 
(a) direct that no person shall transport over India or any part thereof arms or ammunition of 
such classes and descriptions  as may be specified in the notification unless he holds in this behalf 
a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder; or  
(b) prohibit such transport altogether.  
(2) Arms or ammunition tran s-shipped at a sea port or an airport in India are transported within the 
meaning of this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 89, for “Collector of Customs” (w.e.f. 26 -5-1995).  9 
 CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES  
13. Grant of licences .―(1) An application for the grant of a licence under Chapter II shall be 
made to the licensing authority and shall be in such form, contain such particulars and be 
accompanied by such fee, if any, as may be prescribed.  
1[(2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority shall call for the report of the officer in 
charge of the nearest police station on that application, and such officer shall send his report within 
the prescribed time.  
(2A) The licensing authority, after such inquiry, if any, as i t may consider necessary, and after 
considering the report received under sub -section ( 2), shall, subject to the other provisions of this 
Chapter, by order in writing either grant the licence or refuse to grant the same:  
Provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest police station does not send his report on 
the application within the prescribed time, the licensing authority may, if it deems fit, make such 
order, after the expiry of the prescribed time, without further waiting for that report.]  
(3) The licensing authority shall grant — 
(a) a licence under section 3 where the licence is required ―  
(i) by a citizen of India in respect of a smooth bore gun having a barrel of not less than 
twenty inches in length to be used for protection or sport or in respect of a muzzle loading gun 
to be used for bona fide  crop protection:  
Provided that where ha ving regard to the circumstances of any case, the licensing 
authority is satisfied that a muzzle loading gun will not be sufficient for crop protection, the 
licensing authority may grant a licence in respect of any other smooth bore gun as aforesaid 
for su ch protection, or  
(ii) in respect of a point 22 bore rifle or an air rifle to be used for target practice by a 
member of a rifle  club or rifle association licensed or recognised by the Central Government;  
(b) a licence under section 3 in any other case or a licence under section 4, section 5,      
section 6, section 10 or section 12, if the licensing authority is satisfied that the person by whom 
the licence is required has a good reason for obtaining the same.  
14. Refusal of licences .―(1) Notwithstandin g anything in section 13, the licensing authority shall 
refuse to grant ― 
(a) a licence under section 3, section 4 or section 5 where such licence is required in respect 
of any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition;  
(b) a licence in any other case under  Chapter II, ―  
(i) where such licence is required by a person whom the licensing authority has reason to 
believe — 
(1) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force from 
acquiring, having in his possession or carrying any arms  or ammunition, or  
(2) to be of unsound mind, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 6, for  sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  10 
 (3) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or  
(ii) where the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or 
for public safety to refuse to grant such lice nce. 
(2) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant any licence to any person merely on the 
ground that such person does not own or possess sufficient property.  
(3) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence to any person it shall rec ord in writing 
the reasons for such refusal and furnish to that person on demand a brief statement of the same unless 
in any case the licensing authority is of the opinion that it will not be in the public interest to furnish 
such statement.  
15. Duration a nd renewal of licence .―(1) A licence under section 3 shall, unless revoked 
earlier, continue in force for a period of three years from the date on which it is granted:  
Provided that such a licence may be granted for a shorter period if the person by whom the licence 
is require d so desires or if the licensing authority for reasons to be recorded in writing considers in 
any case that the licence should be granted for a shorter period.  
(2) A licence under any other provision of Chapter II shall, unless revoked earlier, continue in  
force for such period from the date on which it is granted as the licensing authority may in each case 
determine.  
(3) Every licence shall, unless the licensing authority for reasons to be recorded in writing 
otherwise decides in any case, be renewable fo r the same period for which the licence was originally 
granted and shall be so renewable from time to time, and the provisions of sections 13 and 14 shall 
apply to the renewal of a licence as they apply to the grant thereof.  
16. Fees, etc., for licence .―The fees on payment of which, the conditions subject to which and 
the form in which a licence shall be granted or renewed shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that different fees, different conditions and different forms may be prescribed for 
differe nt types of licences:  
Provided further that a licence may contain in addition to prescribed conditions such other 
conditions as may be considered necessary by the licensing authority in any particular case.  
17. Variation, suspension and revocation of lice nces.―(1) The licensing authority may vary the 
conditions subject to which a licence has been granted except such of them as have been prescribed 
and may for that purpose require the licence -holder by notice in writing to deliver -up the licence to it 
withi n such time as may specified in the notice.  
(2) The licensing authority may, on the application of the holder of a licence, also vary the 
conditions of the licence except such of them as have been prescribed.  
(3) The licensing authority may by order in wri ting suspend a licence for such period as it thinks 
fit or revoke a licence, ― 
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the holder of the licence is prohibited by this Act 
or by any other law for the time being in force, from acquiring, having in his possession or 
carrying any arms or ammunition, or is of unsound mind, or i s for any reason unfit for a licence 
under this Act; or  11 
 (b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or for 
public safety to suspend or revoke the licence; or  
(c) if the licence was obtained by the suppression of material information or on the basis of 
wrong information provided by the holder of the licence or any other person on his behalf at the 
time of applying for it; or  
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has been contravened; or  
(e) if the holder of t he licence has failed to comply with a notice under sub -sectio n (1) 
requiring him to deliver -up the licence.  
(4) The licensing authority may also revoke a licence on the application of the holder thereof.  
(5) Where the licensing authority makes an order va rying a licence under sub -section ( 1) or an 
order suspending or revoking a licence under sub -section ( 3), it shall record in writing the reasons 
therefor and furnish to the holder of the licence on demand a brief statement of the same unless in any 
case th e licensing authority is of the opinion that it will not be in the public interest to furnish such 
statement.  
(6) The authority to whom the licensing authority is subordinate may by order in writing suspend 
or revoke a licence on any ground on which it may  be suspended or revoked by the licensing 
authority; and the foregoing provisions of this section shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the 
suspension or revocation of a licence by such authority.  
(7) A court convicting the holder of a licence of a ny offence under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder may also suspend or revoke the licence:  
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the suspension or revocation 
shall become void.  
(8) An order of suspension or revocation und er sub -section ( 7) may also be made by an appellate 
court or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision.  
(9) The Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, suspend or revoke or direct 
any licensing authority to suspend or revok e all or any licences granted under this Act throughout 
India or any part thereof.  
(10) On the suspension or revocation of a licence under this section the holder thereof shall 
without delay surrender the licence to the authority by whom it has been suspen ded or revoked or to 
such other authority as may be specified in this behalf in the order of suspension or revocation.  
18. Appeals .―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority refusing to grant a 
licence or varying the conditions of a licence or by an order of the licensing authority or the authority 
to whom the licensing authority is subordinate, suspending or rev oking a licence may prefer an appeal 
against that order to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the appellate authority) and within such 
period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order made by , or under the direction  of, the 
Government.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate  authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period.  12 
 (3) The period prescribed for an appeal shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of 
the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), with respect to the comput ation of periods of limitation 
thereunder.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be 
accompanied by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed against where such statement 
has been furnished to the  appellant and by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(5) In disposing of an appeal the appellate authority shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been given a reasonable 
opportun ity of being heard.  
(6) The order appealed against shall, unless the appellate authority conditionally or 
unconditionally directs otherwise, be in force pending the disposal of the appeal against such order.  
(7) Every order of the appellate authority conf irming, modifying or reversing the order appealed 
against shall be final.  
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND PROCEDURE  
19. Power to demand production of licence, etc .―(1) Any police officer or any other officer 
specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Governm ent may demand the production of his 
licence from any person who is carrying any arms or ammunition.  
(2) If the person upon whom a demand is made refuses or fails to produce the licence or to show 
that he is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being in force to carry such arms 
or ammunition without a licence, the officer concerned may require him to give his name and address 
and if such officer considers it necessary, seize from that person the arms or ammunition which he is 
carryin g. 
(3) If that person refuses to give his name and address or if the officer concerned suspects that 
person of giving a false name or address or of intending to abscond, such officer may arrest him 
without warrant.  
20. Arrest of persons conveying arms, etc ., under suspicious circumstances .―Where any 
person is found carrying or conveying any arms or ammunition whether covered by a licence or not, 
in such manner or under such circumstances as to afford just grounds of suspicion that the same are or 
is being carried by him with intent to use t hem, or that the same may be used, for any unlawful 
purpose, any magistrate, any police officer or any other public servant or any person employed or 
working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, vehicle or any other means of conveyance, may arrest him 
without  warrant and seize from him such arms or ammunition.  
21. Deposit of arms, etc., on possession ceasing to be lawful .―(1) Any person having in his 
possession any arms or ammunition the possession whereof has, in consequence of the expiration of 
the duration of a licence or of the suspension or revocation of a licence or by the issue of a 
notification under section 4 or b y any reason whatever, ceased to be lawful, shall without unnecessary 
delay deposit the same either with the officer in charge of the nearest police station or subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, with a licensed dealer or where such person is a member of the 
armed forces of the Union, in a unit armoury.  13 
 Explanation .―In this sub -section “unit armoury ” includes an armoury in a ship or establishment 
of the Indian Navy.  
(2) Where arms or ammunition have or has been deposited under sub -section ( 1), the depositor or 
in the case of his death, his legal representative, shal l, at any time before the expiry of such period as 
may be prescribed, be entitled — 
(a) to receive back anything so deposited on his becoming entitled by virtue of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force to have the same in his possession, or  
(b) to dispose, or authorise the disposal, of anything so deposited by sale or otherwise to any 
person entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time being in force to have, or not 
prohibited by this Act or such other law from having, the sa me in his possession and to receive 
the proceeds of any such disposal:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to authorise the return or disposal of 
anything of which confiscation has been directed under section 32.  
(3) All things depo sited and not received back or disposed of under sub -section ( 2) within the 
period therein referred to shall be forfeited to Government by order of the district magistrate:  
Provided that in the case of suspension of a licence no such forfeiture shall be o rdered in respect 
of a thing covered by the licence during the period of suspension.  
(4) Before making an order under sub -section ( 3) the district magistrate shall, by notice in writing 
to be served upon the depositor or in the case of his death, upon his  legal representative, in the 
prescribed manner, require him to show cause within thirty days from the service of the notice why 
the things specified in the notice should not be forfeited.  
(5) After considering the cause, if any, shown by the depositor or , as the case may be, his legal 
representative, the district magistrate shall pass such order as he thinks fit.  
(6) The Government may at any time return to the depositor or his legal representative things 
forfeited to it or the proceeds of disposal there of wholly or in part.  
22. Search and seizure by magistrate .―(1) Whenever any magistrate has reason to believe — 
(a) that any person residing within the local limits of his jurisdiction has in his possession any 
arms or ammunition for any unlawful purpose, or  
(b) that such person cannot be left in the possession of any arms or ammunition without 
dange r to the public peace or safety,  
the magistrate may, after having recorded the reasons for his belief, cause a search to be made of the 
house or premises occupied by such person or in which the magistrate has reason to b elieve that such 
arms or ammunition are or is to be found and may have such arms or ammunition, if any, seized and 
detain the same in safe custody for such period as he thinks necessary, although that person may be 
entitled by virtue of this Act or any oth er law for the time being in force to have the same in his 
possession.  
(2) Every search under this section shall be conducted by or in the presence of a magistrate or by 
or in the presence of some officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.  14 
 23. Search of vessels, vehicles for arms, etc .―Any magistrate, any police officer or any other 
officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government, may for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any contravention of this Act or the rules made thereunder is being or is likely to 
be commit ted, stop and search any vessel, vehicle or other means of conveyance and seize any arms 
or ammunition that may be found therein along with such vessel, vehicle or other means of 
conveyance.  
24. Seizure and detention under orders of the Central Government .―The Central 
Government may at any time order the seizure of any arms or ammunition in the possession of any 
person, notwithstanding that such person is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force to have the same in his pos session, and may detain the same for such period as it thinks 
necessary for the public peace and safety.  
1[24A. Prohibition as to possession of notified arms in disturbed areas, etc. ―(1) Where the 
Central Government is satisfied that there is extensive dis turbance of public peace and tranquility or 
imminent danger of such disturbance in any area and that for the prevention of offences involving the 
use of arms in such area, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by notification in the         
Officia l Gazette ― 
(a) specify the limits of such area;  
(b) direct that before the commencement of the period specified in the notification (which 
period shall be a period commencing from a date not earlier t han the fourth day after the date of 
publication of the notifica tion in the Official Gazette), every person having in his possession in 
such area any arms of such description as may be specified in the notification (the arms so 
specified being hereafter in this section referred to as notified arms), shall deposit the s ame before 
such commencement in accordance with the provisions of section 21 and for this purpose the 
possession by such person of any notified arms shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other provision of this Act (except section 41) or in any other law for the time being in force, as 
from the date of publication of such notification in the Official Gazette be deemed to have ceased 
to be lawful;  
(c) declare that as from the commencement of, and until the expiry of, the period specified in 
the no tification, it shall not be lawful for any person to have in his possession in such area any 
notified arms;  
(d) authorise any such officer subordinate to the Central Government or a State Government 
as may be specified in the notification, ― 
(i) to search at any time during the period specified in the notification any person in, or 
passing through, or any premises in, or any animal or vessel or vehicle or other conveyance of 
whatever nature in or passing through, or any receptacle or other c ontainer of whatever nature 
in, such area if such officer has reason to believe that any notified arms are secreted by such 
person or in such premises or on such animal or in such vessel, vehicle or other conveyance or 
in such receptacle or other container ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 7 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  15 
 (ii) to seize at any time during the period specified in the notification any notified arms in 
the possession of any person in such area or discovered through a search under sub -clause ( i), 
and detain the same during the period specified in the notificat ion. 
(2) The period specified in a  notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any area shall 
not, in the first instance, exceed ninety days, but the Central Government may amend such 
notification to extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding ninety days at any 
one time if, in the opinion of that Government, there continues to be in such area such disturbance of 
public peace and tranquillity as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or imminent danger thereof and that 
for the pr evention of offences involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or expedient so to 
do. 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 197 4), relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or sei zure made under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “arms ” includes ammunition;  
(b) where the period specified in a notification, as originally issued under sub -section ( 1), is 
extended under sub -section ( 2), then, in relation to such notification, references in sub -section ( 1) 
to “the period specifie d in the notification ” shall be construed as references to the period as so 
extended.  
24B. Prohibition as to carrying of not ified  arms  in or through public places in disturbed  
areas , etc.―(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there is extensiv e disturbance of 
public peace and tranquillity or imminent danger of such disturbance in any area and that for the 
prevention of offences involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or expedient so to do, it 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ― 
(a) specify the limits of such area;  
(b) direct that during the period specified in the notification (which period shall be a period 
commencing from a date not earlier than the second day after the date of publication of the 
notification in the Official Gazette), no person shall carry or otherwise have in his possession any 
arms of such description as may be specified in the notification (the arms so specified being 
hereafter in this section referred to as notified arms) through or in any public place in such area;  
(c) authorise any such officer subordinate to the Central Government or a State Government 
as may be specified in the notification, ― 
(i) to search at any time during the period specified in the notification any person in, or 
passing through, or any premises in or forming part of, or any animal or vessel or vehicle or 
other conveyance of whatever nature in or passing through, or any re ceptacle or other 
container of whatever nature in, any public place in such area if such officer has reason to 
believe that any notified arms are secreted by such person or in such premises or on such 
animal or in such vessel, vehicle or other conveyance o r in such receptacle or other container;  
(ii) to seize at any time during the period specified in the notification any notified arms 
being carried by or otherwise in the possession of any person, through or in a public place in 
such area or discovered thro ugh a search under sub -clause ( i), and detain the same during the 
period specified in the notification.  16 
  (2) The period specified in a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any area shall 
not, in the first instance, exceed ninety days, bu t the Central Government may amend such 
notification to extend such period from time to time by any period not exceeding ninety days at any 
one time if, in the opinion of that Government, there continues to be in such area such disturbance of 
public peace and tranquil lity as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or imminent danger thereof and that 
for the prevention of offences involving the use of arms in such area it is necessary or expedient so to 
do. 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 197 3 (2 of 1974) , relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure made under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “arms ” includes ammunition;  
(b) “public place ” means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public or any 
section of the public; and  
(c) where the period specified in a notification, as originally issued under sub -section ( 1), is 
extend ed under sub -section ( 2), then, in relation to such notification, references in sub -section ( 1) 
to “the period specified in the notification ” shall be construed as references to the period as so 
extended.]  
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
25. Punishment f or certain offences .―1[(1) Whoever — 
(a) manufactures, sells, transfers, converts, repairs, tests or proves, or exposes or offers for 
sale or transfer, or has in his possession for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or proof, any 
arms or ammunition in contravention of se ction 5; or  
(b) shortens the barrel of a firearm or converts an imitation firearm into a firearm in 
contravention of section 6; or  
2*    *    *           *                        *  
(d) brings into, or takes out of, India, any arms or ammunition of any cl ass or description in 
contravention of section 11 ,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which 
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.  
3[(1A) Whoever acquires, has in his possessi on or carries any prohibited arms or prohibited 
ammunition in contravention of section 7 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
(1AA) who ever manufactures, sells, transfers, converts, repairs, tests or proves, or exposes or 
offers for sale or transfer or has in his possession for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or proof, 
any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition in contravention  of section 7 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 8, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 42 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  17 
 1[(1AAA )] Whoever has in contravention of a notification issued under s ection 24A in his 
possession or in contravention of a notification issued under section 24B carries or otherwise has in 
his possession, any arms or ammunition shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than 2[three years, but which may extend to seven years] and shall also be liable to fine.  
(1B) Whoever — 
(a) acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm or ammunition in contravention of 
section 3; or  
(b) acquires, has in his possession or carries in any place specif ied by notification under 
section 4 any arms of such class or description as has been specified in that notification in 
contravention of that section; or  
(c) sells or transfers any firearm which does not bear the name of the maker, manufacturer ’s 
number o r other identification mark stamped or otherwise shown thereon as required by            
sub-section ( 2) of section 8 or does any act in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of that section; or  
(d) being a person to whom sub -clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 9 applies, acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm or ammunition in 
contravention of that section; or  
(e) sells or transfers, or converts, repairs, tests or proves any firearm or ammunition in 
contr avention of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9; or  
(f) brings into, or takes out of, India, any arms or ammunition in contravention of           
section 10; or  
(g) transports any arms or ammunition in contravention of section 12; or  
(h) fails to  deposit arms or ammunition as required by sub -section ( 2) of section 3, or              
sub-section ( 1) of section 21; or  
(i) being a manufacturer of, or dealer in, arms or ammunition, fails, on being required to do so 
by rules made under section 44, to maintain a record or account or to make therein all such entries 
as are required by such rules or intentionally makes a false entry therein or prevents or obstructs 
the inspection of such record or account or the making of copies of entries therefrom or pr events 
or obstructs the entry into any premises or other place where arms or ammunition are or is 
manufactured or kept or intentionally fails to exhibit or conceals such arms or ammunition or 
refuses to point out where the same are or is manufactured or ke pt,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term  which shall not be less than 3[one year] but which 
may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine:  
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the jud gment 
impose a sentence of impriso nment for a term of less than 3[one year] .] 
4[(1C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1B), whoever commits an offence 
punishable under that sub -section in any disturbed area shall be punishable with impriso nment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 1A) renumbered as sub -section ( 1AAA ) thereof by Act 42 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988) . 
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 1985, s. 2, for “one year, but which may extend to five years” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1985).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 28 -5-1985).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -5-1985).  18 
 Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, “disturbed area ” means any area declared to 
be a disturbed area under any en actment, for the time being in force, making provision for the 
suppression of disorder and restoration and maintenance of public order, and includes any areas 
specified by notification under section 24A or section 24B.]  
 (2) Whoever being a person to whom sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 
applies, acquires, has in his possession or carries any firearm or ammunition in contravention of that 
section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or wi th fine, 
or with both.  
1[(3) Whoever sells or transfers any firearm, ammunition or other arms — 
(i) without informing the district magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station, of the intended sale or transfer of th at firearm, ammunition or other arms; 
or  
(ii) before the expiration of the period of forty -five days from the date of giving such 
information to such district magistrate or the officer in charge of the police station,  
in contravention of the provisions o f clause ( a) or clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of 
section 5, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine of an amount which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.]  
(4) Whoever fails  to deliver -up a licence when so required by the licensing authority under       
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 for the purpose of varying the conditions specified in the licence or fails 
to surrender a licence to the appropriate authority under sub -section  (10) of that section on its 
suspension or revocation shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine of an amount which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(5) Whoever, when required under sectio n 19 to give his name and address, refuses to give such 
name and address or gives a name or address which subsequently transpires to be false shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine of an amount 
which m ay extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.  
2[26. Secret contraventions .―(1) Whoever does any act in contravention of any of the 
provisions of section 3, 4, 10 or 12 in such manner as to indicate an intention that such act may not be 
known to any public  servant or to any person employed or working upon a railway, aircraft, vessel, 
vehicle or any other means of conveyance, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years and also with fine.  
(2) Whoever does any act in contravention of any of the provisions of section 5, 6, 7 or 11 in such 
manner as to indicate an intention that such act may not be known to any public servant or to any 
person employed or working upon a railway, airc raft, vessel, vehicle or any other means of 
conveyance, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years 
but which may extend to ten years and also with fine.  
(3) Whoever on any search being made under section 22 con ceals or attempts to conceal any arms 
or ammunition, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and 
also with fine.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 8, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section  26 (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  19 
 1[27. Punishment for using arms, etc .―(1) Whoever uses any arms or ammunition in 
contravention of section 5 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less 
than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever uses any proh ibited arms or prohibited ammunition in contravention of section 7 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
(3) Whoever uses an y prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition or does any act in contravention 
of section 7 and such use or act results in the death of any other person, shall be punishable with 
death.]  
28. Punishment for use and possession of firearms or imitation firearms in certain      
cases .―Whoever makes or attempts to make any use whatsoever of a firearm or an imitation firearm 
with intent to resist or prevent the lawful arrest or detention of himself or any other person shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term  which may extend to seven years  2[and with fine] .  
Explanation .―In this section the expression “imitation firearm ” has the same meaning as in 
section 6.  
29. Punishment for k nowingly purchasing arms, etc., from unlicensed person or for 
delivering arms, etc ., to person not entitled to possess the same .―Whoever ― 
(a) purchases any firearm s or any other arms of such class or description as may be prescribed 
or any ammunition from any other person knowing that such other person is not licensed or 
authorised unde r section 5; or  
(b) delivers any arms or ammunition into the possession of another person without previously 
ascertaining that such other person is entitled by virtue of this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force to have, and is not prohibited b y this Act or such other law from having, in his 
possession the same;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may extend to 3[three years, or with fine, or 
with both] . 
30. Punishment for contravention of licence or rule .―Whoever contravenes any condition      
of a licence or any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder, for which no punishment is 
provided elsewhere in this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may extend    
to 4[six month s], or with fine which may extend to 5[two thousand] rupees, or with both.  
31. Punishment for subsequent offences .―Whoever having been convicted of an offence under 
this Act is again convicted of an offence under this Act shall be punishable with double the p enalty 
provided for the latter offence.  
32. Power to confiscate .―(1) When any person is convicted under this Act of any offence 
committed by him in respect of any arms or ammunition, it shall be in the discretion of the convicting 
court further to direct t hat the whole or any portion of such arms or ammunition, and any vessel, 
vehicle or other  means of conveyance and any re ceptacle or thing containing, or used to conceal, the 
arms or ammunition shall be confiscated:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1988, s. 6, for section  27 (w.e.f. 27 -5-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 10, for “, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
3. Sub s. by s. 11, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “five hundred” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  20 
 Provided that if the conviction is set a side on appeal or otherwise, the order of confiscation shall 
become void.  
(2) An order of confiscation may also be made by the appellate court or by the High Court when 
exercising its powers of revision.  
33. Offences by companies .―(1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the o ffence was committed without his knowledge and 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it  is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall a lso be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this section, ―  
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
34. Sanction of Central  Government for warehousing of arms .―Notwithstand ing anything 
contained in the 1[Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) ,] no arms or ammunition shall be deposited in a ny 
warehouse licensed under 2[section 58] of that Act without the sanction of the Central Governm ent. 
35. Criminal responsibility of persons in occupation of premises in certain cases .―Where 
any arms or ammunition in respect of which any offence under this Act has been or is being 
committed are or is found in any premises, vehicle or other place in th e joint occupation or under the 
joint control of several persons, each of such persons in respect of whom there is reason to believe 
that he was aware of the existence of the arms or ammunition in the premises, vehicle or other place 
shall, unless the cont rary is proved, be liable for that offence in the same manner as if it has been or is 
being committed by him alone.  
36. Information to be given regarding certain offences .―(1) Every person aware of the 
commission of any offence under this Act shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse the burden of 
proving which shall lie upon such person, give information of the same to the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station o r the magistrate having jurisdiction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 13, for “Sea Customs Act, 1878  (8 of 1878) ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “section 16 ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  21 
 (2) Every person employed or working upon any railway, aircraft, vessel, vehicle or other means 
of conveyance shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse the burden of proving which shall lie upon 
such person, give in formation to the officer in charge of the nearest police station regarding any box, 
package or bale in transit which he may have reason to suspect contains arms or ammunition in 
respect of which an offence under this Act has been or is being committed.  
37. Arrest and searches .―Save as otherwise provided in this Act, ― 
(a) all arrests and searches made under this Act or under any rules made thereunder            
shall be carried out in accorda nce with the provisions of the 1[Code of Criminal               
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)], relating respec tively to arrests and searches made under that Code;  
(b) any person arrested and any arms or ammunition seized under this Act by a person not 
being a magistrate or a police officer shall be delivered without delay  to the officer in charge of 
the nearest police station and that officer shall — 
(i) either release that person on his executing a bond with or without sureties to appear 
before a magistrate and keep the things seized in his custody till the appearance of t hat person 
before the magistrate, or  
 (ii) should that person fail to execute the bond and to furnish, if so required, sufficient 
sureties, produce that person and those things without delay before the magistrate.  
38. Offences to be cognizable .―Every offen ce under this Act shall be cogniza ble within the 
meaning of the 1[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] . 
39. Previous sanction of the district magistrate necessary in certain cases .―No prosecution 
shall be instituted against any person in respect o f any offence under section 3 without the previous 
sanction of the district magistrate.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall  lie against any person for any thing which is in good faith done or in tended to be done under this 
Act. 
41. Power to exempt .―Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to 
such conditions, if any,  as it may specify in the notification, ― 
(a) 2[exempt any person or class of persons (either generally or in relation to such description 
of arms and ammunition as may be specified in the notification)], or exclude any description of 
arms or ammunition, or  withdraw any part of India, from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of this Act; and  
(b) as often as may be, cancel any such notification and again subject, by a like notification, 
the person or class of persons or the description of arms and ammunition or the part of India to the 
operation of such provisions.  
42. Power to take census of firearms .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct a census to be taken of all firearms in any area and empower any officer of 
Government to take such census.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 14, for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) ” (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “exempt any person or c lass of persons”  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  22 
 (2) On the issue of any such notification all persons having in the ir possession any firearm in that 
area shall furnish to the officer concerned such information as he may require in relation thereto and 
shall produce before him such firearms if he so requires.  
43. Power to delegate .―(1) The Central Government may, by not ification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power or function which may be exercised or performed by it under this Act 
other than the power under section 41 or the power under section 44 may, in relation to such matters 
and subject to such condition s, if any, as it may specify in the notification, be exercised or performed 
also by ― 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government,  
as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Any rules made by the Central Government un der this Act may confer powers or impose 
duties or authorise the conferring of powers or imposition of duties upon any State Government or 
any officer or authority subordinate thereto.  
44. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notificatio n in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the appointment , jurisdiction, control and funct ions of licensing authorities 1[including the 
areas and the categories of arms and ammunition for which they may grant licences];  
(b) the form and particulars of application for the grant or renewal of a licence and where t he 
application is for the renewal of a licence, the time within which it shall be made;  
(c) the form in which and the conditions subject to which any licence may be granted or 
refused, renewed, varied, suspended or revoked;  
(d) where no period has been spe cified in this Act, the period for which any licence shall 
continue to be in force;  
(e) the fees payable in respect of any application for the grant or renewal of a licence and in 
respect of any licence granted or renewed and the manner of paying the same;   
 (f) the manner in which the maker ’s name, the manufacturer ’s number or other identification 
mark of a firearm shall be stamped or otherwise shown thereon;  
(g) the procedure for the test or proof of any firearms;  
(h) the firearms that may be used in the course of training, the age -limits of persons who may 
use them and the conditions for their use by such persons;  
(i) the authority to whom appeals may be preferred under section 18, the procedure to be 
followed by such authority and the period within which  appeals shall be preferred, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees;  
(j) the maintenance of records or accounts of anything done under a licence other than a 
licence under section 3 or section 4, the form of, and the ent ries to be made in, such records or 
accounts and the exhibition of such records or accounts to any police officer or to any officer of 
Government empowered in this behalf;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 16  (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  23 
 (k) the entry and inspection by any police officer or by any officer of Government e mpowered 
in this behalf of any premises or other place in which arms or ammunition are or is manufactured 
or in which arms or ammunition are or is kept by a manufacturer of or dealer in such arms or 
ammunition and the exhibition of the same to such officer ; 
(l) the conditions subject to which arms or ammunition may be deposited with a licensed 
dealer or in a unit armoury as required by sub -section ( 1) of section 21 and the period on the 
expiry of which the things so deposited may be forfeited;  
(m) any other  matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made , before 
each House of Parliament , while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in on e session or in 1[two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so, 
however , that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
45.  Act not to apply in certain cases. ―Nothing in this Act shall apply to ― 
(a) arms or ammunition on board any sea -going vessel or any aircraft and forming part of the 
ordinary armament or equipment of such vessel or aircraft;  
(b) the acquisiti on, possession or carrying, the manufacture, repair, conversion, test or proof, 
the sale or transfer or the import, export or transport of arms or ammunition ― 
(i) by or under orders of the Central Government, or  
(ii) by a public servant in the course of hi s duty as such public servant, or  
(iii) by a member of the National Cadet Corps raised and maintained under the      
National Cadet Corps Act, 1948 (31 of 1948), or by any officer or enrolled person of the 
Territorial Army raised and maintained under the T erritorial Army Act, 1948 (56 of 1948), or 
by any member of any other forces raised and maintained or that may hereafter be raised and 
maintained under any Central Act, or by any member of such other forces as the Central 
Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify, in the course of his duty as 
such member, officer or enrolled person;  
(c) any weapon of an obsolete pattern or of antiquarian value or in disrepair which is not 
capable of being used as a Firearm either with or without repai r; 
(d) the acquisition, possession or carrying by a person of minor parts of arms or ammunition 
which are not intended to be used along with complementary parts acquired or possessed by that 
or any other person.  
46. Repeal of Act 11 of 1878 .―(1) The Indian Arms Act, 1878 (11 of 1878), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Arms Act, 1878 (11 of 1878) , and without prejudice 
to the provisions of sections 6 and 24 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), every li cence 
granted or renewed under the first -mentioned Act and in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall, unless sooner revoked, continue in force after such commencement for the unexpired 
portion of the period for which it has been grante d or renewed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1983, s. 16, for certain words (w.e.f. 22 -6-1983).  
--------------------------The Coal Grading Board (Repeal) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 THE COAL GRADING BOARD (REPEAL) ACT, 1959  
  _________  
ARRNGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Repeal of Act 31 of 1925 and dissolution of Coal Grading Board . 
4. Consequential provisions . 
  2 THE COAL GRADING BOARD (REPEAL) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1959  
[9th May, 1959 .] 
An Act to repeal the Coal Grading Board Act, 1925, and to provide for certain matters incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic  of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Grading Board (Repeal) 
Act, 1959.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Coal Board ” means the Coal Board established under section 4 of the Coal Mines 
(Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952 (12 of 1952);  
(c) “Coal Grading Board ” means the Coal Grading Board constituted under section 3 of the Coal 
Grading Board Act, 1925  (31 of 1925) . 
3. Repeal of Act 31 of 1925 and dissolution of Coal Grading Board .—On the appointed day, the 
Coal Grading Board Act, 1925 (31 of 1925), shall stand repealed, and the Coal Grading Board shall stand 
dissolved.  
4. Consequential provisions .—(1) All moneys and other property, of whatever kind, owned by or 
vested in, the Coal Grading Board immediately before the appointed day and a ll debts, liabilities and 
obligations of that Board then existing shall, on the appointed day, stand transferred to and vested in the 
Coal Board.  
(2) Anything done or any action taken before the appointed day by the Coal Grading Board shall, so 
far as it i s not inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 
1952 (12 of 1952), or the rules made thereunder, be as valid and effectual as if it had been done or taken 
by the Coal Board.  
                                                           
1. 14th August, 1959, vide notification No. S.O. 1771, dated 7th August, 1959, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3( ii).   
--------------------------The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS ACT, 1959  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions and interpretation . 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS  
3. Incorporation of the Institute . 
4. Entry of names in the Register.  
5. Fellows and Associates.  
6. Certificate of practice . 
7. Members to be known as cost accountants.  
8. Disabilities . 
CHAPTER III  
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE  
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute.  
10. Re-election or re-nomination to Council.  
10A. Settlement of disputes regarding election.  
10B. Establishment of  Tribunal.  
11. Nomination in default of election.  
12. President and Vice -president.  
13. Resignation of membership and casual vacancies.  
14. Duration and dissolution of Council.  
15. Functions of the Council . 
15A. Functions of Institute.  
15B. Imparting education by Universities and other bodies.  
16. Officers and employees, salary, allowances, etc.  
17. Committees of the Council.  
18. Finances of the Council.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTER OF MEMBERS  
19. Register.  
20. Removal from the Register.  
CHAPTER V  
  MISCONDUCT  
21. Disciplinary Directorate.  
21A. Board of Discipline.  
21B. Disciplinary Committee.  
21C. Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and Director (Discipline) to have 
powers of civil court.  
21D.Transitional provisions.  2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Professional or other misconduct defined.  
22A. Constitution of Appellate Authority.  
22B. Term of office of members of Authority.  
22C. Procedure, etc., of Authority.  
22D. Officers and other staff of Authority.  
22E. Appeal to Authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGIONAL  COUNCIL  
23. Constitution and functions of Regional Councils.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc.  
25. Penalty for using name of the Council, awarding degrees  of cost accountancy, etc.  
26. Companies not to engage in cost accountancy.  
27. Unqualified persons not to sign  documents . 
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Sanction to prosecute.  
CHAPTER VIIA  
QUALITY  REVIEW  BOARD  
29A. Establishment of Quality Review Board.  
29B. Functions of Board.  
29C. Procedure of Board.  
29D. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and members of Board and its expenditure.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DISSSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS REGISTERED UNDER THE 
COMPANIES  ACT, 1956 (1 OF 1956)  
30. Dissolution of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants registered under the Companies Act, 
1956 . 
31. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the dissolved company to the Institute.  
32. Provisions respecting employees of the dissolved company.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. [Omitted .] 
34. Alteration in the Register and cancellation of certificate.  
35. Directions of the Central Government.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36A. Members, etc., to be public servants . 
37. Maintenance of branch offices.  
38. Reciprocity . 
38A. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
39. Power to make regulations.  
40. Rules, regulations and notifications to laid before Parliament.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  3 
 THE COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1959  
[19th May , 1959.]  
An Act to make provision for the regulation of the profession of cost and works accountants.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cost and Works 
Accountants Act, 1959.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1****;  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “associate ” means an associate member of the Institute;  
3[(aa) “Authority ” means the Appellate Authority referred to in section 22A;  
(aaa) “Board ” means the Quality Review Boar d constituted under section 29A ]; 
(b) “cost accountant ” means a person who is a member of the Institute;  
(c) “Council ” means the Council of the Institute;  
(d) “dissolved company ” means the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(e) “fellow ” means a fellow of the Institute;  
4[(ea) “firm” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Pa rtnership Act, 
1932 (9 of 1932), and includes, — 
(i) the limited liability partnership as defined in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of 
the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009); or  
(ii) the sole proprietorship,  
registered  with the Institute;]  
(f) “Institute ” means the  5[Institute of Cost Accountants of India] constituted under this Act;  
3[(fa) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;]   
 4[(fb) “partner ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 
1932 (9 of 1932) or in clause ( q) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), as the case may be;  
(fc) “partnership ” means — 
(A) a partnership as defined in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932); or  
(B) a limited liability partnership which has no company as its Partner;]  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;   
(h) “President ” means the President of the Council;  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f.  15-8-1968).  
2. 28th May, 1959, vide notification No. G.S.R. 610, dated 25th May, 1959, see Gazette of India, Extraordinry, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-8-2006). 
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  4 
 (i) “Register ” means the Register of members maintained under this Act;  
1[(ia) “specified ” means specified by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
2[(iaa) “sole proprietorship ” means an individual who en gages himself in the practice of cost 
accountancy or offers to perform services referred to in clauses ( ii) to ( iv) of sub -section ( 2);] 
(ib) “Tribunal ” means a Tribunal established under sub -section ( 1) of section 10B;]   
(j) “Vice -President ” means the Vice -President of the Council;  
(k) “year” means the period commencing on the 1st day of April of any year and ending on the 
31st day of March of the succeeding year.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, a member of the Institute shall be deemed “to be in 
practice ” when, individually or in partnership with one or more members of the Institute in practice, 2[or 
in partnership with members of such other recognised professions as may be prescribed] he, in 
consideration of remunerati on received  or to be received, — 
(i) engages himself in the practice of   3[cost accountancy]; or  
(ii) offers to perform or performs services involving the costing or pricing of goods or services or 
the preparation, verification or  4[certification or auditing of cost accounting and related statements or 
holds himself out to the public as a cost accountant in practice]; or  
(iii) renders professional services or assistance in or about matters of principle or detail relating to 
cost accounting procedure or the recording, presentation or certification of costing facts or data; or  
(iv) renders such other services as, in the opinion of the Council, are or may be rendered by a cost 
accountant in practice;  
and the words “to be in practice ”, with their grammatical variations and  cognate expressions, shall be 
construed accordingly.  
Explanation .—A member of the Institute who is a whole -time salaried employee of any person shall 
not be deemed to be in practice within the meaning of this sub -section.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS  
3. Incorporation of the Institute .—(1) All persons whose names are entered in the Register at the 
commencement of this Act and all persons who may hereafter have their names entered in the Register 
under the provisions of this Act , so long as they continue to have their names borne on the said Register, 
are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the  5[Institute of Cost Accountants of India], and 
all such persons shall be known as members of the Institute.  
(2) The Instit ute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall have power to acquire, 
hold an d dispose of property, both mov able and immovable, and shall by its name sue or be sued.  
4. Entry of names in the Register .—(1) Any  of the following persons shall be entitled to have his 
name entere d in the Register, namely: — 
(i) any person who was an associate or a fellow of the dissolved company (other than an honorary 
associate or honorary fellow thereof) immediately before the com mence ment of this Act, except any 
such person who is not a permanent resident of India and is not at such commencement practicing as 
a cost accountant in India;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-8-2006 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid ., for “cost and works accountancy” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ certification of cost accounting and related statements or holds himself out to the public as a cost 
accountant in practice” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
5. Subs . by s. 3, ibid., for “Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  5 
 (ii) any person who has passed such examination and completed such training as may be 
prescrib ed for members of the Institute;  
(iii) any person who, at the commencement of this Act, is engaged in the practice of cost 
accountancy in India and who fulfills such conditions as the Central Government or the Council may 
specify in this behalf;  
(iv) any  person who has passed such other examination and completed such other training without 
India as is recognised by the Central Government or the Council as being equivalent to                         
the examination and training prescribed for members of th e Institute:  
Provided that in the case of any person who is no t permanently residing in India , the Central 
Government or the Council may impose such further conditions as it may deem fit;  
(v) any person domiciled in India, who at the commencement of this Act is studying for any 
foreign examination and is at the same time undergoing training, whether within or without India, or, 
who, having passed such examination, is at such commencement unde rgoing training whether within 
or without India : 
Provided that such foreign examination and training are recognised by the Central Government or 
the Council in this behalf:  
Provided further that the person passes the examination and completes his training within five 
years from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every person belonging to the class mentioned in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) shall have his name 
entered in the Register without the payment of any entrance fee.  
1[(3) Every person belonging to any  of the classes mentioned in clauses ( ii), (iii), (iv) and ( v) of               
sub-section ( 1) shall have his name entered in the Register on an application being made and granted in 
the prescribed manner and on payment of such fees, as may be determined,  by notification, by the 
Council, which shall not exceed rupees three thousand:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees three thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees si x thousand.]   
(4) The Central Government shall take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of having the 
names of all persons belonging to the class mentioned in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) entered in the 
Register at the commencement of this Act . 
5. Fellows and Associates .—(1) The members of the Institute shall be divided into two classes 
designated respectively as associates and fellows.  
(2) Any person other than a person to whom the provisions of sub -section ( 3) apply shall, on his name 
being e ntered in the Register, be deemed to have become an associate member of the Institute and so long 
as his name remains so entered, shall be entitled to use the letters   2[ACMA] after his name to indicate 
that he is an associate member of the  3[Institute of Cost Accountants of India].  
(3) Any person who was a fellow of the dissolved company and who is entitled to have his name 
entered in the Register under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, shall be entered in the Register as a 
fellow of the Institut e. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
2. Subs. by  Act 10 of 2012, s. 4, for “AICW A” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, for “Institute of Cost and Works Accountants” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  6 
 1[(4) A member, being an associate who has been in continuous practice in India for at least five 
years, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, or whether partly before and partly after the 
commencement of this Act, and a member who has  been an associate for a continuous period of not less 
than five years and who possesses such qualifications as the Council may prescribe with a view to 
ensuring that he has experience equivalent to the experience normally acquired as a result of continuou s 
practice for a period of five years as a cost accountant shall, on payment of such fees, as may be 
determined, by notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees five thousand, and on 
application made and granted in the prescribed manner, be entered in the Register as a fellow of the 
Institute:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees five thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees ten thousand.  
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this sub -section, a person shall be deemed to have practiced in 
India for any period for which he has held a certificate of practice under section 6, notwithstanding that he 
did not actually practice during that period.  
Explanation  II.—In computing the continuous period during which a person has been an associate of 
the Institute, there shall be included any continuous period during which the person has been an associate 
of the dissolved company immediately before he became an associate of the Institute.]  
(5) Any person whose name is entered in the Register as a fellow of the Institute and so long as his 
name remains so entered, shall be entitled to use the letters  2[FCMA] after his name to indicate that he is a 
fellow of the  3[Institute of Cost Accountants of India ]. 
6. Certificate of practice .—(1) No member of the Instit ute shall be entitled to practi se, whether in 
India or elsewhere, unless he has obtained from the Council a certificate of practice.  
4[(2) Every such member shall make an  application in such form, and pay such annual fee, for his 
certificate as may be determined, by notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees three 
thousand and such fee shall be payable on or before the 1st day of April in each year:  
Provid ed that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees three thousand, which shall not in any case exceed rupees six thousand:  
Provided further that if a member of the Institute, who was in practice im mediately before the 
commencement of this Act, has made within one month of such commencement an application for the 
grant of certificate of practice, he shall not be deemed to have contravened the provisions of                        
sub-section ( 1) by re ason of his having practiced during the period between such commencement and the 
disposal of the application ]; 
5[(3) The certificate of practice obtained under sub -section ( 1) may be cancelled by the Council under 
such circumstances as may be prescribed.]  
7. Members to be known as cost accountants .—Every  member of the Institute in practice shall, and 
any other member may, use the designation of a cost accountant and no member using such designation 
shall use any other description, whether in addition thereto or in substitution therefore:  
Provided that not hing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any such member from adding any 
other description or letters to his name, if entitled thereto, to indicate membership of such other Institute 
of accountancy, whether in India or elsewhere, as may be recognis ed in this behalf by the Council, or any 
other qualification that he may possess, or to prohibit a firm, all the partners of which are members of the 
Institute and in practice, from being known by its firm name as cost accountants.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 4, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 4, for “ FICWA” (w.e.f.1 -2-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “Institute of Cost and Works A ccountants” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 5, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  7 
 8. Disabilities .—Notwi thstanding anything contained in section 4, a person shall not be entitled to 
have his name entered in, or borne on, the Register if he — 
(i) has not attained the age of twenty -one years at the time of his application for the entry of his 
name in the Regist er; or  
(ii) is of unsound mind and stands so adjudged by a competent court; or  
(iii) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(iv) being a discharged insolvent, has not obtained from the court a certificate stating that his 
insolvency was caused by misfortune without any misconduct on his part; or  
(v) has been convicted by a competent court whether within or without India, of an offence 
involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment or of an offence, not of a technical 
nature, committed by him in hi s professional capacity unless in respect of the offence committed he 
has either been granted a pardon or, on an application made by him in this behalf, the Central 
Government has, by an order in writing removed the disability; or  
(vi) has been removed fro m membership of the Institute on being found on inquiry to have been 
guilty of professional or other misconduct:  
Provided that a person who has been remove d from membership for a specified  period, shall not be 
entitled to have his name entered in the Regis ter until the expiry of such period.  
CHAPTER III  
COUNCIL OF THE INSTITUTE  
9. Constitution of the Council of the Institute .—(1) There shall be a Council of the Institute for the 
management of the affairs of the Institute and for discharging the functions assigned to it by or under this 
Act. 
1[(2) The Council shall be composed of the following persons, namely: — 
(a) not more than fifteen persons elected by the members of the Institute, from amongst the 
fellows of the Institute chosen in such manner and from such regional constituencies as may be 
specified:  
Provided that a fellow of the Institute, who has been found guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct, and whose name is removed from the Register or has been awarded penalty of fine, shall 
not be eli gible to contest the election, — 
(i) in case of misconduct falling under the First Schedule of this Act, for a period of three 
years;  
(ii) in case of misconduct falling under the Second Schedule of this Act, for a period of 
six years,  
from the completion of the period of removal of name from the Register or payment of fine, as the case 
may be;  
(b) not more than five persons nominated in the specified manner by the Central Government.]  
2[(3) No person holding a post under the Central Government or a State Government shall be eligible 
for election to the Council under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) No person who has been auditor of the Institute shall be eligible for election to the Council under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) for a period of three years after he ceases to be an auditor.]  
3[10. Re-election or re -nomination to Council .—A member of the Council, elected or nominated 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 9, shall be eligible for re -election or as the case may be,  re-nomination:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 17-11-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 10 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  8 
 Provided that no member shall hold the office for more than two consecutive terms:  
Provided further that a member of the Council, who is or has been elected as President under              
sub-section ( 1) of section 12, shall not be eligible for election or nomination as a  member of the Council.]  
1[10A. Settlement of disputes regarding election .—In case of any dispute regarding any election 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9, the aggrieved person may make an application within 
thirty days from the date of decl aration of the result of election to the Secretary of the Institute, who shall 
forward the same to the Central Government.  
10B. Establishment of Tribunal .—(1) On receipt of any application under section 10A, the Central 
Government shall, by notification, e stablish a Tribunal consisting of a Presiding Officer and two other 
Members to decide such dispute and the decision of such Tribunal shall be final.  
(2) A person shall not  be qualified for appointment, — 
(a) as a Presiding Officer of the Tribunal unless he has been a member of the Indian Legal 
Service and has held a post in Grade I of the service for at least three years;  
(b) as a Member unless he has been a member of the Council for at least one full term, and who is 
not a sitting member of the Council or who has not been a candidate in the election under dispute; or  
(c) as a Member unless he holds the post of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any 
other post under the Central Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that of a Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of t he Tribunal, their 
place of meetings and allowances shall be such as may be specified.  
(4) The expenses of the Tribunal shall be borne by the Council.]  
11. Nomination in default of election .—If the members of the Institute fail to elect any member 
under cl ause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9 from any of the regional constituencies that may be 
specified under that clause, the Central Government may nominate any duly qualified person from such 
constituency to fill the vacancy, and any person so nominated shall be deemed to be a duly elected 
member of the Council.  
12. President and Vice -president .—(1) The Council at its first meeting shall elect two of its 
members to be respectively the President and the Vice -President thereof, and so often as the office of  the 
President or the Vice -President becomes vacant, the Council shall choose a person to be the President or 
the Vic e-President, as the case may be : 
Provided that on the first constitution of the Council a member of the Council nominated in this 
behalf by  the Central Government shall discharge the functions of the President, until such time as a 
President is elected under the provisions of this sub -section.  
(2) The President shall be the  2[Head] of the Council.  
(3) The President or the Vice -President shall  hold office for a period of one year from the date on 
which he is chosen but so as not to extend beyond his term of office as a member of the Council, and, 
subject to his being a member of the Council at the relevant time, he shall be eligible for re -election 
3[under sub -section ( 1)]: 
Provided that  4[the President and the Vice -President] of the Council at the time of the expiration of its 
duration shall continue to hold office until a new Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act. 
13. Resignation of membership and casual vacancies .—(1) Any member of the Council may at any 
time resign his membe rship by writing under his hand  addressed to the President, and the seat of such 
member shall become vacant when such resignation is noti fied in the Official Gazette.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 7 of 2006 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Chief Executive Authority” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “the President” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  9 
 (2) A member of the Council shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is declared by the Council 
to have been absent without sufficient excuse from three consecutive meetings of the Council  1[or he has 
been found guilty of any professional or other misconduct and awarded penalty of fine], or if his name is, 
for any cause, removed from the Register under the provisions of section 20.  
(3) A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by fresh election from the constituency concerned 
or by nomination by the Central Government, as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to 
fill the vacancy shall hold office until the dissolution of the Council:  
Provided that no election shall be held  to fill a casual vacancy occurring within  2[one year] prior to 
the date of the expiration of the duration of the Council, but such a vacancy may be filled by  the 
nomination by the Central Government after consultation with the President of the Council.  
(4) No act done by the Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of 
any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Council.  
14. Duration and dissolution of Council .—(1) The  duration of any Council constituted under this 
Act shall be  3[four years] from the date of its first meeting.  
(2) Notwithstanding the expiration of the duration of a Council (hereinafter ref erred to as the former 
Council ), the former Council shall continu e to exercise its functions under this Act until a new Council is 
constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and on such constitution, the former Council 
shall stand dissolved.  
4[15. Functions of Council .—(1) The Institute shall function under the overall control, guidance and 
supervision of the Council and the duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act shall be vested in the 
Council.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, the duties  of the  
Council shall include — 
(a) to approve academic courses and their contents;  
(b) the prescribing of fees for the examination of candidates for enrolment;  
(c) the prescribing of qualifications for entry in the Register;  
(d) the recognition of foreign qualifications and training for the purposes of enrolment;  
(e) the prescribing of guidelines for granting or refusal of certificates of practice under this Act;  
(f) the levy of fees from members, examinees and other persons;  
(g) the  regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of professional qualifications of 
members of the Institute;  
(h) the carrying out, by granting financial assistance to persons other than members of the 
Council or in any other manner, of research in ac countancy;  
(i) to enable functioning of the Director (Discipline), the Board of Discipline, the Disciplinary 
Committee and the Appellate Authority constituted under the provisions of this Act;  
(j) to enable functioning of the Quality Review Board;  
(k) consideration of the recommendations of the Quality Review Board made under clause ( a) of 
section 29B, action taken thereon with a report to the Central Government within a period of three 
months, and their inclusion in the annual report; and  
(l) to ensure the functioning of the Institute in accordance with the provisions of this Act and in 
performance of other statutory duties as may be entrusted to the Institute from time to time ]. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006 , s. 10,  (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by  s. 10, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “three years” (w.e.f. 22 -7-2007).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  10 
 1[15A. Functions of Institute .—The functions of the Institute shall include — 
(a) the examination of candidates for enrolment;  
(b) the regulation of training of students;  
(c) the maintenance and publication of a Register of persons qualified to practice as cost 
accountants;  
(d) collection of fees from members, examine es and other persons;  
(e) subject to the orders of the appropriate authorities under this Act, the removal of names from 
the Register and the restoration to the Register of names which have been removed;  
(f) the maintenance of a library and publication of books and periodicals relating to accountancy 
and allied subjects;  
(g) the conduct of elections to the Council of the Institute; and  
(h) the granting or refusal of certificates of practice as per gu idelines issued by the Council.  
15B. Imparting education by Universities and other bodies .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, any University established by law or any body affiliated to the Institute, may impart education on the 
subjects covered by the academic courses of the Institute.  
(2) The Universities or bodies referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, while awarding degree, diploma or 
certificate or bestowing any designation, ensure that the award or designation do not resemble or is not 
identical to one awarded by the Institute.  
(3) Nothing c ontained in this section shall enable a University or a body to adopt a name or 
nomenclature which is in any way sim ilar to that of the Institute.]  
2[16. Officers and employees, salary, allowances, etc. —(1) For the efficient performance of  its 
duties, the Council shall — 
(a) appoint a Secretary of the Council to perform such duties as may be prescribed;  
(b) appoint a Director (Discipline) to perform such functions as assigned to him under this Act 
and the rules and regulations framed thereunder;  
(c) designate an officer of the Council or the Institute to carry out the administrative functions of 
the Institute as its chief executive.  
(2) The Council may also — 
(a) appoint such other officers and employees to the Council and the Institute as it considers  
necessary;  
(b) require and take from the Secretary or from any other officer or employee of the Council and 
the Institute such security for the due performance of his duties, as the Council considers necessary;  
(c) prescribe the salaries, fees, allowances  of the officers and employees of the Council and the 
Institute and their terms and conditions of service;  
(d) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the allowances of the President, 
Vice -President and other members of the Council and me mbers of its Committees.  
(3) The Secretary of the Council shall be entitled to participate in the meetings of the Council but 
shall no t be entitled to vote thereat.]  
 17. Committees of the Council .—(1) The Council shall constitute from amongst its members of the 
followin g Standing Committees, namely: — 
(i) an Executive Committee;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 13 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 14,  ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  11 
 1[(ii) a Finance Committee; and];  
(iii) an Examination Committee.  
(2) The Council may also form a Training  and Educational Facilities Committee and such other 
Committees from amongst its members as it deems necessary for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act.  
2[(3) Each of the Standing Committees shall consist of the President and the Vice -President ex officio , 
and minimum of three and maximum of five members to be elected by the Co uncil from amongst its 
members ]; 
3*   *   *   *   * 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any Committee formed under sub -section ( 2), 
may, with the  sanction of the Council, co -opt such other members of the Institute not exceeding  4[one-
third of total membership of the Committee] as the Committee thinks fit, and any member so co -opted 
shall be entitled to exercise all the rights of a member of the Com mittee.  
(7) The President shall be the Chairman of every Committee of which he is a member, arid in his 
absence, the Vice -President, if he is a member of the Committee, shall be the Chairman.  
(8) The Standing Committees and other Committees formed under th is section shall exercise such 
functions and be subject to such conditions in the exercise thereof as may be prescribed.  
18. Finances of the Council .—(1) There shall be established a fund under the management and 
control of the Council into which shall be paid all moneys received by the Council and out of which shall 
be met all expenses and liabilities properly incurred by the Council.  
(2) The Council may invest any money for the time being standing to the credit of the fund in any 
Government security or in  any other security approved by the Central Government.  
5[(3) The Council shall keep proper accounts of the fund distinguishing capital from revenue in the 
manner prescribed.  
(4) The Council shall prepare in the manner prescribed and approve, prior to the start of the financial 
year, an annual financial statement (the budget) indicating all its anticipated revenues as well as all 
proposed expenditu res for the forthcoming year.   
(5) The annual accounts of the Council shall be prepared in such manner as may b e prescribed and be 
subject to audit by a chartered accountant in practice to be appointed annually by the Council:  
Provided that no member of the Council or a person who has been a member of the Council during 
the last four years or a person who is in par tnership with such member shall be eligible for appointment as 
an auditor under this sub -section:  
Provided further that, in the event it is brought to the notice of the Council that the accounts of the 
Council do not represent a true and fair view of its f inances, then, the Council may itself cause a special 
audit to be conducted:  
Provided also that if such information, that the accounts of the Council do not represent a true and fair 
view of its finances, is sent to the Council by the Central Government, t hen, the Council may, wherever 
appropriate cause a special audit or take such other action as it considers necessary and shall furnish an 
action taken report on it to the Central Government];  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 15, for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 15,  ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
3. Sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “two -thirds of total membership of the Committee”  (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 17-11-2006).  12 
 1[(5A) As soon as may be practicable at the end of each year, the Council shall circulate the audited 
accounts to its members at least fifteen days in advance and consider and approve these accounts in a 
special meeting convened for the purpose.  
(5B) The Council shall cause to be published in the Gazette of India not  later than the 30th day of 
September of the year next following, a copy of the audited accounts and the Report of the Council for 
that year duly approved by the Council and copies of the said accounts and Report shall be forwarded to 
the Central Governmen t and to all the members of the Institute.]  
(6) The Council may borrow from a scheduled bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934  (2 of 1934) , or from the Central Government — 
(a) any money required for meeting its liabilities on capital account on the security of the fund or 
on the security of any other assets for the time being belonging to it; or  
(b) for the purpose of meeting current liabilities pending the receipt of income by way of 
temporary loan or overdraft.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTER OF  MEMBERS  
19. Register .—(1) The Council shall maintain in the prescribed manner a Register of the members of 
the Institute.  
(2) The Register shall include the following particulars about every me mber of the Instit ute,                     
namely: — 
(a) his full name, date of birth, domicile, residential and professional addresses;  
(b) the date on which his name is entered in the Register;  
(c) his qualifications;  
(d) whether he holds  a certificate of practice; and  
(e) any other particulars which may be presc ribed.  
(3) The Council shall cause to be published in such manner as may be prescribed a list of members of 
the Institute as on the 1st day of April of each year, and shall, if requested to do so by any such member, 
send him a copy of such list  2[on payment of such amount as may be prescribed].  
3[(4) Every member of the Institute shall, on his name being entered in the Register, pay such annual 
membership fee as may be determined, by notification, by the Council, which shall not exceed rupees five 
thousand:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees five thousand which shall not in any ca se exceed rupees ten thousand.]  
20. Removal from the Register .—(1) The Council may remove from  the Register the name o f any 
member of the Institute, — 
(a) who is dead; or  
(b) from whom a request has been received to that effect; or  
(c) who has not paid any prescribed fee required to be paid by him; or  
(d) who  is found to have been subject at the time when his name was entered in the Register, or 
who at any time thereafter has become subject , to any of the disabilities mentioned in section 8, or 
who for any other reason has ceased to be entitled to have his nam e borne on the Register.  
(2) The Council shall remove from the Register the name of any member in respect of whom an order 
has been passed under this Act removing him from membership of the Institute.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 16 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-20006).  
3. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  13 
  
1[(3) If the name of any member has been removed from the Register under clause ( c) of                       
sub-section ( 1), on receipt of an application, his name may be entered again in the Register on payment of 
the arrears of annual fee and entrance fee along with such additional fee, as may be determine d, by 
notification, by the Council which shall not exceed rupees two thousand:  
Provided that the Council may with the prior approval of the Central Government, determine the fee 
exceeding rupees two thousand which shall not in any cas e exceed rupees four t housand.]  
CHAPTER V  
  MISCONDUCT  
2[21. Disciplinary Directorate .—(1) The Council shall, by notification, establish a Disciplinary 
Directorate headed by an officer of the Institute designated as Director (Discipline) and such other 
employees for making investigations in respect of any informat ion or complaint received by it.  
(2) On receipt of any information or complaint along with the prescribed fee, the Director (Discipline) 
shall arrive at a prima facie  opinion on the occurrence of the alleged miscond uct. 
(3) Where the Director (Discipline) is of the opinion that a member is guilty of any professional or 
other misconduct mentioned in the First Schedule, he shall place the matter before the Board of Discipline 
and where the Director (Discipline) is of t he opinion that a member is guilty of any professional or other 
misconduct mentioned in the Second Schedule or in both the Schedules, he shall place the matter before 
the Disciplinary Committee.  
(4) In order to make investigations under the provisions of this Act, the Disciplinary Directorate shall 
follow such procedure as may be specified.  
(5) Where a complainant withdraws the complaint, the Director (Discipline) shall place such 
withdrawal before the Board of Discipline or as the case may be, the Discipl inary Committee, and the 
said Board of Committee may, if it is of the view that the circumstances so warrant, permi t the withdrawal 
at any stage.]  
3[21A. Board of Discipline .—(1) The Council shall constitute a Boa rd of Discipline consisting of — 
(a) a person with experience in law and having knowledge of disciplinary matters and the 
profession, to be its presiding officer;  
(b) two members one of whom shall be a member of the Council elected by the Council and the 
other member shall be the person design ated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
(c) the Director (Discipline) shall function as the Secretary of the Board.  
(2) The Board of Discipline shall follow summary disposal procedure in dealing with all the cases 
before it.  
(3) Where the B oard of Discipline is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional or other 
misconduct mentioned in the First Schedule, it shall afford to the member an opportunity of being heard 
before making any order against him and may thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, 
namely: — 
(a) reprimand the member;  
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register up to a period of three months;  
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit which may extend to rupees one lakh.  
(4) The Director (Discipline) shall submit before the Board of Discipline all information and 
complaints where he is of the opinion that there is no prima facie  case and the Board of Discipline may, if 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 18 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 21 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  14 
 it agrees with the opinion of the Director (Discipline),  close the matter or in case of disagreement, may 
advise the Director (Discipline) to  further investigate the matter . 
21B. Disciplinary Committee .—(1) The Council shall constitute a Disciplinary Committee 
consisting of the President or the Vice -President o f the Council as the Presiding Officer and two members 
to be elected from amongst the members of the Council and two members to be nominated by the Central 
Government from amongst the persons of eminence having experience in the field of law, economics, 
business, finance or accountancy:  
Provided that the Council may constitute more Disciplinary Committees as and when it considers 
necessary.  
(2) The Disciplinary Committee while considering the cases placed before it, shall follow such 
procedure as may be spe cified.  
(3) Where the Disciplinary Committee is of the opinion that a member is guilty of a professional or 
other misconduct mentioned in the Second Schedule or both the First Schedule and the Second Schedule, 
it shall afford to the member an opportunity o f being heard before making any order against him and may 
thereafter take any one or more of the following actions, namely: — 
(a) reprimand the member;  
(b) remove the name of the member from the Register permanently or for such period, as it thinks 
fit; 
(c) impose such fine as it may think fit, which may extend to rupees five lakhs.  
(4) The allowances payable to the members nominated by the Central Government sh all be such as 
may be specified . 
21C. Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and Director (Discipline) to have 
powers of civil court .—For the purposes of an inquiry under the provisions of this Act, the Authority, 
the Disciplinary Committee, Board of Discipline and the Director (Discipline) shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a  civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document; and  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sections 21, 21A, 21B, 21C and 22, “member of the Institute ” 
includes a person who was a member of the Institute on the date of the alleged misconduct although he 
has ceased to be a member o f the Insti tute at the time of the inquiry . 
21D. Transitional provisions .—All complaints pending before the Council or any inquiry initiated 
by the Disciplinary Committee or any reference or appeal made to a High Court prior to the 
commencement of the Cost and Works Accountants (Amendment) Act, 2006 shall continue to be 
governed by the provisions of this Act, as if this Act had not been amended by the Cost and Works 
Acco untants (Amendment) Act, 2006.]  
1[22. Professional or other misconduct defined .—For the purposes of this Act, the expression 
“professional or other misconduct ” shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided in any of the 
Schedules but nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power 
conferre d or duty cast on the Director (Discipline) under sub -section ( 1) of section 21 to inquire into the 
conduct of any member of the Institute under any other circumstances.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 21, for section 22 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  15 
 1[22A. Constitution of Appellate Authority .—The Appellate Authority constituted under                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 22A of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949), shall be deemed to 
be the Appellate Authority for the purposes of this Act subject to the modification that f or clause ( b) of 
said sub -section ( 1), the following clause  had been substituted, namely: — 
“(b) the Central Government shall, by notification appoint two part -time members from amongst 
the persons who have been members of the Council of the  2[Institute of Cost Accountants of India] 
for at least one full term and who is not a sitting member of the Council; ”. 
22B. Term of office of members of Authority .—A person appointed as a member shall hold office 
for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of 
sixty -two years, whichever is earlier.  
22C. Procedure, etc., of Authority .—The provisions of section 2 2C, section 22D and section 22F of 
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949  (38 of 1949) shall apply to the Authority in relation to allowances 
and terms and conditions of service of its Chairperson and members and in the discharge of its functions 
under this A ct as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under the C hartered Accountants Act, 
1949.  
22D. Officers and other staff of Authority .—(1) The Council shall make available to the Authority 
such officers and other staff members as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions 
of the Authority.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff members of 
the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
22E. Appeal to Authority .—(1) Any member  of the Institute aggrieved by any order of the Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee imposing on him any of the penalties referred to in                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 21A and sub -section ( 3) of section 21B, may within ninety day s from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Authority:  
Provided that the Director (Discipline) may also appeal against the decision of the Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee to the Authority if so autho rised by the Council, within ninety 
days:  
Provided further that the Authority may entertain any such appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of ninety days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal in time.  
(2) The Au thority may, after calling for the records of any case, revise any order made by the Board 
of Discipline or the Disciplinary Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 21A and sub -section ( 3) of 
section 21B and may — 
(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order;  
(b) impose any penalty or set aside, reduce, or enhance the penalty imposed by the order;  
(c) remit the case to the Board of Discipline or Disciplinary Committee for such further enquiry 
as the Authority considers proper in the circumstances of the case; or  
(d) pass such other order as the Authority thinks fit:  
Provided that the Authority shall give an opportunity of being heard to the parties conce rned before 
passing any order.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGIONAL  COUNCILS  
23. Constitution and functions of Regional  Councils .—(1) For the purpose of advising and 
assisting it on matters concerning its functions, the Council may constitute such Regional Councils as and 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 22 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 5, for “Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India” (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  16 
 when it deems fit for one or more of the regional constituencies that may be specified by the Central 
Government under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 9.  
(2) The Regional Councils shall be constituted in such manner and exercise such functions as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for falsely claiming to be a member, etc .—Any per son who, — 
(i) not b eing a member of the Institute — 
(a) represents that he is a member of the Institute; or  
(b) uses the designation cost accountant; or  
(ii) being  a member of the Institute, but not having a certificate of practice, represents that he is in 
practice or practices as a cost accountant;  
shall be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees , and on any 
subsequent conv iction with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
25. Penalty for using name of the Council, awarding degrees of cost accountancy, etc .—(1) Save 
as otherwise provided  in this Act, no person shall, — 
(i) use a name or a common seal which is identical with the name or the common seal of the 
Institute or so nearly resembles it as to deceive or as is likely to deceive the public;  
(ii) award any degree, diploma or certificate or bestow any designation which indicates or 
purports to indicate the position or attainment of any qualification or competence in cost accountancy 
similar to that of a member of the Institute; or  
(iii) seek to regulate in any manner whatsoever the profession of  1[cost accountants].  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any other 
proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(4) If the Central Government is satisfied that any diploma or certificate or any designatio n granted or 
conferred by any person other than the Institute, which purports to be a qualification in cost accountancy 
but which, in the opinion of the Central Government, falls short of the standard of qualifications 
prescribed for cost accountants and d oes not in fact indicate or purport to indicate the position or 
attainment of any qualification or competence in cost accountancy similar to that of a member of the 
Institute, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions a s it may think fit to 
impose, declare that this section shall not apply to such diploma or certificate or designation.  
26. Companies not to engage in cost accountancy .—(1) No company, whether incorporated in 
India or elsewhere, shall practice as cost accou ntants.  
3[Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the “company ” shall include any 
limited liability partnership which has company as its partner for the purposes of this section.]  
(2) Any contravention of the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable on first conviction with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction to five thousand rupees.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2012 , s. 6, for “cost and works accountants” (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012). 
2. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 7 of 2006, s. 23 (w.e.f. 8 -8-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -2-2012).  17 
 27. Unqualified persons not to sign  documents .—(1) No person other than a member of the 
Institute shall sign any document on behalf of cost accountant in practice or a firm of such cost 
accountants in his or its professional capacity . 
1[(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, without prejudice to any 
other proceedings which may be taken against him, be punishable on first conviction with a fine not less 
than five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the event of a second or 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which m ay extend to one year or with a fine not less 
than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to  two lakh rupees or with both.]  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every perso n in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that not hing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neg lect on the part of , any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly . 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” with respect t o any offence under section 24, s ection 25 or section 27, means any 
body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and with respect to an offence 
under section  26 means a body corporate; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Sanction to prosecute .—No person shall be prosecuted under this Act except on a complaint 
made by or under the order of the Council or of the Cen tral Government.  
2[CHAPTER VIIA  
QUALITY  REVIEW  BOARD  
29A. Establishment of Quality Review Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
constitute a Quality Review Board consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.  
(2) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall be appointed from amongst the persons of 
eminence having experience in the field of law, economics, business, finance or accountancy.  
(3) Two members of the Board shall be nominated by the Council and other two members shall be 
nomin ated by the Central Government.  
29B. Functions of Board .—The Board shall perform th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) to make recommendations to the Council with regard to the quality of services provided by 
the members of the Institute;  
(b) to review the quality of services provided by the members of the Institute including cost audit 
services; and  
(c) to guide the members of the Institute to improve the quality of services and adherence to the 
various statutory and other regulatory requirement s. 
29C. Procedure of Board .—The Board shall meet at such time and place and follow in its meetings 
such procedure as may be specified.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 2 4, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  18 
 29D. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and members of Board and its 
expenditure .—(1) The  terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the members of the Board, 
and their allowances shall be such as may be specified.  
(2) The expenditure of the Board shall be borne by the Council.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
DISSSOLUTION OF THE INSTITUTE OF COST AND WORKS ACCOUNTANTS REGISTERED UNDER THE 
COMPANIES  ACT, 1956 (1 OF 1956)  
30. Dissolution of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956 .—On the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) the company known as the Institute  of Cost and Works Accountants registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , shall be dissolved and thereafter no person shall make, assert or 
take any claims, demands or proceedings against the dissolved company or against any officer thereof 
in his capacity as such officer except in so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of 
this Act;  
(b) the right of every member to or in respect of the dissolved company shall be extinguished, and 
thereafter no member of that company shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or 
proceedings in respect of that company except as provided in this Act.  
31. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the dissolved company to the Institute .—(1) On the 
commencement of this Act, there shall be transferred  to and vested in the Institute all the assets and 
liabilities of the dissolved company.  
(2) The assets of the dissolved company shall be deemed to include all rights and powers, and all 
property, whether movable or immovable of the company, including, in particular, cash balances, reserve 
funds, investments, deposits and all other interests and rights in or arising out of such property as may be 
in the possession of the dissolved company and all books of accounts or documents of the dissolved 
company; and the liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever 
kind then existing of that company.  
(3) All contracts, debts, bonds, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature to which the 
dissolved company is a party , subsisting or having effect immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Institute, as the case may be, and may be 
enforced as fully and effectively as if instead of the dissolved compa ny, the Institute had been a party 
thereto.  
(4) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature 
by or against the dissolved company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any 
way pr ejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Institute of the assets and liabilities of the 
dissolved company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against th e Institute, in the same manner and to the same extent 
as it would or may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company if this Act 
had not been passed.  
32. Provisions respecting employees of the dissolved company .—(1) Every per son employed in the 
dissolved company prior to the 1st day of September, 1958  , and still in its employment immediately 
before the commencement of this Act shall, as from such commencement, become an employee of the 
Institute, shall hold his office or serv ice therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity as he would have held the 
same under the dissolved company if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so  unless and 
until his employment in the Institute is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions of 
employment are duly altered by the Institute.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or in  any 
other law for the time being in force the transfer of the services of any employee of the dissolved 
company to the Institute shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other 
law, and no such claim shall be entertained by  any court, tribunal or other authority.  19 
 CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. [Appeals .] Omitted by Cost and Works (Amendment ) Act, 2006 (7 of 2006), s. 26                      
(w.e.f.  17-11-2006).  
34. Alteration in the Register and cancellation of certificate .—(1) Where an order is made under 
this Act reprimanding a member a record of the punishment shall be entered against his name in the 
Register.  
(2) Where the name of any member is removed, the certificate of practice granted to him under this 
Act shall be rec alled and cancelled.  
35. Directions of the Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may from time to time 
issue such directions to the Council as in the opinion of the Central Governm ent are conducive to the 
fulfil ment of the objects of this Act and in the discharge of its functions, the Council shall be bound to 
carry out any such directions.  
(2) Directions issued under sub -section ( 1) may include directions to the Council to make any 
regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made.  
(3) If, in the opinion of the Central Government the Council has persistently made default in giving 
effect to the directions issued under this section, the Central Government may, after giving an opportunity 
to the Council to state its case, by order, disso lve the Council, where after a new Council shall be 
constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act with effect from such date as may be specified 
by the Central Government.  
(4) Where the Central Government passes an order under sub -section ( 3) dissolving the Council, it 
may, pending the constitution of a new Council in accordance with the provisions of this Act, authorise 
any person or body of persons to take over the management of the affairs of the Institute and to exercise 
such functions as ma y be specified in this behalf by the Central Government.  
1[36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Council or the Authority or the Disciplinary Committee or the 
Tribunal or the Board or the Board of Discipline or the Disciplinary Directorate or any officer of that 
Government, Council, Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Tribunal, Board, Board of Discipline or the 
Disciplinary Directorate, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule, regulation, notification, dir ection or order made thereunder. ] 
 2[36A. Members, etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Presiding Officer, members and 
other officers and employe es of the Authority, Disciplinary Committee, Tribunal, Board, Board of 
Discipline or the Disciplinary Directorate shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860).]  
 37. Maintenance of branch offices .—(1) Where a cost accountant in practice or a firm of such cost 
accountants has more than one office in India, each one of such offices shall be in the separate char ge of a 
member of the Institute : 
Provided that the Council may in suitable cases ex empt any cost accountant in practice or firm of 
such cost accountants from the operation of this sub -section.  
(2) Every cost accountant in practice or firm of such cost accountants maintaining more than one 
office shall send to the Council a list of office s and the persons in charge thereof and shall keep the 
Council informed of any changes in relation thereto.  
38. Reciprocity .—(1) Where any country, specified by the Central Government in this behalf by 
notification in the Official Gazette, prevents persons  of Indian domicile from becoming members of any 
institution similar to the Institute established under this Act or from practicing the profession of costs 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 27, for section 36 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  20 
 accountancy or subject them to unfair discrimination in that country, no subject of any such country  shall 
be entitled to become a member of the Institute or practice the profession of cost accountancy, in India.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Council may prescribe the conditions, if any, 
subject to which foreign qualifications rel ating to cost accountancy shall be recognised for the purposes of 
entry in the Register.  
1[38A. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of election and nomination in respect of members to the Council under             
sub-section (2) of section 9;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and Members of the Tribunal, 
place of meetings and allowances to be paid to them under sub -section ( 5) of section 10B;  
(c) the procedure of investigation under sub -sectio n (4) of section 21;  
(d) the procedure while considering the cases by the Disciplinary Committee under                         
sub-section ( 2) and fixation of allowances of the nominated members under sub -section ( 4) of           
section 21B;  
(e) the procedure to be followed by the Board in its meetings under section 29C; and  
(f) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members of the Board under               
sub-section ( 1) of section 29D.]  
 39. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Council may, by notification in the Gazette of India, 
make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act,  2***. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or  any of  the following matters , namely: — 
(a) the standard and conduct of examinations under this Act;  
(b) the qualifications for the entry of the name of any person in the Register as a member of the 
Institute;  
(c) the qualification required for the purposes of sub -section ( 4) of section 5;  
(d) the conditions under which any examination or training may be treated as equivalent to the 
examination or training prescribed for members of the Institute;  
(e) the conditions und er which any foreign qualification may be recognised;  
(f) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which applications for entry in the Register 
may be made;  
(g) the fees payable for membership of the Institute and the annual fees payable by associ ates and 
fellows of the Institute in respect of their certificates;  
(h) the manner in which elections to  3*** the Regional Councils may be held;  
(i) the particulars to be entered in the Register;  
(j) the functions of Regional Councils;  
(k) the  regulation and maintenance of the status and standard of professional quali fications of 
members of the Institute;  
(l) the carrying out of research in accountancy;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 29 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. The words “and a copy of such regulations shall be sent to each me mber of the Institute” omitted by s. 30, ibid.                        
(w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
3. The words “the Council and” omitted by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  21 
 (m) the maintenance of libraries and publication of books and periodicals relating to cost 
accountancy and allied subjects;  
(n) the management of the property of the Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts;  
(o) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council and committees thereof, the times and 
places of such meetings, the pr ocedure to be followed thereat and the number of members necessary 
to form a quorum;  
(p) the manner in which the annual list of members of the Institute shall be published;  
(q) the powers, duties and functions of the President and the Vice -President of the  Council;  
(r) the functions of the Standing and other committees and the conditions subject to which such 
functions shall be discharged;  
(s) the terms of office, and the powers, duties and functions of the Secretary and other employees 
of the Council;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(u) the terms and conditions of service of persons who have become employees of the Institute 
under section 32 of this Act;  
(v) the registration and training of students and the fees to be charged therefor ; and  
(w) any  other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) All regulations made by the Council under this Act shall be subject to the condition of previous 
publication and to the approval of the Central Government.  
(4) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Central Government may 
frame the first regulations for the purposes mentioned in this section, and such regulations shall be 
deemed to have been made by the Council, and shall remain in force until they are amended, altered or 
revoked by the Council.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[40. Rules, regulations and notifications to laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every 
regulation made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of t hirty days 
which may be comprised  in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately followi ng the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, regulation or notification, or both Houses agree that the rule, 
regulation or notification should not be made or issued, the rule, regulation or notification shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule, regula tion or notification .] 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Clause ( t) omitted by Act 7 of 2006, s. 30 (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  22 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 21 ( 3), 21A( 3) and 22]  
PART  I 
Professional misconduct in relation to cost accountants in practice  
A cost accountant in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he — 
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as a cost accountant unless such person is also a cost 
accountant in practice and is in partnership with or employed by him;  
(2) pays or allows or agrees to pay or allow, directly or indirectly, any share, commission or 
brokerage in the fees or profits of his professional business, to any person other than a member of the 
Institute or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representative of a deceased partner, or a member of 
any other professional body or with such other persons having such qualifications as may be prescribed, 
for the purpose of rendering such professional services from time to time in or outside India.  
Explanation .—In this item, “partner ” includes a person residing outside India with wh om a cost 
accountant in practice has entered into partnership which is not in contravention of item ( 4) of this Part;  
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part of the profits of the professional work of a person who is not a 
member of the Institute:  
Provide d that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting a member from entering into 
profit sharing or other similar arrangements, including receiving any share, commission or brokerage in 
the fees, with a member of such professional body or other  person having qualifications, as is referred to 
in item ( 2) of this Part;  
(4) enters into partnership, in or outside India, with any person other than a cost accountant in practice 
or such other person who is a member of any other professional body having  such qualifications as may 
be prescribed, including a resident who but for his residence abroad would be entitled to be registered as a 
member under clause ( iv) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or whose qualifications are recognised by the 
Central Governme nt or the Council for the purpose of permitting such partnerships;  
(5) secures, either through the services of a person who is not an employee of such cost accountant or 
who is not his partner or by means which are not open to a cost accountant, any professional business:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting any arrangement permitted in 
terms of items ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of this Part;  
(6) solicits clients or professional work, either directly or indirectly, by circular , advertisement, 
personal communication or interview or by any other means:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construe d as preventing or prohibiting — 
(i) any cost accountant from applying or requesting for or inviting or securing professional  work 
from another cost accountant in practice; or  
(ii) a member from responding to tenders or enquiries issued by various users of professional 
services or organisations from time to time and securing professional work as a consequence;  
(7) advertises his  professional attainments or services, or uses any designation or expressions other 
than cost accountant on professional documents, visiting cards, letter heads or sign boards, unless it be a 
degree of a University established by law in India or recognised  by the Central Government or a title 
indicating membership of the  2[Institute of Cost Accountants of India] or of any other institution that has 
been recognised by the Central Government or may be recognised by the Council:  
Provided that a member in practice may advertise through a write up, setting out the services provided 
by him or his firm and particulars of his firm subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the Council;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2006, s. 32, for  the First Schedule (w.e.f. 17-11-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2012, s. 8, for “Institute of Cost Accountants of India” (w.e.f. 17 -11-2006).  23 
 (8) accepts a position as cost accountant previously held by another cos t accountant in practice 
without first communicating with him in writing;  
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept in respect of any professional employment, 
fees which are based on a percentage of profits or which are contingent upon t he findings or results of 
such employment, except as permitted under any regulation made under this Act;  
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than the profession of cost accountant unless 
permitted by the Council so to engage:  
Provided that not hing contained herein shall disentitle a cost accountant from being a director of a 
company (not being a managing director or a whole time director) unless he or any of his partners is 
interested in such company as accountant;  
(11) allows a person not bein g a member of the Institute in practice, or a member not being his 
partner to sign on his behalf or on behalf of his firm, any cost or pricing statements or any other 
statements relating thereto.  
PART  II 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of th e Institute in service  
A member of the Institute (other than a member in practice) shall be deemed to be guilty of 
professional misconduct, if he being an employee of any company, firm or person — 
(1) pays  or allows or agrees to pay, directly or indirectly, to any person any share in the emoluments 
of the employment undertaken by him;  
(2) accepts or agrees to accept any part of fees, profit or gains from a lawyer, a cost accountant or 
broker engaged by such  company, firm or person or agent or customer of such company, firm or person 
by way of commission or gratification.  
PART III  
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, s hall be deemed to be guilty of professional 
misconduct, if he — 
(1) not being a fellow of the Institute acts as a fellow of the Institute;  
(2) does not supply the information called for, or does not comply with the requirements asked for by 
the Institute, C ouncil or any of its Committees, Director (Discipline), Board of Discipline, Disciplinary 
Committee, Quality Review Board or the Appellate Authority;  
(3) while inviting professional work from another cost accountant or while responding to tenders or 
enquir ies or while advertising through a write up, or anything as provided for in items ( 6) and ( 7) of Part I 
of this Schedule, gives information knowing it to be false.  
PART  IV 
Other misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of other 
misconduct, if — 
(1) he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months;  
(2) in the opinion of the Council he brings disrepute to the profession or the Institute as a result of his 
action whether or not re lated to his professional work.  
  
 
 24 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 21 ( 3), 21B ( 3) and 22]  
PART  I 
Professional misconduct in relation to cost accountants in practice  
A cost accountant in practice shall be deemed to be guilty of p rofessional misconduct, if he — 
(1) discloses information acquired in the course of his professional engagement to any person other 
than his client so en gaging him, without the consent of his client, or otherwise than as required by any law 
for the time being in force;  
(2) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his firm, a report of an examination of cost 
accounting and related statements unle ss the examination of such statements has been made by him or by 
a partner or an employee in his firm or by another cost accountant in practice;  
(3) permits his name or the name of his firm to be used in connection with an estimate of cost or 
earnings cont ingent upon future transactions in a manner which may lead to the belief that he vouches for 
the accuracy of the forecast;  
(4) expresses his opinion on cost or pricing statements of any business or enterprise in which he, his 
firm or a partner in his firm has a substantial interest;  
(5) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in a cost or pricing statement, which is not disclosed 
in a cost or pricing statement but disclosure of which is necessary in making such statement where he is 
concerned with su ch statement in a professional capacity;  
(6) fails to report a material mi s-statement known to him to appear in a cost or pricing statement with 
which he is concerned in a professional capacity;  
(7) does  not exercise due diligence, or is grossly negligent in the conduct of his professional duties;  
(8) fails to obtain sufficient information which is necessary for expression of an opinion or its 
exceptions are sufficiently material to negate the expression of an opinion ;  
(9) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the generally accepted procedure of costing 
and pricing applicable to the circumstances;  
(10) fails to keep moneys of his client other than fees or remuneration or money meant to be 
expended in a separate banking account or to use such moneys for purposes for which they are intended 
within a reasonable time.  
PART II 
Professional misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in pract ice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of p rofessional 
misconduct, if he — 
(1) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations made thereunder or any guidelines 
issued by the Council;  
(2) being an employee of any company, firm or person, discloses confidential information acquired in 
the course of his employment, except as and when required by any law for the time being in force or 
except as permitted by the employer;  
(3) includes in any information, statement, return or form to be submitt ed to the Institute, Council or 
any of its Committees, Director (Discipline), Board of Discipline, Disciplinary Committee, Quality 
Review Board or the Appellate Authority any particulars knowing them to be false;  
(4) defalcates or embezzles moneys received  in his professional capacity.  
  25 
 PART  III 
Other misconduct in relation to members of the Institute generally  
A member of the Institute, whether in practice or not, shall be deemed to be guilty of other 
misconduct, if he is held guilty by any civil or criminal court for an offence which is punishable with 
imprisonment fo r a term exceeding six months.]  
 
--------------------------The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) 
ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Act not to apply in relation to certain vacancies . 
4. Notification of vacancies to employment exchanges . 
5. Employers to furnish information and returns in prescribed form . 
6. Right of access to records or documents . 
7. Penalties.  
8. Cognizance of offences . 
9. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
10. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 THE EMPLOYMENT  EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) 
ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1959  
[2nd September , 1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to employment exchanges.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.  
(2) It extends to the whole of  India1* * * . 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date2as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such State and different dates may be appointed for 
different States or for different area s of a State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a)“appropriate Government ” means— 
(1) in relation to — 
(a) any establishment of any railway, major port, mine or oil -field, or  
(b) any establishme nt owned, controlled or managed  by— 
(i) the Central Government or a department of the Central Government , 
(ii) a company in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the share capital is held by 
the Central Government or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more 
State Governments,  
(iii) a corporation (including a co -operative society) established by or under a Central 
Act which is owned, controlled or  managed by the Central Government,  
the Central Government;  
(2) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that other 
establishment is situate;  
(b) “employee ” means any person who is employed in an establishment to do any work for 
remuneration;  
(c) “employer ” means any person who employs one or more other persons to do any work in an 
establishment for remuneration and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of 
employees in such establishment;  
(d) “employment exchange ” means any office or place established and maintained by the 
Government for the collection and furnishing of information, either by the keeping of reg isters or 
otherwise, respecting — 
(i) persons who seek to engage employees,  
(ii) person s who seek employment, and  
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be appointed;  
(e) “establishment ” means— 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”  omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f.  1-9-1971 ). 
2.1st May , 1960, vide notification No. G.S.R. 382, dated 1st April, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(i), in respect of all the States to which the Act extends and in the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh,  
Manipur and Tripura.  3 (a) any office, or  
(b) any place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried on ; 
(f) “establishment  in public sector ” means an establishment owned, controlled or managed by — 
(1) the Government or a department of the Government;  
(2) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 
1956) ; 
(3) a corporation (including a co-operative society) established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, which is owned, controlled or managed by the Government;  
(4) a local authority;  
(g) “establishment in private sector ” means an establishment which is not an establish ment in  
public sector and where ordinarily twenty -five or more persons are employed to work for 
remuneration;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “unskilled office work ” means work done in an establishment by any of the following 
categories of employees, namely :— 
(1) daftri; 
(2) jemadar , orderly and peon;  
(3) dusting man or farash ; 
(4) bundle or record lifter;  
(5) process server;  
(6) watchman;  
(7) sweeper;  
(8) any  other employee doing any routine or unskilled work which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be unskilled office work.  
3. Act not to apply in relation to certain vacancies .—(1) This Act shall not  apply in relation to 
vacancies ,— 
(a) in any employment in agriculture (including horticulture) in any establishment in private 
sector other than employment as agricultural or farm machinery operatives;  
(b) in any employment in domestic service;  
(c) in any employment the total duration of which is less than three months;  
(d) in any employment to do unskilled office work;  
(e) in any employment connect ed with the staff of Parliament.  
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification in t he Official Gazette in this 
behalf, this Act shall not also apply in relation to — 
(a) vacancies which are proposed to be filled through promotion or by absorption of surplus staff 
of any branch or department of the same establishment or on the result of an y examination conducted 
or interview held by, or on the recommendation of, any independent agency, such as the Union or a 
State Public Service Commission and the like;  
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a remuneration of less than sixty rupees in  a 
month.  
4. Notification of vacancies to employment exchanges .—(1) After the commencement of this Act 
in any State or area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public sector in that State or area 4 shall, before filling up any vacancy in any employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, require that from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector or every 
establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector shall, befor e filling 
up any vacancy in any employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such employment 
exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer shall thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(3) The manner in which the vacancies referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
notified to the employment exchanges and the particulars of employments in which such vacancies have 
occurred or are about to occur shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Nothing in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall b e deemed to impose any obligation upon any employer 
to recruit any person through the employment exchange to fill any vacancy merely because that vacancy 
has been notified under any of those sub -sections.  
5. Employers to furnish information and returns in prescribed form .—(1) After the 
commencement of this Act in any State or area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public 
sector in that State or area shall furnish such information or return as may be prescribed in relation to 
vacancies that have occurred or are about to occur in that establishment, to such employment exchanges 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require that from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector or every 
establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector shall furnish such 
information or return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have occurred o r are about to 
occur in that establishment to such employment exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer shall 
thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(3) The form in which, and the intervals of time at which, such information or return shall be 
furnished and the particulars which they shall contain shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Right of access to records or documents .—Such officer of Government as may be prescribed in 
this behalf, or any person authorised by him in writing, shall have access  to any relevant record or 
document in the possession of any employer required to furnish any information or returns under section 
5 and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes such record or document to be 
and inspect or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining 
any information required under that section.  
 7. Penalties .—(1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment exchanges prescribed for the 
purpose any vacancy in contra vention of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 4, he shall be 
punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and for every 
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person — 
(a) required to furnish any information or return — 
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or  
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be false, 
or 
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives  a false answer to, any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished under section 5; or  
(b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the right of entry conferred by 
section 6,  
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees 
and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  5 8. Cognizance of offences .—No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except 
by, or with the sanction of, such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf or any person 
authorised by that officer in writing.  
9. Protection of action taken in good f aith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
10. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazet te 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters , namely:— 
(a) the employment exchange or exchanges to which, the form and manner in which, and the time 
within which vacancies shall be notified , and the particulars of employments in which such vacancies 
have occurred or are about to occur;  
(b) the  form and manner in which, and the intervals at which, information and returns required 
under section 5 shall be furnished , and the particulars which they shall contain;  
(c) the officers by whom and the manner in which the right of access to documents and the right 
of entry conferred by section 6 may be exercised;  
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
--------------------------The Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS CERTIFICATES ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1959  
[18th September, 1959 .] 
An Act to make certain provisions in respect of Government Savings Certificates.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Government 
Savings Certificates Act, 1959.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
(3) It applies to such class of savings certificates  as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “holder ”, in relation to a savings certificate, means — 
(i) a person who holds the savings certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act and of any rules made thereunder at any time before the date on which the Finance Bill, 2005 
receives the assent of the President; and  
(ii) an individual who holds the savings certificate issued in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and of any rules made thereunder at any time on or after the date on which the Finance 
Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the President;  
(aa) “minor ” means a person who is not deemed to have attained his majority under the Majority 
Act, 1875 (9 of 1875);]  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “savings certificate ” means a savings certificate to which this Act applies;  
(d) “transfer ” means a transfer inter vivos , and does not include a transfer by operation of law.  
3. Restrictions on transfer of savings certificates .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law 
for the time being in force, no transfer of a savings certifica te, whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Act, shall be valid unless it has bee n made with the previous consent in writing of 
the prescribed authority.  
4. Holdings by or on behalf of minors .—Notwithstanding  any provision in any law for the time 
being in force, — 
(a) a minor may apply for and hold savings certificates and any other person may apply for and 
hold savings certificates on behalf of a minor;  
(b) where any savings certificate is held by or on behalf  of a minor, the minor shall, whether the 
savings certificate was applied for and issued before or after the commencement of this Act, be bound 
by the provisions of this Act and of any rules made there under applicable to such savings certificate 
and by the  terms of any declaration made by the applicant for the savings certificate in pursuance of 
the said rules.  
5. Payment where certificate is held by or on behalf of a minor .—Payment of the sum for the time 
being due on a savings certificate held by  or on behalf of a minor may be  made — 
(a) to him personally, if he himself applied for the savings certificate, or  
                                                           
1. 1st August, 1960, vide notification No. G.S.R. 709, dated 25th June, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2005, s. 117, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2005).  2 
 (b) for the use of the minor, if the application for the savings certificate was made by any person 
other than the minor, — 
(i) to any such pe rson, being a parent of the minor or guardian of his property, as may be 
specified in that behalf in the form of application;  
(ii) if no such person has been specified, to any guardian of the property of the minor 
appointed by a competent court, or where no such guardian has been so appointed, t o either 
parent of the minor, or where neither parent is alive, to any other guardian of the minor.  
6. Nomination by holders of savings certificates .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, or in any disposition, testamentary or otherwise in respect of any savings 
certificate, where a nomination made in the p rescribed manner purports to confer on any person the right 
to receive payment of the sum for the time being due on the savings certificate on the death of the holder 
thereof and before the maturity of the certificate, or before the certificate having reac hed maturity has 
been discharged, the nominee shall, on the death of the holder of the savings certificate, become entitled 
to the savings certificate and to be paid the sum due thereon to the exclusion of all other persons, unless 
the nomination is varied  or cancelled in the prescribed manner.  
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall become void if the nominee predeceases, or 
where there are two or more nominees all the nominees predecease, the holder of the savings certificate 
making the no mination.  
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the holder of the savings certificate making 
the nomination to appoint in the prescribed manner any person to receive the sum due thereon in the event 
of his death during the minority of th e nominee.  
(4) A transfer of a savings certificate made in the prescribed manner shall automatically cancel a 
nomination previously made:  
Provided that where a savings certificate is held by or on behalf of any person as a pledge e or by way 
of security for  any purpose, such holding shall not have the effect of cancelling a nomination but the right 
of the nominee shall be subject to the right of the person so holding it.  
7. Payment on death of holder .—(1) If the holder of a savings certificate dies and there is in force at 
the time of his death a nomination in favour of any person, payment of the sum due thereon shall be made 
to the nominee.  
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, payment of the sum due thereon  shall be made — 
(a) in any case where a person has been appointed to receive it under sub -section ( 3) of section 6, 
to that person, and  
(b) where there is no such person, to any guardian of the property of the minor appointed by a 
competent court, or where  on such guardian has been so appointed, to either parent of the minor, or 
where neither parent is alive, to any other guardian of the minor.  
(3) Where the sum due on a savings certificate is payable to two or more nominees, and either or any 
of them dies,  the sum shall be paid to the surviving nominee or nominees.  
(4) If a person dies and is at the time of his death the holder of a savings certificate and there is no 
nomination in force at the time of his death and probate of his will or letters of adminis tration of his estate 
or a succession certificate granted under the Indian Succession Act, 1925, is not within three months of 
the death of the holder produced to the prescribed authority, then, if the sum due on the savings certificate 
does not exceed  1[such limit as may be prescribed], the prescribed authority may pay the same to any 
person appearing to it to be entitled to receive the sum or to administer the estate of the deceased.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require any person to receive payment of the 
sum due on a savings certificate before it has reached maturity or otherwise than in accordance with the 
terms of the savings certificate.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1985, s. 3, for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 4 -9-1985).  3 
 8. Payment to be a full discharge .—(1) Any payment made in accordance with the foreg oing 
provisions of this Act to a minor or to his parent or guardian or to a nominee or to any other person shall 
be a full discharge from all further liability in respect of the sum so paid.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to preclude any ex ecutor or administrator or other 
representative of a deceased holder of a savings certificate from recovering from the person receiving the 
same under section 7 the amount remaining in his hands after deducting the amount of all debts or other 
demands lawf ully paid or discharged by him in due course of administration.  
(3) Any creditor or claimant against the estate of a holder of a savings certificate may recover his debt 
or claim out of the sum paid under this Act to any person and remaining in his hands u nadministered , in 
the same manner and to the same extent as if the latter had obtained letters of administration to the estate 
of the deceased.  
9. Security for due administration .—The prescribed authority may take such security as it thinks 
necessary from any person to whom any money is paid under sub -section ( 4) of section 7 for the due 
administration of the money so paid and may assign the said security to any person interested in such 
administration.  
10. Power to administer oath .—(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the right of a person claiming to 
be entitled to payment under sub -section ( 4) of section 7, the prescribed authority may take evidence on 
oath or affirmation according to the law for the time being in force relating to oaths and affirmations.  
(2) Any person who upon such oath or affirmation makes any statement which is false and which he 
either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true shall be deemed guilty of an offence 
under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 186 0). 
11. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
officer of the Government or any prescribed authority in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this Act.  
12. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form of application for savings certificates and the issue and discharge of such certificates;  
(b) the maximum limits of holdings;  
(c) the conditions as to payment of interest or discount relating to any class of savings certificates 
and the recovery o f any interest paid on any amount held in excess of the maximum limits in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue or in any other manner;  
(d) the transfer and conversion of savings certificates and the fees to be levied in respect thereof;  
(e) the rep lacement of savings certificates mutilated, lost or destroyed and the fees payable in 
respect thereof;  
(f) the form of nominations, the manner in which and the conditions subject to which nominations 
may be made and the registration of nominations;  
(g) the  manner in which any person may be appointed for the purposes of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 6;  
(h) the variation or cancellation of nominations and the registration of such variations or 
cancellations;  
(i) the fees that may be levied for registration, variation or cancellation of nominations;  
1[(ia) the limit under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;]  
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 56 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4 -9-1985).  4 
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may  be comprised in one 
session or 1[in two  or more  successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be, so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
13. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Post Office National Savings Certificates                         
Ordinance, 1944  (42 of 1944) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, any rules made or deemed to have been made or 
anything done or any action taken in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or  under the said 
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by or 
under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the day on which such rules were made , such thing was 
done or such action was taken.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for c ertain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
--------------------------The Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Declaration of the Indian Statistical Institut e as an institution of national  importance . 
4. Grant of degrees and diplomas by Institute.  
5. Grants, loans, etc., by Central Government to the Institute . 
6. Audit of accounts of the Institute . 
7. Prior approval of Central Government necessary for certain action by   Institute . 
8. Constitution of Committees by Central Government for p reparing programme of work by the 
Institute, etc.  
9. Review of work done, Inspection of assets, etc . 
10. Institute to afford facilities to Committees.  
11. Power to issue directions to Institute . 
12. Power of Central Government to assume functions of control . 
 
    2 
 THE INDIAN STATISTICAL INSTITUTE ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1959  
[24th December,  1959 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the Indian Statistical Institute having at present its 
registered office in Calcutta to be an institution of national importance and  to provide for 
certain matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indian Statistical Institute                  
Act, 1959.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires. — 
(a) “Institute ” means the Indian Statistical Institute registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(b) “memorandum ” means the memorandum of association of the Institute filed with the 
Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies under the Societies Registra tion Act,  1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(c) “rules and regulations ” includes any rule or regulation (by whatever name called) which the 
Institute is competent to make in the exercise of the powers conferred on it under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860 ), but shall not include any bye -laws or standing orders made 
under the rules and regulations for the conduct of its day -to-day administration.  
3. Declaration of the Indian Statistical Institute as an institution of national                       
importance .—Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Indian Statistical Institute are such as 
to make it an institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the Indian Statistical Institute is 
an institution of  national importance.  
4. Grant of degrees and diplomas by Institute .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956  (3 of 1956) , or in any other law for the time being force, the 
Institute may hold such examinations and grant such degrees and diplomas in  2[statistics, mathematics, 
quantitative economics, computer science and such other subjects related to statistics] as may be 
determined by the Institute from time to time.  
5. Grants, loans, etc., by Central Government to the Institute .—For the purpose of enabling the 
Institute to discharge efficiently its functions , including research, education, training, project activities 
and statistical work relating to planning for national development, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation ma de by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such 
sums of money as that Government considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise.  
6. Audit of accounts of the Institute .—(1) The accounts of the Institute shall  be audited by auditors 
duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and the 
institute shall appoint such auditors as the Central Government may, after consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of In dia and the Institute, select.  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1960, vide notification No. S.O. 584 (E), dated 2 nd March, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                     
sec 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1995, s. 2, for “statistics” (w.e.f. 18-9-1995).  
 3 
 (2) The Central Government may issue such directions to the auditors in the performance of their 
duties as it thinks fit.  
(3) Every such auditor in the performance of his duties shall have at all reasonable times access to th e 
registers, books of account, records and other documents of the Institute.  
(4) The auditors shall submit their report to the Institute and shall al so forward a copy thereof to the 
Central Government for its information.  
7. Prior approval of Central Gover nment necessary for certain action by                               
Institute .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the So cieties Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) , or 
in the memorandum or rules and regulations, the Institute shall not, except with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, — 
(a) alter, extend or abridge any of the purposes for which it has been established or for which it is 
being used immediately before the commencement of this Act, or amalgamate itself either wholly or 
partially with any other institution or society; or  
(b) alter or amend in any manner the memorandum or rules and regulations; or  
(c) sell or otherwise dispose of any property acquired by the Institute with money specifically 
provided for such acquisition by the Cent ral Government:  
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary in the case of any such movable propert y or 
class of movable property as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf by general or 
special order; or  
(d) be dissolved.  
8. Constitution of Committees by Central Government for preparing programme of work by 
the Institute, etc .—(1) The Central Government may constitute as many Committees as and when it 
considers necessary consisting of such number of persons as it thinks fit t o appoint thereto and assign to 
each such Committee all or any of the following duties, namely: — 
(a) the preparation and submission to the Central Government as far as possible before the 
commencement of each financial year, of statements showing programmes of work agreed to be 
undertaken by the Institute during that year for which the Central Government may provide funds, as 
well as general financial estimates in respect of such work; and  
(b) the settlement on broad lines of the programme of such work.  
(2) Where the Institute do es not agree to undertake any work suggested by any Committee referred to 
in sub -section ( 1), it shall give to the Central Government its reasons for not so agreeing.  
9. Review of work done, Inspection of assets, etc .—(1) The Central Government may constitute a 
Committee consisting of such number of persons as it thinks fit to appoint thereto for the purpose of — 
(a) reviewing the work done by the Institute and the progress made by it;  
(b) inspecting its buildings, equipment  and other assets;  
(c) evaluating the work done by the Institute; and  
(d) advising Government generally on any matter which in the opinion of the Central Government  
is of importance in connection with the work of the Institute;  
and the Committee shall sub mit its reports thereon in such manner as the Central Government may direct.  
(2) Notice shall be given in every case to the Institute of the intention to cause a review, inspection or 
evaluation to be made, and the Institute shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the 
right to be present and be heard at such review, inspection or evaluation.  4 
 (3) The Central Government may address the Chairman of the Institute with reference to the result of 
such review, inspection or evaluation as discl osed in any report of the Committee referred to in            
sub-section ( 1), and the Chairman shall communicate to the Central Government the action, if any, taken 
thereon.  
(4) When the Central Government has, in pursuance of sub -section ( 3), addressed the Chairman of the 
Institute in connection with any matter, and the Chairman does not within a reasonable time take action to 
the satisfaction of the Central Government in respect thereof, the Central Government may, after 
considering any expla nations furnished or representations made on behalf of the Institute, issue such 
directions as it considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report.  
10. Institute to afford facilities to Committees .—The Institute shall be bound to afford all necessary 
facilities to any Committee constituted under section 8 or section 9 for the purpose of enabling it to carry 
out its duties.  
11. Power to issue directions to Institute .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do in the public interest, issue, for reasons to be recorded and communicated to the 
Institute, such directions as it thinks fit to the Institute, and such directions may include directions 
requiring the Institute — 
(a) to amend the memorandum or to make or amend any rule or regulation within such period as 
may be specified in the directions;  
(b) to give priorities  to the work undertaken or to be undertaken by the Institute in such manner as 
the Central Government may think  fit to specify in this behalf.  
(2) Any directions issued under this section shall have effect, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law for the time being in force or in the memorandum or rules and regulations of the Institute.  
12. Power of Central G overnment to assume functions of control .—(1) If, in the op inion of the 
Central Government, — 
(i) the Institute without just or reasonable cause has made default in giving effect to any direction 
issued under sub -section ( 4) of section 9 or section 11; or  
(ii) the Council of the Institute has exceeded or abused its powers in relation to the Institute or 
any part thereof;  
the Central Government may, by written order, direct the Institute within a period to be specified in the 
order to show cause to the satisf action of the Central Government against the making of any appointment 
referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) If, within the period fi xed by any order issued under sub -section ( 1), cause is not shown to the 
satisfaction of the Central Government, the Central Government may, by order published in the                 
Official Gazette and stating the reasons therefore, appoint one or more persons to take charge of the 
Institute or an y part thereof for such period not exceeding two years as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in the memorandum 
or rules and regulations of the Institute, on the issue of an order under sub -section ( 2), during the period 
specified in that order, — 
(a) where the order provides for any person or persons being in charge of the Institute — 
(i) all persons holding office as Members of the Council, including the Chairman, shall be 
deemed to  have vacated their offices as such;  
(ii) the person or persons appointed under sub -section ( 2) to be in charge of the Institute shall 
exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the Chairman or Council of the Institute, 
whether at a meeting or o therwise, in respect of the Institute;  
(b) where the order provides for any person or persons being in charge of any part of the Institute, 
the person or persons so appointed shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers and perform all 
the duties of the Chairman or Council in relation to that part.  
--------------------------The Married Women Property (Extension) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE MARRIED WOMEN ’S PROPERTY (EXTENSION) ACT, 1959  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Amendment of section 2 . 
3. Amendment of section 6 . 
4. Amendment of Act 30 of 1950 . 
5. Repeals and savings . 
 
  2 
 THE MARRIED WOMEN ’S PROPERTY (EXTENSION) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1959  
[24th December,  1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Married Women ’s Property Act, 1874, to parts of 
India in which it is not now in force.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Married Women ’s Properly 
(Extension) Act, 1959.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2 of the Married Women ’s Property                                    
Act, 1874 (3 of 1874), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the sent ence “It extends to the 
whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were 
comprised in Part B States. ”, the sentence “It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. ” shall be substituted.  
3. Amendment of section 6 .—For sub -section ( 2) of section 6 of the principal Act, the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall 
apply in the case of any policy of insurance such as is referred to therein which is effected — 
(a) by any Hindu, Muhammad an, Sikh or Jain — 
(i) in Madras, after the thirty -first day of December, 1913, or  
(ii) in any other territory to which this Act extended immediately before  the 
commencement of the Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act, 1959, after the first 
day of April, 1923, or  
(iii) in any territory to which this Act extends on and from the commencement of the 
Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act, 1959, on or after  such commencement;  
(b) by a Buddhist in any territory to which this Act extends, on or after the 
commencement of the Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act, 1959:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall affect any right or liability which has accru ed or 
been incurred under any decree of a competent court passed — 
(i) before the first day of April, 1923, in any case to which sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) 
of clause (a) applies; or  
(ii) before the commencement of the Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act 1959, in 
any case to which sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( a) or clause ( b) applies.”. 
4. Amendment of Act 30 of 1950 .—In Part A of the Schedule to the Union Territories (Laws) 
Act, 1950, the entry relating to the Married Women ’s Property Act, 1874, shall be omitted.  
5. Repeals and savings .—If immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force 
in any territory to which the principal Act is now extended any law corresponding, to the principal 
Act, that law shall, save as otherwise  expressly provided in this Act, stand repealed on                              
such commencement:  
Provided that the repeal shall not affect — 
                                                           
1. 1st March, 1960, vide notification No. S.O. 528(E), dated 29th February, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                   
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii). 
 3 
 (a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder,  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any law so 
repealed,  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any law so repealed, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or re medy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and 
any such penalty, forfeiture or punish ment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that, subject to the proceeding proviso, anything done or any action taken under 
any such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the 
princ ipal Act, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything 
done or any action taken under the principal Act.  
 
 
--------------------------The Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) Amendment Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE MINERAL OILS (ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 1959  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. Power to alter countervailing duties on imported goods in certain cases . 
  2 
 THE MINERAL OILS (ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1959  
[24th December,  1959.]  
An Act to amend the Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) Act, 1958.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) 
Amendment Act, 1959.  
1*                               *                              *                                *                               *                        * 
4. Power to alter countervailing duties on imported goods in certain cases. —Where any duty of 
customs on any of the goods specified in section 2 of the principal Act became leviable under the Indian 
Tariff Act, 1934  (32 of 1934) , for the period commencing on the 1 st day of April, 1959, and ending on the 
31st day of October, 1959, by reason of the fact that under that Act such duty, being the excise duty f or 
the time being leviable on like goods if produced or manufactured in India, has to be added to, or levied 
as, the duty of customs, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
the duty of customs on any of the said go ods for the said period shall be such as may be specified in                   
the notification.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 and 3 rep. by Repealing and Amending Act 52 of 1964, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  
--------------------------The Miscellaneous Personal Laws (Extension) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE MISCELLANEOUS PERSONAL LAWS (EXTENSION) ACT, 1959  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition.  
3. Extension and amendment of certain Acts . 
4. Repeals and savings.  
SCHEDULE I . 
SCHEDULE II  
  2 
 THE MISCELLANEOU S PERSONAL LAWS (EXTENSION) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1959  
[4th December , 1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of certain personal laws to parts of India in which they are 
not now in force . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title and commencement .―(1)  This Act may be called the Miscellaneous Personal Laws 
(Extension) Act, 1959.  
(2)  It shall come into force on such date1  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, a ppoint.  
2. Definition .―In this Act, “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force.  
3. Extension and amendment of certain Acts .―On and from the appointed day, the Acts specified 
in Schedule I shall stand amended in the manner specified t herein.  
4. Repeals and savings .―(1) On and from the appointed day, the enactments specified in Schedule II 
and other enactments corresponding to the Acts specified in Schedule I shall stand repealed in the 
territories to which they respectively extended im mediately before that day.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect ― 
(a) the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred  under any enactment 
so repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any enactment so repealed; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid;    
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been  passed:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken under any such enactment shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the Act now extended to the territory concerned 
and shall continue to be in force accordingly,  unless and until superseded by anything done or any action 
taken under the said Act.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. 1st February, 1960, vide notification No. S.O.  308(E), dated 29th January, 1960, see Gazette   of India, Extraordinary,             
Part II, s. 3(ii). 3 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See section 3)  
The Converts ’ Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866  
(21 of 1866)  
Section 35.―For “except the territories which, immediately, before the 1st November, 1956, were 
comprised in Part B States ”, substitute  “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory 
of Manipur ”. 
The Anand Marriage Act, 1909  
(7 of 1909)  
Section  1.―In sub-section ( 2), for “except the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States ”, substitute  “except the State of                                    
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 
(15 of 1916)  
Section 1.―For sub-section ( 2), substitute ― 
“(2)  It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. ”. 
The Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928   
(12 of 1928)  
Section 1.―In sub-section ( 2), for “except the territories which immed iately before the                            
1st November , 1956, were comprised in Part B States ”, substitute  “except the State of                                      
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
Section 2.—Omit  “from inheritance or”.  
The Hindu Gains of Learning A ct, 1930  
(30 of 1930)  
Section  1.―In sub-section ( 2), for “except the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States ”, substitute  “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)  Application Act, 1937  
(26 of 1937)  
Section  1.―In sub-section ( 2), for “except the territories which, immediately before the                            
1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States ”, substitute  “except the State of                                    
Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
The Dissolution of Muslim Marriage s Act, 1939  
(8 of 1939)  
Section  1.―In sub -section ( 2), for “except the territories which, immedia tely before the 1st 
November, 19 56, were comprised in Part B States ”, substitute “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ”. 
 4 
 SCH EDULE II  
[See section 4 (1)] 
The Hindu Transfers and Bequests (City of Madras) Act, 1921 (8 of 1921).  
The Hyderabad Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1344 -F (Hyderabad Act 5 of 1344 -F). 
The Hyderabad (Application of Central Acts) Act, 1952 (Hyderabad Act 48 of 1952), in so far as it 
relates to any of the Acts specified in Schedule I.  
The Andhra Pradesh (Extension of Laws) Act, 1958 (Andhra Pradesh Act 23 of 1958), in so far as it 
relates to the Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930.  
The State of Saurashtra (Applicat ion of Central and Bombay Acts) Ordinance, 1948                       
(Saurashtra Ordinance 25 of 1948), in so far as it relates to ― 
(a)  the Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928 (12 of 1928), and  
(b)  the Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930  (30 of 1930).  
The Saurashtra Dissolution of Muslim Marr iages Act, 1952 (Saurashtra 26 of 1952).  
The Travancore Muslim Succession Act, 1108 (11 of 1108).  
The Cochin Muslim Succession Act, 1108 (15 of 1108).  
The Travancore Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disa bilities Act, 1114 (18 of 1114).  
The Travancore Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1117 (30 of 1117) . 
The Cochin Muslim Marriages Dissolution Act, 1120 (22 of 1120).  
The Madhya Bharat (Adoption of Laws) Act, Samvat 2009 (Act 1 of 1953), in so far as it relates t o― 
(a) the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 (7 of 1909);  
(b) the Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 (15 of 1916);  
(c) the Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928 (12 of 1928);  
(d) the Hindu Gains of Learning Act, 1930 (30 of 1930); and  
(e) the M uslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) Application Act, 1937 (26 of 1937).  
The Madhya Bharat Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1956 (14 of 1956).  
The Madras Hindu Transfers and Bequests Act, 1914 (Madras Act 1 of 1914).  
The Mysore Converts ’ Marriage Dissolution A ct, 18 66 (Mysore Act 21 of 1866) , as extended           
to Mysore.  
Section 6 of the Mysore Hindu Law (Women ’s Rights) A ct, 1933 (Mysore Act 10 of 1933 ). 
The Mysore Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1938 (Mysore Act 5 of 1938).  
The Mysore Dis solution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1943 (Mysore Act 43 of 1943).  
The United State of Rajasthan Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) Application Ordinance,                             
1949 (14 of 1949).  5 
 The Rajasthan (Adaptation of Central Laws) Ordinance, 1950 (4 of 1950), in so far as it                 
relates to ― 
(a) the Anand Marriage Act, 1909 (7 of 1909);  
(b) the Hindu Disposition of Property Act, 1916 (15 of 1916);  
(c) the Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928 (12 of 1928);  
(d) the Hindu Gain s of Learning Act, 1930 (30 of 1930); and  
(e) the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 ( 8 of 1939).  
 
--------------------------The Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 THE PARLIAMENT (PREVE NTION OF DISQUALIFICATION) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1959  
[4th April , 1959 .] 
An Act to declare that certain offices of profit under the Government shall not disqualify the 
holders thereof for being chosen as, or for being, members of Par liament.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification)                    
Act, 1959.  
2.  Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “compensatory allowance ” means any sum of money payable to the holder of an office by 
way of daily allowance (such allowance not exceeding the amount of daily allowance to which a 
member of Parliament is entitled under  1[the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954  (30 of 1954) ], any conveyanc e allowance , house -rent allowance or 
travelling allowance for the purpose of enabling him to recoup any expenditure incurred by him in 
performing the functions of that office;  
(b) “statutory body ” means any corporation, committee, commission, council, boar d or other 
body of persons, whether incorporated or not, established by or under any law for the time being 
in force;  
(c) “non-statutory body ” means any body of persons other than a statutory body.  
3. Certain offices of profit not to disqualify .―It is here by declared that none of the following 
offices, in so far as it is an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any 
State, shall disqualify the holder thereof for being chosen as, or for being, a member of Parliament, 
namely, ― 
(a) any office held by a Minister, Minister of State or Deputy Minister for the Union or for 
any State, whether ex officio  or by name;  
2[(aa) the office of a Leader of the Opposition in Parliament;]  
3[(ab) the office of Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission;]  
4[(ac) the office of  5[each leader and each deputy leader] of a recognised party and a 
recognised group in either House of Parliament;]  
6[(ad) the office of the Chairperson of the National Advisory Council constituted by the 
Government of India in the Cabi net Secretariat vide Order No. 631/2/1/2004 -Cab., dated the 31st 
May, 2004;]  
(b) the office of Chief Whip, Deputy Chief Whip or Whip in Parliament or of a Parliamentary 
Secretary;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1993, s. 2, for the words “the Salaries and Allowance s of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 ” (w.e.f. 27 -8-1993).    
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1977, s. 12 ( w.e.f. 1-11-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 54 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -7-1993).    
4. Ins.  by Act 5 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5 -2-1999).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2000, s. 5, for “each leader” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000).       
6. Ins. by Act 31 of 2006, s . 2 (w.e.f. 18-8-2006 ). 
 2 1[(ba) the office of chairperson of ― 
(i) the National Commission for Minorit ies constituted under section 3 of the National 
Commission for Minorities Act, 1992  (19 of 1992) ; 
2[(ii) the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes constituted under clause (1) of 
article 338 of the Constitution;  
(iia) the National Commission for the  Scheduled Tribes constituted under clause (1) of 
article 338A of the Constitution;]  
(iii) the National Commission for wome n cons tituted under section 3 of the N ational 
Commission for Women Act, 1990  (20 of 1990) ;] 
(c) the office of a member of any force r aised or maintained under the National Cadet Corps 
Act, 1948  (31 of 1948) , the Territorial Army Act, 1948  (56 of 1948) , or the Reserve and Auxiliary 
Air Forces Act, 1952  (62 of 1952) ; 
(d) the office of a member of a Home Guard constituted under any law for  the time being in 
force in any State;  
(e) the office of sheriff in the city of Bombay, Calcutta or Madras;  
(f) the office of chairman or member of the syndicate, senate, executive committee, council or 
court of a university or any other body connected wit h a university;  
(g) the office of a member of any delegation or mission sent outside India by the Government 
for any special purpose;  
(h) the office of chairman or member of a committee (whether consisting of one or more 
members), set up temporarily for th e purpose of advising the Government or any other authority 
in respect of any matter of public importance or for the purpose of making an inquiry into , or 
collecting statistics in respect of, any such matter, if the holder of such office is not entitled to  any 
remuneration other than compensatory allowance;  
3[(i) the office of chairman, director or member of any statutory or non -statutory body other 
than any such body as is referred to in clause ( h), if the holder of such office is not entitled to any 
remun eration other than compensatory allowance, but excluding ( i) the office of chairman of any 
statutory or non -statutory body specified in Part I of the Schedule  4[, (ii) the office of chairman or 
secretary of any statutory or non -statutory body specified in Part II of the Schedule and ( iii) the 
office of deputy chairman of the non -statutory body specified in Part III of the Schedule ;] 
(j) the office of village revenue officer , whether called a lambardar , malguzar , patel  
deshmukh  or by any other name, whose du ty is to collect land revenue and who is remunerated by 
a share of , or commission on, the amount of land revenue collected by him, but who does not 
discharge any police functions.  
5[(k) the office of Chairman, Deputy Chairman, Secretary or Member (by whate ver name 
called) in any statutory or non -statutory body specified in the Table;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 5 4 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f.  27-8-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2013, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 20 -9-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1993, s. 3, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 19 -7-1993).  
4.  Subs. by Act 20 of 1992, s. 2, for “and ( ii) the office of chairman or se cretary or any statutory  or non -statutory body 
specified in Part II of the Schedule ;” (w.e.f. 17 -5-1992).  
5. Ins. by Act 31 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-2006).  3 (l) the office of Chairperson or trustee (by whatever name called) of any Trust, whether public 
or private, not being a body specified in the Schedule;  
(m) the office of Chairm an, President, Vice -President or Principal Secretary or                      
Secretary of the Governing Body of any society registered under the Societies Registration                  
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or under any other law relating to registration o f societies, not being a 
body specified in the Schedule.]  
1[Explanation  1].―For the purposes of this section, the office of  2[chairman, Deputy Chairman or 
secretary] shall include every office of that description by whatever name called.  
3[Explanation 2 .―In clause ( aa), the expression “Leader of the Opposition ” shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament                     
Act, 1977  (33 of 1977) .] 
4[Explanation 3 .―In clause ( ac), the expressions  “recognised party ” and “recognised group ” shall 
have the meanings assigned to them in the Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and 
Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Act, 1998  (5 of 1999) .] 
4.  Temporary suspension of disqualification in certain c ases.―If a person being a member of 
Parliament who immediately before the commencement of this Act held an office of profit declared 
by any law repealed by this Act not to disqualify the holder thereof for being such member, becomes 
so disqualified by reason of  any of the provisions contained in this Act, such office shall not, if held 
by such person for any period not extending beyond a period of six months from the commencement 
of this Act disqualify him for being a member of Parliament.  
 5. Repeals .―The Parli ament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1950  (19 of 1950) , the 
Parliament Prevention of Disqualification Act, 1951  (68 of 1951) , the Prevention of Disqualification 
Act, 1953  (1 of 1954) , and any provision in any other enactment which is inconsistent wi th this Act 
are hereby repealed.  
                                                           
1. Explanation  re-numbered as Explanation  1 thereof  by Act 3 3 of 1977, s. 12 (w.e.f.1 -11-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1993, s. 3, for “chairman or secretary” (w.e.f. 27 -8-1993).  
3. Explanation 2  ins. by Act 31 of 1977, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1977).  
4. Explanation 3  ins. by Act 5 of 1999, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7 -1-1999) .  4 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( i)] 
PART I  
BODIES UNDER THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
Air-India International Corporation established under section 3 of the Air Corporations                         
Act, 1953 (27 of 1953).  
Air Transpo rt Council constituted under section 30 of the Air Corporations                                            
Act, 1953 (27 of 1953).  
Board of Directors of the Export  Risks Insurance Corporation  1* * *  Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Heavy Electrical s 1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Hindustan Cables  1* * *  Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Hindustan Insecticides  1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Hindustan Machine Tools  1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Hindustan Shipyard Limited.  
Board of Directors of the  2[Hindustan Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited].  
Board of Directors of the National Coal Development Corporation (Private) Limited.  
Board of Directors of the National  3[Industrial] Development Corporation  1* * * Limited.  
Board of D irectors of the National Instruments  1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the National Small Industries Corporation  1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Neyveli Lignite Corporation (Private) Limited.  
Board of Directors of the Sindri Fertilizers and C hemicals  1* * * Limited.  
Board of Directors of the State Trading Corporation of India  1* * * Limited.  
Central Warehousing Corporation established under section 17 of the Agricultural Produce 
(Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 1956) . 
Coal Board established under section 4 of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety)                               
Act, 1952 (12 of 1952).  
Coal Mines Labour Housing Board constituted under section 6 of the Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund Act, 1947 (32 of 194 7). 
Commissioners for the Port of Calcutta.  
Committee for the allotment of land in the township of Gandhidham.  
Company Law Advisory Commission constituted under section 410 of the Companies                          
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
                                                           
1. The brackets and word “ (Private )” omit ted by Act 5 8 of 1960, s. 3 and Sch. II (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 3 and Sch. II , ibid., for “Nangal Fertilizers and Chemicals (Private) Limited,” (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  
3. Ins. by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -12-1960).  5 Cotton Textiles Fu nd Committee constituted under the Te xtile Fund s                                               
Ordinance, 1944 (34 of 1944).  
Dock Labour Board, Bombay, established under the Bombay Dock Workers (Regulation                       
of Employment) Scheme, 1956, made under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)                   
Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).  
Dock Labour Board, Calcutta, established under the Calcu tta Dock Workers (Regulation of  
Employment) Scheme, 1956, made under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Emp loyment) Act, 1948 
(9 of 1948).  
Dock Labour Board, Madras, established under the Madras Dock Workers (Regulation                          
of Employment) Scheme, 1956, made under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)                    
Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).  
Forward Markets Commission established under section 3 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1952 (74 of 1952).  
Indian Air Lines Corporation established under section 3 of the Air Corporation s                                
Act, 1953 (27 of 195 3). 
Industrial Finance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Industrial Finance 
Corporation Act, 1948 (15 of 1948).  
Licensing Committee constituted under rule 10 of the Registration and Licensing of                      
Industrial Underta kings Rules, 1952, made under the Industries (Development and Regulation)               
Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Mining Boards constituted under section 12 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).  
National Co -operative Development and Warehousing Board establis hed under section 3 of the 
Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 1956).  
Rehabilitation Finance Administration constituted under section 3 of the Rehabilitation Finance 
Administration Act, 1948 (12 of 1948).  
Tariff  Commission established under section 3 of the Tariff Commission Act, 1951 (50 of 1951).  
Trustees of the Port of Bombay.  
Trustees of the Port of Madras.  
Trustees or Commissioners of any major Port as defined in the Indian Ports                                          
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), other than the Port of Calcutta, Bombay or Madras.  
BODIES UNDER STATE GOVERNMENTS  
Andhra Pradesh  
Agricultural Improvement Fund Committee constituted under section 3 of the Hyderabad 
Agricultural Improvement Act, 1952.  
Co-operative Agricultural and Marke ting Development Fund Committee.  
Livestock Purchasing Committee.  6 Assam  
Adhi Concilition Boards constituted under section 2A of  the Assam Adhiars Protection and 
Regulation Act, 1948.  
Assam Evacuee Property Management Commit tee constituted under section 12 of the Assam 
Evacuee Property Act, 1951.  
Assam Text  Book Committee.  
Bihar  
Mining Board for Coal Mines.  
Text B ook and Education Literature Committee.  
Bombay  
Allocation Committee (Allop athic) under the Employees ’ State Insur ance Scheme.  
Allocation Committee (Ayurvedic) under the Employees ’ State Insurance Scheme.  
Board to conduct over -all supervision of the business and affairs of the Narsinggiriji  Mills, 
Sholapur.  
Bombay Housing Board constituted under section 3 of the Bomba y Housing Board Act, 1948.  
Bombay State Electricity Board constituted under section 5 of the Electricity (Supply)                                       
Act, 1948 (54 of 1948).  
Bombay State Electricity Consultative Council constituted under section 16 of th e Electricity  
(Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948).  
Medical Service Committee under the Employees ’ State Insurance Scheme.  
Pharmaceutical Committee under the Employees ’ State Insurance Scheme.  
Regional Transport Authority for Ahmedabad, Aurangabad, Bombay, Nagp ur, Poona, Rajkot and 
Thana constituted under section 44 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939).  
Saurashtra Housing Board constituted under section 3 of the Saurashtra Housing Board Act, 1954.  
State Transport Authority constituted under section 44 of the Motor Vehicles                                      
Act, 1939 (4 of 1939).  
Vidarbha Housing Board constituted under section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Housing Act, 1950.  
Kerala  
Board of Examiners appointed under rule 8 of the Travancore -Cochin Boiler Atte ndants Rules, 
1954.  
Panel of Assessors constituted under rule 63 of the Travancore -Cochin Boiler Attendants Rules, 
1954.  
Panel of Assessors constituted under the Travancore -Cochin Economiser Rules, 1956.  
Madhya Pradesh  
Madhya Pradesh Housing Board constitu ted under section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Housing 
Board Act, 1950.  
Mahakoshal Housing Board.  7 1[Tamil Nadu ] 
Committee to select Books for Study for S.S.L.C. Examination.  
Landing and Shipping Fees Committees for Minor Ports.  
Local Committee constituted under  regulation 10A of the Employees ’ State Insurance (General) 
Regulations, 1950.  
Madras Board of Transport.  
2[Tamil Nadu  State Electricity Board ] constituted under section 5 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948 (54 of 1948).  
Madras State Electricity Consult ative Council constituted under section 16 of the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948).  
Port Conservancy Boards.  
Port Trust Boards of Minor Ports.  
State Board of Communications.  
Text Books Committee.  
3[Karnataka ] 
Board of Management, Mysore Iron and  Steel Works, Bhadra vathi. 
Board of Management of Industrial Con cerns.  
Orissa 
Appeal Committee under the Board of Secondary Education.  
Orissa Board of Communications and Transport.  
Regional Transport Authority constituted under section 44 of the Motor Vehi cles                                   
Act, 1939 (4 of 1939).  
State Transport Authority constituted under section 44 of the Motor Vehicles                                     
Act, 1939 (4 of 1939).  
Punjab  
Punjab State National Workers (Relief and Rehabili tation) Board.  
Rajasthan  
City Improvement Trust, Kota  constituted under the City of Kota Improvement Act, 1946.  
Excise Appellate Board, Ajmer.  
Rajasthan State Electricity Board constituted under section 5 of the Electricity (Supply)                    
Act, 1948 (54 of 1948).  
Urban Improvement Board, Jaipur.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subject) Order, 1970, for “ Madras ”   
(w.e.f. 14 -1-1969) .    
2. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subject) Order, 1970, for “ Madras  State 
Electricity Board” (w .e.f. 14 -1-1969) . 
3. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects) Order, 1974, s. 3 and Sch., for 
“Mysore” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  8 Uttar Pradesh  
Government Cement Factory Board.  
Local Committees for Agra, Kanpur, Lucknow and Saharanpur appointed under section 25 of the 
Employers ’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).  
Sub-Committee  to select books for Educational Expansion Department.  
U.P. Sugar and Power Alcohol and Lab our Housing Board constituted under section 10 of the 
U.P. Sugar and Power Alcohol Industries Labour Welfare and Development Fund Act, 1950.  
West Bengal  
Licensing Bo ard constituted under the regulations made under rule 45 of the Indian Electricity 
Rules, 1956.  
West Bengal Housing Board constituted under the West Bengal Development Corporation                  
Act, 1954.  
BODIES IN UNION TERRITORIES  
Delhi Development Au thority constituted under section 3 of the Delhi Development                           
Act, 1957 (61 of 1957).  
Delhi Electricity Power Control Board constituted under section 5 of the Bombay Electricity 
(Special Powers) Act, 1946, as applied to Delhi.  
Delhi  State Electricity Council constituted under section 16 of the Electricity (Supply)                        
Act, 1948 (54 of 1948).  
PART II  
BODIES UNDER THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
Advisory Committee for the Air -India International Corporation appointed under se ction 41 of the 
Air Corporations Act, 1953 (27 of 1953).  
Advisory Committee for the Indian Airlines Corporation appointed under section 4 1 of the Air 
Corporation s Act, 1953 (27 of 1953).  
Central Silk Board constituted under section 4 of the Central Silk Bo ard Act, 1948 (61 of 1948).  
Coffee Board constituted under section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942 (7 of 1942).  
Coir Board constituted under section 4 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 of 1953).  
Development Council for Acids and Fertilizers established under se ction 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Alkalis and Allied Industries established under section 6 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Indian Central Coconut C ommittee constituted under section 4 of the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Drugs, Dyes and Intermediates established under section 6 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 19 51). 
Development Council for Food Processing Industries established under section 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  9 Development Council for Heavy Electrical Engineering Industries established under section 6 of 
the In dustries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Intern al Combustion Engines and Power D riven Pumps established 
under section 6 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Light Electrical Engineering Industries established under section 6 of 
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Machine Tools established under section 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Non -ferrous Metals including alloys established under section 6 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Oil -based and Plastic Industries established unde r section 6 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Sugar Industry established under section 6 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Textiles ma de of artificial Silk including artificial Silk Yarn established 
under section 6 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Development Council for Textiles made of Wool, including woollen yarn, hosiery, carpets                  
and druggets established under section 6 of the Industries (Development and Regulation)                           
Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
Durgah Committee, Ajmer, constituted under section 4 of the Durgah Khawaja Saheb                        
Act, 1955 (36 of 1955).  
Indian Central Arecanut Committee.  
Indian Central Coconut Committee constituted under section 4 of the Indian Coconut Committee  
Act, 1944 (10 of 1944) (now dissolved) . 
Indian Central Cotton Committee constituted under section 4 of the Indian Cott on Cess                         
Act, 1923 (14 of 1923) (now dissolved).  
Indian Central Jute Committee.  
Indian Central Oilseeds Committee constituted und er section 44 of the Indian Oil seeds Committee 
Act, 1946 (9 of 1946).  
Indian Central Sugarcane Committee.  
Indian Central Tobacco Committee.  
Indian Lac Cess Committee constituted under section 4 of the Indian Lac Cess                                     
Act, 1930 (24 of 1930).  
Rubber Board constituted under section 4 of the Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947).  
Tea Bo ard constituted under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 (29 of 1953).  
BODIES UNDER STATE GOVERNMENTS  
Andhra Pradesh  
Market Committee constituted under section 4 of the Hyderabad Agricultural Market Act No. II 
of 1339F.  
Market Committee constituted under secti on 4A of the Madras Commercial Crops Markets                   
Act, 1933.  10 Bihar  
Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts.  
Bihar Subai Majlis Awqaf.  
Bodh Gaya Temple Advisory Committee constituted under section 15 of the Bodh Gaya Temple 
Act, 1949.  
Body Gaya Te mple Management Committee constituted under section 3 of the Bodh Gaya 
Temple Act, 1949.  
Kerala  
Administration Committee for Coir Purchase Scheme.  
Malabar Market Committee constituted under section 4A of the Madras Commercial Crops 
Markets Act, 1933.  
Tapio ca Market Expansion Board.  
1[Tamil Nadu ] 
Area Committee for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments constit uted under section 12 of 
the Tamil Nadu  Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951.  
Tamil Nadu State Wakf Board constituted under section 9 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954).  
Punjab  
State Marketing Board constituted under section 3 of the Patiala Agricultural Produce Markets 
Act, 2004.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[TABLE  
[See section 3( k)] 
S. No.    Name of body  
(1)          (2) 
1. The Tripura Khad i and Village Industries Board, a body constituted under the Tripura Khadi and 
Village Industries Act, 1966.  
2. The Uttar Pradesh Development Council.  
3. The Irrigation and Flood Control Commission, Uttar Pradesh.   
4. The Indian Statistical Institute, Calc utta. 
5.  The West Bengal Handicrafts Development Corporation Limited.  
6. The West Bengal Small Industries Development Corporation Limited.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subject) Order, 1970, for “ Madras ”               
(w.e.f. 14 -1-1969) . 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1962  and omitted by Act 54 of 1993 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -7-1993) .    
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2006,  s. 3 (  w.e.f. 18 -8-2006) .  
 11 (1)     (2) 
7.  The West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation Limited.  
8.  The Sriniketan Santiniketan Developm ent Authority, a body constituted under the West Bengal 
Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act No. 13 of 1979).  
9.   The Haldia Development Authority, a body constituted under the West Bengal Town and Country 
(Planning and D evelopment) Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act No. 13 of 1979).  
10. The West Bengal Minorities Development and Finance Corporation, a body constituted under the 
West Bengal Minorities Development and Finance Corporation Act, 1995.  
11. The Hooghly River Bridge Comm issioners, constituted under the Hooghly River Bridge                     
Act, 1 9 69 (West Bengal Act No. 36 of 1 969).  
12. The Board of Wakf, West Bengal, a body constituted under the Wakf Act, 1995 (43 of 1995).  
13.  The State Fisheries Development Corpora tion Limited, West Bengal.  
14. The West Bengal State Haj Committee, constituted under the Haj Committee                                     
Act, 2002 (35 of 2002).  
15. The Asansol Durgapur Development Authority, West Bengal, a body constituted under the                 
West Bengal Town and Country (Planning and Development) Act, 1979 (West Bengal                         
Act No. 13 of 1979).  
16. The West Bengal Pharmaceutical and Phytochemical Development Corporation Limited.  
17. The West Bengal Handloom and  Powerloom Development Corporation Limited.  
18. The West Bengal Khadi and Village Industry Board.  
19. The Society for Self -employment for Urban Youth, a society registered under the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 196 1 (West Bengal Act No. 26 of 19 61). 
20. The Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanams Board.  
21. The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority, an authority 
constituted under section 4 of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority Act, 19 85 (2 of 1986).  
22. The National Agricultural Co -operative Marketing Federation of India Limited (NAFED).  
23. The Indian Farmer Fertilizers Co -operative Limited (IFFCO).  
24. The Krishak Bharati Co -operative Limited (KRIBHCO).  
25. The National Co -operative Consumers Federation of India Limited (NCCF).  
26. The Auroville Foundation established under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 of the Auroville 
Foundation Act, 1988 (54 of 1 988).  
27. The National Commission of Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector.  
28. The Pl anning Board (Asiatic Society) established under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 of the Asiatic 
Society Act, 1984 (5 of 1984).  
29. The Delhi Rural Development Board.  
30. The Maulana Azad Education Foundation,  12 (1)    (2) 
31. The Indira Gandhi National Centre f or the Arts.  
32. The Dr. Ambedkar Foundation.  
33. The Bihar State Board of Religious Trust, a body constituted under the Bihar Hindu Religious 
Trust Act, 1950 (Bihar Act No. 1 of 1951).  
34. The Research and Information System for the Non -Aligned and Other Developing Countries.  
35. The Indian Institute of Psychometry.  
36. The Uttar Pradesh Film Development Council.  
37. The Uttar Pradesh Provincial Co -operative Federation.  
38. The Uttar Pradesh Co -operative Federation Limited.  
39. The National Co -operative Un ion of India.  
40. The Uttar Pradesh Krishi and Gram Vikas Bank.  
41. The Uttar Pradesh Co -operative Bank Limited.  
42. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations.  
43. The Board of Control ― A.N. Sinha Institute of Social Studies, Patna.  
44. All India Council for Sports.  
45. The Howrah Improvement Trust.  
46. The Dalit Sena, 12, Janpath, New Delhi.  
47. The Social Justice Trust, 12, Janpath, New Delhi.  
48. The Bahujan Foundation (Charitable Trust), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.  
49. The Bahujan Prerna Charitable Trust, Delhi.  
50. The Central Wakf Council, established under section 9 of the Wakf Act, 1995 (43 of  1995).  
51. The Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML).  
52. The Jalianwala Bagh Memorial Trust.  
53. The Haj Committee of India constituted under section 3 of the Haj Committee                                           
Act, 2002 (35 of 2002).  
54. The Mallickghat Phoolbazar Parichalan Committee.  
55. The West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited.]  
_________ ________________________________________________________________________  
--------------------------The Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE PHARMACY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
11. [Repealed .] 
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed .] 
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. [Repealed .] 
17. [Repealed .] 
18. Special provisions for dissolution or reconstitution and reorganisation of State                  
Councils.  
19. Validation of certain acts.  
  2 
 THE PHARMACY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1959  
[27th August,  1959 .] 
An Act further to amend the Pharmacy Act, 1948.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Pharmacy (Amendment)                   
Act, 1959.  
(2) Section 19 shall come into force at once; and the remaining provisions shall come into force on 
such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different 
dates may be appointed for different States or areas thereof.  
2*                             *                              *                                *                                *                           *  
18. Special provisions for dissolution or reconstitution and reorganisation of State                  
Councils .—(1) Where on account of the territorial changes brought about by the reorganisation of States 
on the 1st day of November, 1956, a State Council is f unctioning either in a part of a State or in more than 
one State, the Central Government may, after consulting the State Government or Governments 
concerned, by order provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the dissolution of the State Council;  
(b) the reconstitution and reorganisation in any manner whatsoever of the State Council, 
including the constitution, where necessary, of new State Councils;  
(c) the extension of the term of office of the members of a State Council for any pe riod or periods 
not exceeding two years in the aggregate;  
(d) the area in respect of which the reconstituted State Council or new State Council shall 
function and operate;  
(e) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of the State Council 
(including the rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to any other State Councils or State 
Governments and the terms and conditions of such transfer ; 
(f) the substitution of any such transferee for the State Council or the addi tion of any such 
transferee, as a party to any legal proceeding to which the State Council is a party; and the transfer of 
any proceedings pending before the State Council to any such transferee;  
(g) the transfer or re -employment of any employees of the St ate Council to, or by, any such 
transferee and subject to the provisions of section 111 of the States Reorganisation                                   
Act, 1956 (37 of 1956 ), the terms and conditions of service applicable to such employees after such 
trans fer or re -employment;  
(h) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as may be necessary to give effect 
to the purposes of this section.  
(2) Where an order is made under this s ection, transferring the assets , rights and liabilities of any 
State Council , then, by virtue of that order , such assets , rights and liabilities of the State Council shall vest 
in, and be the ass ets, rights and liabilities of , the transferee.  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 1960 vide notification No. S.O. 1042, dated 26th April, 1960, see Gazette of India, 1960, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Section s 2 to 17 rep. by Act 52 of 1964,  s. 2, and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  3 
 (3) Every order made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be, after it is made.  
19. Validation of certain acts .—Chapters III, IV and V of the principal Act shall be deemed to have 
taken effect in the territories which immediately before the  commencement of the Constitution were 
either comprised in the Province of Bombay or being administered as if they formed part of that Province, 
on the earliest date on which any act, proceeding or thing was done or taken in the said territories by the 
Government or by any officer of Government or by any other authority in the belief or purported belief 
that the said Chapters had taken effect in the said territories and that such act, proceeding or thing was 
being done or taken under the said Chapters; and all acts, proceedings and things of the nature referred to 
above, done or taken in the said territories between the said date and the commencement of this section by 
the Government or by any officer of Government or by any other authority shall for all pur poses be 
deemed to be, and to have always been, done or taken in accordance with law; and no suit or other 
proceeding shall be maintained or continued against the Government or any person or authority 
whatsoever on the ground that any such act, proceeding or thing was not done or taken in accordance        
with law.  
 
--------------------------The Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE RAJASTHAN AND MADHYA PRADESH (TRANSFER  
OF TERRITORIES) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1959  
[18th September,  1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the transfer of certain territories from the State of Rajasthan to the State of 
Madhya Pradesh and for matters connected  therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territo ries) 
Act, 1959.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of October, 1959;  
(b) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Ac t, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(c) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(d) “transferred territories ” means the territories specified in the First Schedule and transferred 
from the State of Rajasthan to the State of Madhya Pradesh by section 3.  
3. Transfer of territories from Rajasthan to Madhya Pradesh .—(1) As from the appointed day, 
there shall be added  to the State of Madhya Pradesh the territories specified in the First Schedule which 
shall thereupon cease to form part of the State of Rajasthan.  
(2) The transferred territories shall be included in, and form part of Bhanpura pargana of , Mandsaur 
distric t in the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to affect the power of the State Government to alter 
after the appointed day the name, extent or boundaries of any district in the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(a) in the entry against “6. Madhya Pradesh ”, after the words and figures “States Reorganisation     
Act, 1956 ”, the words, brackets and figures “and the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya 
Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 ” shall be inserted.  
(b) in the entry against “11. Rajasthan ”, after the words and figures “States Reorganisation             
Act, 1956 ”, the words, brackets and figures “but excluding the territories specified in the First 
Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 ” shall be inserted.  
5. Amendments of Delimitation Orders .—The Del imitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1956, and the Constitution of Council Constituencies (Madhya Pradesh)             
Order, 19 57, shall have effect subject to the modifications specified in the Second Schedule.  
6. Provision as to  sitting members .—(1) The sitting members of the House of the People            
repre senting Mandsaur constituency in the State of Madhya Pradesh and Kotah constituency in the State 
of Rajasthan shall , notwithstanding the alteration in the extent of those constituencies by virtue of the 
provisions of this Act, continue to be members of the House of the People.  
(2) The sitting members of the Legislative Assemblies of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan repre senting 
Garoth constituency and Begun constituency respectively shall, notwithstanding the alteration in the 
extent of those constituencies by virtue of the provisions of this Act, continue to be members of the said 
Assemblies.  
  2 
 7. Extension of jurisdiction  of Madhya Pradesh High Court .—(1) As from the appointed day, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh  shall extend to the transferred 
territories; and  
(b) the High Court of Rajasthan shall have no  jurisdiction in respect of the said territories.  
(2) If, immediately before the appointed day, there is  any proceeding relatable to the transferred 
territories pending in the High  Court of Rajasthan, then, notwithstanding anything contained in              
sub-section  (1), such proceeding s hall be heard and disposed of by that High Court.  
(3) Any order made by the High Court of Rajasthan in any  proceeding with respect to which that 
High Court exercises jurisdiction by  virtue of sub -section ( 2), shall, for all purposes, have effect, not only 
as an  order of the High Court of Rajasthan, but also as an order made by the High  Court of Madhya 
Pradesh.  
(4) For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in the High  Court of Rajasthan until that Court has 
disposed of all issues between the  parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the 
costs of the  proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the  Supreme 
Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petition s for writs;  
(b) reference s to a High Court shall be construed as  including reference s to a Judge or Division 
Court thereof, and references to an  order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
reference s to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
8. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in transferred territories under existing        
Appro priation Acts .—As from the appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of Madhya Pradesh 
before that day for the appropriation of any money out of the Consolidated Fund of the State to meet any 
expenditure in respect of any part of the financial year 1959 -60 shall h ave effect also in relation to the 
transferred territories, and it shall be lawful for the State Government to spend any amount for those 
territories out of the amount authorised by such Act to be expended for any services in that State.  
9. Assets and liab ilities .—(1) All land and all stores, articles and other goods in the transferred 
territories belonging to the State of Rajasthan shall, as from the appointed day, pass to the State of 
Madhya Pradesh.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, the expression “land” includes immoveable property of every kind 
and any rights in or over such property and the expression “goods” does not include coins, bank notes and 
currency notes.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out of a contract or otherwis e, of the State of 
Rajasthan in relation to the transferred territories shall, as from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities 
and obligations, respectively, of the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
10. State Financial Corporations and State Electricity Board s.—As from the appointed day, — 
(a) the Financial Corporations constituted under the  State Financial Corporations                       
Act, 1951  (63 of 1951) , for the States of Rajasthan and Madhya  Pradesh, and  
(b) the State Electricity Boards constituted under the  Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , 
for the said States , 
shall be deemed to have been constituted for those States  with their areas as altered by the provisions of 
section 3.  
11. Extension of laws .—All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or are in 
force in, the Mandsaur district in the State of Madhya Pradesh but do not extend to, or are not in force in, 
the transferred territories shall, as from that day, extend to, or as the c ase may be, come into force in, the 
transferred territories; and all laws which, immediately before the appointed day, are in force in the 
transferred territories, but not in the Mandsaur district in the State of Madhya Pradesh, shall, on that day, 
cease t o be in force in the transferred territories, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before that day.  3 
 Explanation. —In this section “law” includes any enactment, or dinance, regulation, order, bye -law, 
rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of 
Madhya Pradesh or Rajasthan.  
12. Power to construe laws .—Any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to en force any 
law extended to the transferred territories by section 11 may,  for the purpose of facilitating its application 
in relation to the transferred territories, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, 
as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or author ity. 
13. Legal proceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Rajasthan is a 
party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities transferred to the State of 
Madhya Pradesh under this Act, that State shall be  deemed to be substituted for the State of Rajasthan as a 
party to those proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may 
continue accordingly.  
14. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediate ly before the 
appointed day before any court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which 
on that day falls within the State of Rajasthan shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to any part of 
the transferred territ ories, stand transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the 
State of Madhya Pradesh.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Cou rt of Rajasthan and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section, — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in Madhya Pradesh means — 
(i) the  court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have lain if the proceeding had been instituted after the appointed day, or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that State as may be 
determined after the appointed day  by the Government of Madhya Pradesh, or before the 
appointed day by the Government of Rajasthan, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority 
or officer.  
15. Effect of provisions inconsistent with other laws .—The provis ions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
16. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act (including any difficulty in relation to the transition under section 11 from one law to another law), 
the President may by order do anything not inconsistent with any such provision which appears to him to 
be necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central “Government may, by notification the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is i n session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  1[in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in  making any modifica tion 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall b e without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  4 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( d) and 3]  
TERRITORIES TRANSFERRED FROM THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN TO THE STATE OF  
MADHYA PRADESH  
The following territories comprised within the villages specified below in Bhensrorgarh tahsil of 
Chittor district, namely: — 
Name of village    Area in  
 Sheet No.  Khasara No.  Bighas  Biswas  
1 2 3  4 
Dotada  11 361 124 10 
 12 362 814 . . 
 13 363 173 3 
 13 364 572 16 
 14 365 1[921] 14 
 14 366 15 16 
 14 367 2[205] . . 
 14 368 202 16 
 15 369 364 15 
 15 370 239 7 
 13 371 14 18 
  TOTAL          . 3,648  15 
Pipalda  5 220 730 . . 
 5 221 49 . . 
 6 222 535 . . 
 6 223 142 12 
  TOTAL          .    1,456  12 
Borkheda  7 118 . . 10 
 7 119 248 . . 
 8 120 292 1 
 8 121 138 2 
  TOTAL          .    678 13 
 GRAND TOTAL          .                 .      5,784       Bighas            
or 
      3,085       Acres.    
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “926” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  
2. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid.,  for “200” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  5 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 5 ) 
PART I 
Modifications of the First Schedule to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly  
Constituencies Order, 1956  
1. In Part “6—MADHYA PRADESH ”, the Note at the end shall be numbered as  “NOTE I” and 
the following  shall be added thereto, namely :— 
“NOTE II:—Any reference to Mandsaur district in column 3 of this Part shall be taken to 
mean the area comprised within that district on the 1st day of October, 1959. ”. 
2. In Part “11—RAJASTHAN ”, the following Note sh all be added at the end, namely :— 
“NOTE :—Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Chittor district or Bhensrorgarh tahsil, 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that district or tahsil on the 1st day of       
October, 1959 .”. 
PART II 
Modifications of the Second Schedule to the Delimit ation of Parliamentary and Assembly  
Constituencies Order, 1956  
1. In Part “6—MADHYA PRADESH ”, the Note at the end shall be numbered as “NOTE I” and 
the following shall be added thereto, namely: — 
“NOTE II:—Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Bhanpura  pargana of Mandsaur district 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that pargana on the 1st day of October, 1959 .”. 
2. In Part “11—RAJASTHAN ”, the following Note sh all be added at the end, namely :— 
“NOTE:—Any reference in column 3 of this Part to Bhensrorgarh tahsil of Chittor district 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised within that tahsil on the 1st day of October, 1959. ”. 
PART III 
Modification of the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Madhya Pr adesh ) Order, 1957  
After the Table, the following  Note shall be inserted, namely :— 
“NOTE:—Any reference in column 2 of this Table to Indore Division shall be taken to mean 
the area comprised within that Division on the 1st day of October, 1959. ”. 
--------------------------The State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 1959  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.   
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF NEW BANKS AND CHANGE OF NAME OF ANY SUBSIDIARY BANK  
3. Establis hment of new banks .  
3A. Change of name of a subsidiary bank.  
4. New banks to be bodies corporate .  
5. Head office and branches of new banks .  
6. Authorised capital of new banks .  
7. Issued capital of new banks.  
8. Reserve fund of the new banks.  
9. Transfe r of shares of existing banks to State Bank.  
10. Transfer of undertaking of existing banks to new banks . 
11. Transfer of services of employees of existing banks.  
12. Special provision s for transfer of foreign assets.  
CHAPTER III  
COMPENSATION  
13. Compensat ion to share holders of existing banks other than the Bank of Patiala .  
14. Compensation payable by the State Bank in  respect of the Bank of Patiala and the Hyderabad 
Bank.   
15. Constitution of the Tribunal .  
16. Tribunal to have powers of a civil court . 
17. Procedure of the Tribunal . 
 
 2 
 CHAPTER IV  
 SHARES OF THE SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
SECTIONS  
18. Transferability of shares.  
18A. Right of registered shareholder to nominate . 
19. Restriction on voting rights.  
20. Shares to be approved securities.  
21. Register of sh areholders.  
21A. Register of beneficial owners.  
22. Trusts not to be entered on the register.  
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT OF SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
23. Certain officers to vacate office.  
24. Management.  
25. Composition of the Board of Directors.  
25A. Fit and proper sta tus of an elected director.  
25B. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors.  
26. Term of office of directors.  
27. Disqualification for directorship.  
28. Vacation of office of directors.  
29. Managing director.  
30. Remuneration of director s. 
31. R emoval from office of director  
32. Appointment of another person for discharging the duties of managing director during his 
absence.  
33. Casual vacancies among directors.  
34. Meetings of the Board of Directors.  
35. Executive committee and other committees.  
35A. Supersession of Board of Directors in certain cases.  
CHAPTER VI  
BUSINESS OF SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
36. Subsidiary bank to act as agent of the State Bank.  
36A. Subsidiary bank to act as agent of the Reserve Bank.  3 
 SECTIONS  
37. Other business which a subsidi ary bank may transact.  
38. Acquisition of business of other banks.  
38A. Arrangement with subsidiary banks on appointment of directors to prevail.  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
39. Closing of annual accounts.  
40. Disposal of profits.  
40A. Transfer of unpa id or unclaimed dividend to unpaid dividend account.  
41. Audit.  
42. Temporary provision regarding existing  auditors.  
43. Returns to be furnished by a subsidiary bank.  
44. General meetings.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
45. Power to issue directions  for removi ng difficulties.  
46. Observers for existing banks.  
47. Inspection.  
48. Cost of development programme.  
49. Special provision regarding existing officers and employees.  
50. Staff of a subsidiary bank.  
50A. Bonus.  
51. Establishment of pension and superannuati on funds by subsidiary banks.  
52. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy.  
53. Indemnity of directors.  
54. Defects in appointment or constitution not to invalidate acts or proceedings.  
55. Companies Act, 1956, and Banking Regulation Act, 1949, not to apply t o certain existing 
banks.  
56. Continuance of special provisions respecting recovery of loans and advan ces made by the 
Bank of Patiala . 
57. Bar to liquidation of a subsidiary bank.  
58. Dissolution of existing banks.  
59. Construction of references to existin g banks.  
60. Exercise of powers and functions on behalf of the Reserve Bank.  4 
 SECTIONS  
61. Protection of action taken under Act.  
62. Power of Central Government to make rules  
63. Power of subsidiary banks to make regulations.  
64. [Repealed .] 
65. Saving.  
THE  FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
[THE THIRD SCHEDULE .―Repealed .] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 THE STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSIDIARY BANKS) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 38 OF 19591 
[10th September , 1959.]  
An Act to provide for the formation of certain Government or Government associated banks 
as subsidiar ies of the State Bank of India and for the constitution, management and 
control of the subsidiary banks so formed, and for matters connected therewith, or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:―   
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMIN ARY 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “appointed day ” means, ―  
(i) in relation to an existing bank, the date on which the co rresponding new bank is 
constituted under section 3;  
(ii) in relation to a new bank, the date on which that new bank is constituted under  
 section 3;  
(iii) in relation to the Hyderabad Bank, the date on which the amendments to the Sta te 
Bank of Hyderabad A ct, 1956 (79 of 195 6), take effect under Part VII of the Third Schedule;  
2*   *   *   *  *  
 (b) “corresponding bank ” means, ―  
(i) in relation to the State Bank of Bikaner, the Bank of Bikaner, Limited;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
4*   *   *    *   *  
(iv) in relation to the State Bank of Mysore, the Bank of Mysore, Limited;  
(v) in relation to the State Bank of Patiala, the Bank of Pat iala; 
(vi) in relation t o the State Bank of Travancore , the Travancore Bank, Limited;  
(c) “corresponding new bank ” means, ―  
(i) in relation to the Bank of Bikaner, Limited, the State Bank of Bikaner;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and S ch. I  
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.  
2. Sub -clause ( iv) omitted by Act 48 of 20 09, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
3. Sub -clause  (ii) omitted by Act 7 of 2011, s. 2 (w.e.f.  1-6-2011 ). 
4. Sub -clause ( iii) omitte d by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).   
 6 
   
1*   *   *   *  *  
2*    *    *    *   *  
(iv) in rel ation to the Bank of Mysore, Limited, the State Bank of Mysore;  
(v) in relation to the Bank of Patiala, the State Bank of Patiala;  
(vi) in relation to the Travancore Bank, Limited, the State Bank of Travancore;  
(d) “existing bank ” means any of the follo wing banks, namely: ―  
(i) Bank of Bikaner, Limited;  
1*   *   *   *  *   
2*    *    *    *   * 
(iv) Bank of Mysore, Limited;  
(v) Bank of Patiala;  
(vi) Travancore Bank, Limited;  
(e) “Hyderabad Bank ” means the Hyderabad State Bank constituted under the Hyderabad 
State Bank Act, 1350F (19 of 1350F), and renamed the State Bank of Hyderabad under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the State Bank of Hyderabad Act , 1956 (79 of 1956) ; 
(f) “new bank ” means any of the banks constituted under section 3;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by regulations made under this Act;  
(h) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 19 34);  
3*   *   *   *  * 
 (j) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Ban k of India  
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955);  
(k) “subsidiary bank ” means any new bank and includes the Hyderabad Bank  4***;  
(l) “Tribunal ” means the Tribunal constituted under section 15;  
5[(m) “workman ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  
(14 of 1947).]  
                                                           
1. Sub -clause ( ii) omitted by Act 7 of 20 11, s .2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011 ).  
2. Sub -clause ( iii) omitted by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
3. Clause ( i) omitted by Act 48 of 2009,  s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
4. The words “and the Saurashtra Bank ” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ).  
5. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  7 
 CHAPTER II  
1[CONSTITUTION OF NEW BANKS  AND CHANGE  OF NAME OF ANY  SUBSIDIARY  BANK] 
3. Establishment of new banks .―With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be constituted the following 
new banks, namely: ― 
(a) the State Bank of Bikaner;  
2*   *   *   *  * 
3*   *    *    *   *  
(d) the State Bank of Mysore;  
(e) the State Bank of Patiala;  
 (f) the State Bank of Travancore;  
and different dates may be specified for different new banks.   
4[3A. Change of name of a subsidiary bank .―(1) The Central Government after consulting the 
State Bank and the Reserve Bank may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the name of 
any subsidiary bank shall, with effect from such date as may be specified in this behalf, be changed to 
any other name and thereupon any reference to that su bsidiary bank in this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force or in any contract, instrument or document shall be construed as a reference to 
that bank by its new name.  
(2) The change in the name of a subsidiary bank under sub -section ( 1) shall n ot affect any rights 
or obligations of that bank or render defective any legal proceedings by or against it, and any legal 
proceedings which might have been continued or commenced by or against that bank by its former 
name may be continued by or against it  by its new name.]  
4. New banks to be bodies corporate .―(1) Every new bank shall be a body corporate with 
perpetual succession and a common seal and sha ll sue and be sued in its name.  
(2) The body corporate constituting each of the new banks shall consist of the State Bank and 
other shareholders, if any, for  the time being of the new bank.  
(3) Every new bank shall carry on the business of banking and other business in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, and shall have power to acquire and hold property, whether movable or 
immovable, for the purposes of its business and to dispose of the same.  
5. Head office and branches of new banks .―(1) The head office of each of the new banks shall 
be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to 
time, specify.  
(2) Every new bank shall maintain as its branches all branches of the corresponding ban k in 
existence immediately before the appointed day, and shall not establish any new branch or discontinue 
any branch except in consultation with the State Bank and with the approval of the Reserve Bank.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3,  for the heading (w.e.f. 1 4-12-1962 ). 
2. Clause ( b) omitted by Act 7 of 2011 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2011 ). 
3. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
4.  Ins. by  s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.14 -12-1962).  8 
 1[6. Authorised capital of new bank .―(1) Subject to  the provisions of this Act, the authorised 
capital of every new bank shall be rupees five hundred crores.  
(2) The authorised capital of every new bank shall be divided into shares of one hundred rupees 
each or of such denomination as the new bank may, wit h the approval of the State Bank, decide.  
(3) Every new bank may issue the certificates of shares of equivalent values of such denomination 
as the new bank may, decide, with the approval of the State Bank, in accordance with the procedure as 
may be prescri bed and every shareholder of the new bank shall be entitled to have the certificate of 
shares of equivalent value of such denomination.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Bank may, 2[in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank  and with the approval of the Central Government] , authorise a new bank to 
increase o r reduce its authorised capital .] 
7. Issued Capital of new Banks .―(1) On the appointed day, the issued capital of a new bank 
shall consist of such amount, divided into fully paid -up shares of hundred rupees each, as the State 
Bank may, with the approval of the Reserve Bank, fix.  
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained  in sub -section ( 1), the issued capital of a new bank 
shall, consist of such amount as the State Bank may, 4[in consultation with the Reserve Bank  and with 
the approval of the Central Government] , fix, and shall be divided into fully paid -up shares of such  
denomination in accordance with  sub-section ( 2) of section 6.]  
(2) All shares in the issued capital of a new bank shall, on the appointed day, stand allotted to the 
State Bank.  
(3) The State Bank shall, as soon as may be, after the determination, if any,  by the Tribunal, of the 
amount of compensation payable in respect of an existing bank, consider whether any increase in, or 
reduction of, the issued capital of the corresponding new bank as fixed under sub -section ( 1), by way 
of adjustment, or transfer fr om, or to, the reserves of such bank, or in any other manner, is necessary 
or expedient and may, thereafter with the approval of the Reserve Bank, direct that bank to increase or 
reduce its issued capital.  
5[(4) A new bank may from time to time, 6[with the  approval of the State Bank and the  Central 
Government in consultation with the  Reserve Bank ], increase, whether by 7[public issue or rights 
issue] or by preferential allotment or private placement in accordance with the procedure as may be 
prescribed, its  issued capital by issue of equity or preference shares.  
(5) The issued capital of a new bank shall consist of equity shares or equity and preference shares:  
Provided that the issue of preference shares shall be in accordance with the guidelines framed by 
the Reserve Bank specifying the class of preference shares, the extent of issue of each class of such 
preference shares (whether perpetual or irredeemable or redeemable) and the terms and conditions 
subject to which, each class of preference shares may be issued.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 6 , for section 6 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 4, for “with the approval of the Reser ve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
4. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 5, for “with the approval of the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 7, for sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007). 
6. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 5, for “with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
7. Subs by s. 5, ibid., for “public issue ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 9 
 (6) A new bank may, 1[with the approval of the State Bank and the Central Government in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank ], increase from time to time by way of issuing bonus shares to 
existing equity shareholders, its issued capital in such manne r as the State Bank, 2[in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank  and with the approval of the Central Government] , direct.  
(7) No increase or reduction in the issued capital of a new bank shall be made in such a manner 
that the State Bank holds at any time les s than fifty -one per cent. of the issued capital consisting of 
equity shares of new bank.  
(8) A new bank may accept the money in respect of shares issued towards increase in issued 
capital in instalments, make calls and forfeit unpaid shares and re -issue t hem, in th e manner as may be 
prescribed.]  
8. Reserve fund of the new banks .―(1) Every new bank shall establish a reserve fund which, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 7 and of sub -section ( 2) of this section, shall — 
(a) on the appoint ed day, consist of such sum as the State Bank, with the approval of t he 
Reserve Bank, may determine, and 
 (b) after the appointed day, consist of the sum aforesaid together with such further sums as 
may be transferred to the reserve fund by the new bank ou t of its annual net profits before 
declaring a dividend.  
(2) The State Bank shall, as soon as may be after the determination, if any, of the amount of 
compensation by the Tribunal, in respect of an existing bank, consider whether any increase in, or 
reduc tion of, the reserve fund of the corresponding new bank, by way of adjustment, by transfer from, 
or to, any account, or towards provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of any assets or 
contingencies, or for any other purpose, is necessary, and m ay, thereafter, with the approval of the 
Reserve Bank, direct that bank to so increase or reduce its reserve fund.  
9. Transfer of shares of existing banks to State Bank .―On the constitution of a new bank, all 
shares in the capital of the corresponding bank, where such corresponding bank has a share capital, 
shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the State Bank, free of all trusts, liabilities and 
encumbrances.  
10. Transfer of undertaking of existing banks to new banks .―(1) Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, when a new bank is constituted, the undertaking of the corresponding 
bank shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the new bank.  
(2) The und ertaking of the corresp onding bank referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to 
include all rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, 
including cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other interests  and rights in, or arising out 
of, such property and all books, accounts and documents relating thereto as may be in the possession 
of that bank immediately before the appointed day, and shall also be deemed to include all debts, 
liabilities and obligation s of whatever kind, then existing of that bank.  
(3) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, 
agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever 
nature, subsi sting or having effect immediately before the appointed day and to which any existing 
banks is a party, or which are in favour of that bank, shall be of full force and effect against or in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 5, for “with the approval of the State Ba nk and the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “with the approval of the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 10 
 favour of the corresponding new bank, as the case may be, and may b e enforced or acted upon as fully 
and effectually as if instead of the existing bank the corresponding new bank had been a party thereto 
or as if they had been issued in favour of the corresponding new bank.  
(4) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal o r other legal proceeding of whatever nature by or 
against an existing bank is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way 
prejudicially affected by reason of transfer to the corresponding new bank of the undertaking of the 
existing bank, or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the corresponding new bank.  
11. Transfer of services of employees of existing banks .―(1) Save as otherwise provided  in 
this Act, every employee of an existing bank in the employment of that bank immediately before the 
appointed day, shall, on and from that day, become an employee of the corresponding new bank and 
shall hold his office or service therein by the same ten ure, at the same remuneration and upon the 
same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other 
matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day, if the undertaking of the existing bank 
had not been  transferred to and vested in the corresponding new bank, and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment in that bank is terminated or until his remuneration or other terms 
and conditions of service are revised or altered by the corresponding new bank under, or in pursuance 
of, any law, or in accordance with any provision which, for the time being, governs his service:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to an employee of the Bank of 
Patiala who holds a civil post u nder the State of Punjab unless, prior to the appointed day, he has 
intimated his consent to become an employee of the State Bank of Patiala by notice in writing, given 
to the Government of that State through the Bank of Patiala.  
(2) Any person who, on the  appointed day, is entitled to, or is in receipt of, a pension or other 
superannuation or compassionate allowance or other benefit from an existing bank or from any 
provident, pension or other fund or from any authority administering such fund, shall be en titled to be 
paid by, and to receive from, the corresponding new bank or any provident, pension or other fund or 
from any authority administering such fund, the same pension, allowance or benefit, so long as he 
observes the conditions on which the pension,  allowance or benefit was granted, and if any question 
arises whether he has so observed such conditions, the question shall be determined by the State Bank 
and its decision thereon shall be final.  
(3) For the persons who immediately before the appointed d ay are the trustees of, or the members 
of any authority administering, any fund constituted for the benefit of the employees of an existing 
bank, there shall be substituted as trustees or members such persons as the State Bank may, by general 
or special or der, specify.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any 
other law or in any agreement for the time being in force, the transfer from an existing bank of the 
services of any officer or employee of that bank to the corresponding new bank in terms of this 
section shall not entitle any such officer or employee, to any compensation to which he would, but for 
this provision, have been entitled under any such law or agreement, and no claim in respect of such 
compensation shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
12. Special provision for transfer of foreign assets .―(1) If, according to the laws of any 
country outside India, the provisions of this Act by themselves are not effective to transfer or vest any 
asset or liability situated in that country which forms part of the undertaking of an existing bank to, or 
in, the corresponding new bank, the affairs of the existing bank in relation to such asset or liability 11 
 shall, on and from the appointe d day, stand entrusted to the 1[managing director] for the time being of 
the co rresponding new bank, and the 1[managing direct or] may exercise all powers and do all such 
acts and things as are exercised or done by the existing bank for the purpose of effectively winding up 
the affairs of that bank.  
(2) The 1[managing director] of the corresponding new bank shall, in exercise of the powers 
conferred on him by sub -section ( 1), take all such steps as may be required by the laws of any such 
country outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, an d in connection therewith 
the 1[managing director] may either hims elf or through any person authorised by him in this behalf, 
realise any asset and discharge any liability of the existing bank and transfer the net proceeds thereof 
to the corresponding new bank.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), on and from the 
appointed day, no person shall make any claim or demand or take any proceeding in India against any 
existing bank or any person acting in its name or on its behalf except in so far as may be necessary for 
enforcing the pr ovisions of this section or except in so far as it relates to any offence committed by 
such person.  
2[(4) For the purposes of this section, ―  
(a) “corresponding new bank ” means in relation to the Bank of Jaipur Limited, the institution 
constituted under section 3 as the State Bank of Bikaner;  
(b) “existing bank ” includes the Bank of Jaipur Limited.]  
CHAPTER III  
COMPENSATION  
13. Compensation  to share holders of existing banks other than the Bank of Patiala .―(1) 
Every person who and any State Government which immediately before the appointed day is 
registered as a holder of shares in the books of an existing bank shall be given by the State Ban k such 
compensation in respect of the transfer to the State Bank of the shares in the capital of that bank as is 
determined in accordance with the principles contained in the First Schedule.  
(2) The amount of compensation to be given in accordance with th e principles contained in the 
First Schedule shall be determined in the first instance by the State Bank, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank, and shall be offered by it to all those to whom compensation is payable under  
sub-section ( 1) in full satisfac tion thereof.  
(3) If the amount of compensation offered by the State Bank in terms of sub -section ( 2) is not 
acceptable to any shareholder of an existing bank, such shareholder may, before such date as may be 
notified by the Central Government in the Offic ial Gazette, request the Central Government, in 
writing, to have the matter referred to the Tribunal.  
(4) If, before the date notified under sub -section ( 3), the Central Government receives requests, in 
terms of that sub -section, from not less than one -fourth in number of the shareholders, holding not 
less than one -fourth in value of the paid -up share capital of the existing bank, the Central Government 
shall have the matter referred to the Tribunal for decision.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 21, for “general manager ” (w.e.f. 1 - 7-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  12 
 (5) If, before the date notified under sub -section ( 3), the Central Government does not receive 
requests as provided in that sub -section the amount of compensation offered by the State Bank, and 
where a reference has been made to the Tribunal, the amount determined by it, shall be the 
compensation  payable under sub -section ( 1) and shall be final and binding on all parties concerned.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of the succeeding sub -sections, the amount of compensation shall be 
paid, ― 
 (a) if the shareholder has not applied for shares of the corr esponding new bank in accordance 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 7), by a cheque drawn on the State Bank; and  
(b) if he has applied for shares of the corresponding new bank in accordance w ith the 
provisions of that sub -section, in shares of the corres ponding new bank to the extent of the value 
of such shares allotted to him and the balance by a cheque drawn on the State Bank.  
(7) Any shareholder of an existing bank to whom compensation is payable under this section may, 
before the expiry of three mont hs from the date of the final determination of the amount of such 
compensation under sub -section ( 5), or such extended period as the State Bank may think fit in any 
particular case to allow, apply to the State Bank for the transfer to him of shares in the capital of the 
corresponding new bank in lieu of such compensation or part thereof; and for the purposes of such 
transfer, the value of each share of the corresponding new bank shall be such as may be determined in 
this behalf by the State Bank with the ap proval of the Reserve Bank.  
(8) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 7), the State Bank shall issue to the 
corresponding new bank a warrant, in the form specified in the rules made under this Act, directing it 
to transfer in favour of the perso n specified in the warrant such number of shares as may be allotted to 
the applicant in accordance with sub -sections ( 9) and ( 10), out of the shares in the capital of that bank 
standing allotted to the State Bank under the provisions of this Act, and the c orresponding new bank 
shall be bound to comply with such warrant.  
(9) A shareholder of an existing bank who has applied for shares in the capital of the 
corresponding new bank shall be allotted — 
(a) such number of shares, having such total face value as w ould bear to forty -five per cent. of 
the issued capital of the corresponding new bank the same proportion as the paid -up value of his 
shares in the capital of the existing bank in respect of which he is paid compensation bears to the 
total paid -up capital of that bank; and  
(b) if the total number of shares allotted under clause ( a) to all applicants is less than  
forty -five per cent. of the issued capital of the corresponding new bank, such number of additional 
shares as the State Bank may deem fit having regard to the provisions of this Act, the 
circumstances of the case and the desirability of securing as wide a distribution of shares among 
as large a number of shareholders as possible.  
Explanation .―For the purpose of determining the number of shares u nder this sub-section 
fractions of a share shall be disregarded.  
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 9), an allotment of shares under that  
sub-section shall not be made in such a m anner that the State Bank holds at any time less than  
fifty-five per cent. of the issue capital of the corresponding new bank.  
(11) A warrant issued by the State Bank under sub -section ( 8) shall not be liable to duty under the 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 o f 1899).  13 
 (12) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the rights inter se  between the holder of any 
share in an existing bank, and any other person who may have an interest in such share and such other 
person shall be entitled to enforce his interes t against the compensation awarded to the holder of such 
share, but not against the State Bank.  
1[(13) For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “corresponding new bank ” does not include the State Bank of Patiala and means in 
relation to the Bank of Jaipur L imited the institution constituted under section 3 as the State Bank 
of Bikaner;  
(b) “existing bank ” includes the Bank of Jaipur Limited, but does not include the Bank of 
Patiala.]  
14. Compensation payable by the State Bank in respect of the Bank of Patia la 2*** and the 
Hyderabad Bank .―(1) The State Government of Punjab in respect of the Bank of Patiala, the 3*** 
and the Reserve Bank in respect of the Hyderabad Bank, shall be given, by reason of the provisions of 
this Act or of the amendments contained in Part V or Part VII of the Third  Schedule, such 
compensation by the State Bank as is determined in accordance with the principles contained in the 
First Schedule.  
(2) The amount of compensation to be given in accordance with the principles contained in the 
First Schedule shall be determ ined in the first instance by the State Bank, and shall be offered by it to 
the State Government of Punjab  4*** or the Reserve Bank, as the case may be, in full satisfaction of 
the compensation payable under sub -section ( 1):  
Provided that in determining t he amount of compensation to be offered to the State Government 
of Punjab  5***, the State Bank shall consult the Reserve Bank.  
(3) If the amount of compensation offered by the State Bank in terms of sub -section ( 2) is not 
acceptable to the State Governmen t of Punjab  4*** or the Reserve Bank as the case may be, the State 
Government concerned or the Reserve Bank, may before such date as may be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette, request the Central Government to have the matter referr ed to the 
Tribunal for decision, and where any such request is received, the Central Government shall refer the 
matter accordingly.  
(4) If, before the date notified under sub -section ( 3), the State Government of Punjab  4*** or the 
Reserve Bank, as the cas e may be, has not made any such request, the amount of compensation 
offered by the State Bank, and where a reference has been made to the Tribunal, the amount 
determined by it, shall be the compensation payable under sub -section ( 1) and shall be final and 
binding on all parties concerned.  
(5) The amount of compensation shall be paid  by a cheque drawn on the Reser ve Bank.  
15. Constitution of the Tribunal .―(1) The Central Government may for the purposes of this Act 
constitute a Tribunal which shall consist o f a Chairman and two other members.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3, for sub -section ( 13) (w.e.f. 1 -1- 1963).  
2. The words “, the Saurashtra  Bank ” omitted by Act 48 of 20 09, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ).  
3. The words “, the State Government of Gujarat in respect of the Saurashtra Bank ” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
4 The words “ , the State Government of Gujarat ,” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
5. The words “or the State Government of Gujarat ” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ).   14 
 (2) The Chairman shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or has been a 
Judge of the Supreme Court and of the two other members, one shall be a person, who, in the opinion, 
of the Central Governmen t, has had experience of commercial banking and the other shall be a person 
who is a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 
1949).  
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman or any  other member of the 
Tribunal, the Central Government shall fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), and any proceeding may be continued before the 
Tribunal so re -constituted from the stage  at which the vacancy occurred.  
(4) The Tribunal may, for the purpose of determining any compensation payable under this Act, 
choose one or more persons having special knowledge or experience of any relevant matter to assist it 
in the determination of suc h compensation.  
16. Tribunal to have powers of a civil court .―(1) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil 
court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the 
following matters, namely: ― 
(a) summoning and e nforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Notwithstanding a nything contained in sub -section ( 1) or in any other law for the time being 
in force, the Tribunal shall not compel the Reserve Bank, the State Bank or any subsidiary bank — 
(a) to produce any books of account or other documents which the Reserve Bank, the State 
Bank or the subsidiary bank claims to be of a confidential nature;  
(b) to make any such books or documents part of the record of the proceedings before the 
Tribunal; or  
(c) to give inspection of any such books or documents to any party before it or t o any other 
person.  
17. Procedure of the Tribunal .―(1) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure.  
(2) The Tribunal may hold the whole or any part of its enquiry in camera .  
(3) Any clerical or arithmetical mistake in any order of the Tribunal or any error arising therein 
from any accide ntal slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the Tribunal either of its own 
motion or on the application of any of the parties.  
CHAPTER IV  
 SHARES OF THE SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
18. Transferability of shares .―(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section  (2), the shares of a 
subsidiary bank shall be freely transferable.  15 
 (2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle the State Bank to transfer any shares held by 
it in any subsidiary bank such transfer will result in reducing the shares held by it t o less than  
1[fifty -one per cent . of the issued capital  consisting of equity shares]  of that subsidiary bank.  
2[18A. Right of registered shareholder to nominate .―(1) Every individual registered 
shareholder of a subsidiary bank may, at any time, nominate, in the prescribed manner, an individual 
to whom all his rights in the shares shall vest in the event of his death.  
(2) Where the shares are registered in the name  of more than one individual jointly, the joint 
holders may together nominate in the prescribed manner, an individual to whom all their rights in the 
shares shall vest in the event of the death of all the joint holders.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in any other law for the time being in force or in any 
disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, in respect of such shares where a nomination made in 
the prescribed manner purports to confer on any individual the right to vest the shares, the nomi nee 
shall, on the death of the shareholder or, as the case may be, on the death of all the joint holders, 
become entitled to all the rights of the shareholder or, as the case may be, of all the joint holders, in 
relation to such shares to the exclusion of all other persons unless the nomination is varied or 
cancelled in the prescribed manner.  
(4) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the individual registered as the holder of 
the shares to make nomination to appoint, in the prescribed manner,  any person to become entitled to 
the shares in the event of his death duri ng the minority of the nominee.]  
3[19. Restriction on voting rights .―No shareholder, other than the State Bank, shall be entitled 
to exercise voting rights in respect of any shares held by him in excess of ten per cent. of the issued 
capital of the subsidiary bank concerned:  
Provided that the shareholder holding any preference share capital in the subsidiary bank shall, in 
respect of such capital, have a right to vote only on resolut ions placed before such subsidiary bank 
which directly affect the rights attached to his preference shares:  
Provided further that no preference shareholder shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in 
respect of preference shares held by him in excess of  ten per cent. of the total voting rights of all the 
shareholders holding preference share capital only.]  
20. Shares to be approved securities .―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts 
hereinafter mentioned in this section, the shares of a subsidiary  bank shall be deemed to be included 
among the securities enumerated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), and also to 
be approved securities for the purposes of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), and the  
Banking Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
21. Register of shareholders .―4[(1)] Every subsidiary bank shall keep at its head office a 
register, in one or more books, of the shareholders and shall enter therein the following particulars so 
far as they may be available: ― 
(i) the names, addresses and occupation s, if any, of the s hareholder and a statement of the 
shares held by each share holder , distinguishing each share by its denoting number;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s.  8, for “fifty-five per cent. of the issued capital ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
3. Subs.  by s. 10, ibid., for section 19  (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).     
4. Section 21 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s.11, ibid. (w.e.f.9 -7-2007).  16 
 (ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on which any person ceases to be a shareholder; and  
(iv) such other p articulars as may be prescribed:  
1[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the shares held with a depository.]  
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for a subsidiary 
bank to keep the regist er of shareholders in computer floppies or diskettes or any other electronic 
form subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, 
or extract from, the register  of shareholders, certified to be a true copy under the hand of any officer 
of the subsidiary bank authorised in this behalf shall in all legal proceedings, be admissible in 
evidence. ] 
3[21A. Register of beneficial owners .―The register of beneficial owners maintained by a 
depository under section 11 of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall be deemed to be a 
register of shareholders for the purposes of this Act.]  
22. Trusts not to be entered on the register .―4[No not ice of any trust,]  express, implied or 
constructive, shall be entered on the register of shareholders of a subsidiary bank or be receivable by 
it in respect of its shares : 
5[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a depository in respect of sh ares held by it as 
a registered owner on behalf of the beneficial owners.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of section 21, section 21A and this section , the expressions 
“beneficial owner ”, “depository ” and “registered owner ” shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in clauses ( a), (e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 
1996  (22 of 1996) .] 
CHAPTER V  
MANAGEMENT  OF SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
23. Certain officers to vacate office .―Every person holding office as chairman, director, 
member of the Board of Management (including a member of a local or advisory committee) , 
managing director, general manager, manager (other than manager of a branch), deputy managing 
director, deputy general manager, assistant general manager or adviser, as the case may be , in an 
existing bank (other than the Bank of Patiala)  6[and the Hyder abad Bank]  immediately before the 
appointed day, shall be deemed to have vacated that office on the appointed day, and notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or in any agreement or 
contract, such pers on shall not be entitled to any compensation for the loss of office or for the 
premature termination of any agreement or contract, relating to his employment, except such pension, 
compensation or other benefit as the corresponding new bank, 7[or the Hyder abad Bank] , as the case 
                                                           
1. Proviso ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 6 (w.e.f.15 -1-1997).  
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 200 7, s. 11 (w.e.f.9 -7-2007).  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 7 (w.e.f.15 -1-1997).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s . 12, for “Notwithstanding anything contained in section 19,  no notice of any trust, ”  
(w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
5. Ins. by Act 8 of 1997, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  
6. Subs. by Act 48 of 2009, s. 5, for “, the Hyderabad Bank and the Saurasht ra Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
7. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “the Hyderabad Bank or th e Saurashtra  Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 17 
 may be, may with the approval of the State Bank, grant to him, having regard to what he would have 
received if this Act had not been passed and if his employment had ceased on the appointed day in the 
ordinary course:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent any person who has so vacated 
his office in any of the said banks from being re -nominated or re -appointed to any office in a 
subsidiary bank in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
24. Management .―(1) The State Bank may, from time to time, give directions and instructions 
to a subsidiary bank in regard to any of its affairs and business, and that bank shall be bound to 
comply with the directions and instructions so given.  
(2) Subject to any such dire ctions and instructions, the general superintendence and conduct of the 
affairs and business of a subsidiary bank shall, as from the appointed day, vest in a Board of Directors 
who may, with  the assistance of the 1[managing director], exercise all powers a nd do all such acts and 
things as may be exercised or done by that bank.  
(3) The Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall, in discharging its functions under this Act, 
act on business principles, regard being had to public interest.  
25. Composition of the Board of Directors .―(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), 
the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall consist of the following: ― 
2[(a) the Chairman for the time being of the State Bank, ex officio  or an official of the State 
Bank or of the subsidiary bank n ominated by him as Chairman, 3[in consultation with the Reserve 
Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central Government ]; 
4[(aa) the managing director appointed under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 29, or under  
section 32;]  
2[(b) one  director, possessing necess ary expertise and experience in the matters relating to 
regulation or supervision of commercial banks,  5[to be nominated by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of the Reserve Bank] ;  
(c) not more than five directors to be nominated by the State Ba nk of whom not more than 
three shall be officers of that bank;  
6[Provided that any nomination of a director made by the State Bank under this clause shall, 
except in so far as it relates to an office r of that bank, be in consultation with the Central 
Gove rnment.]  
 4[(ca) one director, from among the employees of the subsidiary bank, who are workmen, to 
be appointed by the Central Government in the manner provided in the rules made under this Act;  
(cb) one director, from among such of the employees of the subsidiary bank as are not 
workmen, to be appointed by the Central Government in the manner provided in the rules made 
under this Act;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 21, for “general manager ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 13 , for clause ( a) (w.e.f.9 -7-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 6, for “with the approval of the Reserve Ba nk” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
4. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 22  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 6, for “to be nominated by the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
6. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 18 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  18 
 1[(d) not more than three directors to be elected in the following manner, namely: ― 
(i) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other than the State Bank) of a 
subsidiary bank is more than one per cent. of the total issued capital, and equal to or less than 
sixteen per cent. of such capital, one director to be elected, in the prescribed manner, by such 
sharehol ders and two directors shall be nominated by the State Bank, or  
(ii) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other than the State Bank) of a 
subsidiary bank is more than sixteen per cent, of the total issued capital and equal to or less 
than t hirty -two per cent. of such capital, two directors to be elected in the prescribed manner 
by such shareholders and one director shall be nominated by the State Bank, or  
(iii) if the total amount of holdings of the shareholders (other than the State Bank) o f a 
subsidiary bank is more than thirty -two per cent. of the total issued capital, all the three 
directors to be elected, in the prescribed manner, by such shareholders:  
Provided that in case, the total amount of holdings of the shareholders of a subsidiar y bank 
(other than the State Bank) is not more than one per cent. of the total issued capital, all three 
directors shall be nominated by the State Bank and such directors shall, for the purposes of this 
Act, be deemed to be directors elected under this cla use. 
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, the total amount of holdings of the 
shareholders (other than the State Bank) whose names are on the register of shareholders of the 
subsidiary bank three months before the date fixed for election of directors shall be  taken into 
account. ] 
 (e) a director, if any , to be nominated by the Central Government  2***  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), on the first constitution of 
the Board of Directors, the directors referred to in the sa id clause shall be appointed by the State Bank 
and the directors so appointed shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have been elected 
within the meaning of the said clause  
3*   *   *   *   * 
 (4) An officer of 4*** the State Bank may be nomina ted as a director of a subsidiary bank by 
virtue of his office.  
(5) The directors nominated under sub -section ( 2) shall retire at the expiry of one year after the 
appointed day.  
(6) Any nomination or appointment of a director made by the State Bank under  this Act shall, 
except in so far  as it relates to an officer of that bank, be 5[in consultation with the  Central 
Government] . 
6[25A. Fit and proper status of an elected director .―(1) The Directors to be elected under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 shall ― 
(a) have special knowledge or practical experience in respect of one or more of the following 
matters, namely: ― 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s.  13, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. The words “in consultation with the State Bank ” omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s. 18 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3.  Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 30 of 2007, s. 13 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
4. The words “the Reserve Bank or ” omitt ed by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
5. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 6, for “in consultation with the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
6. Ins. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 14 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  19 
 (i) agricultural and rural economy,  
(ii) banking,  
(iii) co-operation,  
(iv) economics,  
(v) finance,  
(vi) law,  
(vii) small -scale industry,  
(viii) any other matter the special knowledge of, and practical experience in, which 
would, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, be useful to the subsidiary bank;  
(b) represe nt the interests of depositor s; or 
(c) represent the interests of farmers, w orkers and artisans.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no person shall be 
eligible to be elected as director under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 unless he is a person 
having fit and proper status based upon track record, integrity and such other criteria as the Reserve 
Bank may no tify from time to time in this regard.  
(3) The Reserve Bank may also specify in the notification issued under sub -section ( 2), the 
authority to determine the fit and proper status, the manner of such determination, the procedure to be 
followed for such det erminations and such other matters as may be considered necessary or incidental 
thereto.  
(4) Where the Reserve Bank is of the opinion that any director of a subsidiary bank elected under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 does not fulfil the requi rements of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), 
it may, after giving to such director and the subsidiary bank a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
by order, remove such director and on such removal, the Board of Directors shall co -opt any other 
person fulfilling the requirements of the said sub -sections as a director in place of the person so 
removed till a director is duly elected by the shareholders of the subsidiary bank in the next annual 
general meeting and the person so co -opted shall be deemed to have been duly elected by the 
shareholders of the subsidiary bank as a director.  
25B. Power of Reserve Bank to appoint additional directors .―(1) If the Reserve Bank is of 
the opinion that in the interest of banking policy or in the public interest or in the interests of the 
subsidiary bank or its depositors, it is necessary so to do, it may, from time to time and by order in 
writing appoint, w ith effect from such date as may be specified in the order, one or more persons to 
hold office as additional directors of the subsidiary bank.  
(2) Any person appointed as additional director in pursuance of this section shall ― 
(a) hold office during the pl easure of the Reserve Bank and subject thereto for a period not 
exceeding three years or such further period not exceeding three years at a time as the Reserve 
Bank may specify;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a direct or or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation 
thereto; and  20 
 (c) not be required to hold qualification shares in the subsidiary bank.  
(3) For the purpose of reckoning any proportion of  the total number of directors of the subsidiary 
bank, any additional director appointed under this section sh all not be taken into account.]  
26. Term of office of directors .―(1) A d irector of a subsidiary bank, 1[nominated under clause 
(b) or clause ( c) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 or appointed under clause ( ca) or clause 
(cb) of that sub -section] shall hold office during the pl easure of the authority 2[nominating or 
appointing] him.  
3[(2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 2 5, a director elected under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 1) of that section shall hold office for three years  4***, and shall be eligible for  
re-election:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.  
(2A) Subject to the provisions contained in section 25 and in sub -section ( 1), a director nominated 
under clause ( c) and not being an officer of the State Bank or a director appointed under clause ( ca) or 
clause ( cb) or a director, not being an officer of the Central Government, nominated under clause ( e) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, shall hold office for such term not exceeding three years, as the 
Central Government may specify 5[and thereafter until his successor shall have been duly appointed ], 
and shal l be eligible for re -nomination or re -appointment, as the case may be:  
Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years.]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
 27. Disqualification for directorship .―(1) A person shall be disqua lified to be a director of a 
subsidiary bank, if — 
(a) he holds the office of director, provisional director, promoter, agent, or manager of any 
banking company or a banking company for the formation of which a prospectus has been issued; 
or  
(b) he is a sa laried officer of Government; or  
(c) he has been removed or dismissed from the service of Government or a local authority or a 
corporation or a company in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is 
held by Government; or  
(d) he holds any office of pro fit under the subsidiary bank 7[other than the office of the 
managing director]; or  
 7[(da) in the case of a director appointed under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 25, ―  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 19, for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).   
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “nominating ” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for sub -sections ( 2) and ( 2A) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
4. The words “and thereafter until his successor is duly elected ” omitted by Act 45 of 2006, s. 16 (w.e.f.16 -10-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “and thereafter until his successor shall have been duly nominated or appointed ”  
(w.e.f.16 -10-2006).  
6.  Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 66 of 1988, s. 19 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
7. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 24 (w.e. f. 1-7-1974).  21 
 (i) he is not serving in the sub sidiary bank or has not been serving in it for a continuous 
period of at least five years; and  
(ii) he is of such age that there is a likelihood of his attaining the age of superannuation 
during his term of office as a director; or]  
(e) he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated an insolvent or has suspended payment of his 
debts or has compounded with his creditors; or  
(f) he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(g) he is, or has been, convicted of any offence which, in th e opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(h) in the case of an elected director, he is not registered as a holder of unencumbered shares 
in the subsidiary bank of a nominal value of at least one thousand rupees:  
Provided that the  disqualification mentioned in clause ( b) shall not apply to an officer of the 
Central Government nominated as a director under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25:  
1[Provided further that in the case of a director appointed under clause ( ca) or c lause ( cb) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 25, the disqualification mentioned in clause ( d) shall not operate:  
Provided also that] in the case of a director deemed to have been elected on the first constitution 
of the Board of Directors, the disqualificatio n mentioned in clause ( h) shall not operate for a period of 
six months from his becoming such director.  
(2) No two persons who are partners of the same firm or are directors of the same private 
company or one of whom is an agent of the other or holds a po wer of attorney from a firm of which 
the other is a partner may be directors of a subsidiary bank at the same time.  
(3) The nomination or election, as a director of any person who is a member of either House of 
Parliament or the Legislature of a State sha ll be void unless within two months of the date of 
nomination or election as such director, he ceases to be a member of Parliament or the Legislature of 
the State, and if any director is elected or nominated as a member of Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State, he shall cease to be a director as from the date of such election or nomination, as the case may 
be.  
(4) Nothing contained in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to preclude any person 
from being a director of a subsidiary bank by reaso n only of his being a legal or technical adviser of 
that bank.  
(5) In this section, ―  
(a) “banking company ” has the same meaning as in the 2[Banking Regulation Act, 1949  
(10 of 1949) ]; 
(b) “manager ” means the chief executive officer, by whatever name called, of a banking 
company;  
(c) “private company ” has the same meaning as in the Com panies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 24, for “Provided further that ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 15, for “Banking Companies Act, 1949 ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  22 
 28. Vacation of office of directors .―If a director of a subsidiary bank ― 
(a) is, or has become, subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 27; or  
(b) resigns his office by giving notice in writing under hi s hand, in the case of a nominated 
director to the State Bank, and in the case of an elected director to the Board of Director of the 
subsidiary bank, and his registration is accepted; or  
(c) is absent without leave of the Board of Directors for more than  three consecutive meetings 
thereof;  
his seat on the Board of Directors shall thereupon become vacant:  
Provided that nothing in clause ( b) or clause ( c) shall apply to a director referred to in clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 or to a director,  being an officer of the State Bank, nominated under 
clause ( c) or to a director, being an officer of the Central Government nominated under clause ( e) of 
that sub -section.  
29. Managing director .―(1) The State Bank shall, after consulting the Board of Dire ctors of a 
subsidiary bank, 1[and the Reserve Bank, and with the approval of the Central Government], appoint a 
2[managing director] for that subsidiary bank:  
Provided that in the case of  the first appointment of the 2[managing director] no such consulati on 
with the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank shall be necessary.  
(2) Subject to the general control of the Board of Directors, the day to day administration and 
management of the affairs of a subs idiary bank shall vest in the 2[managing director ], and the 
2[managing director] shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
delegated to him by the Board of Directors.  
(3) The 2[managing director] of a subsidiary bank — 
(a) shall devote his whole time to the affairs of tha t bank: 
Provided that the 2[managing director] of the subsidiary bank may, 3[with the approval of the 
State Bank and the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank] , be a director of 
any other institution;  
(b) shall hold office for such term no t exceeding four years and subject to such conditions as 
the State Bank may,4[in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central 
Government] , specify at the time of his appointment;  
(c) shall receive such salary and allowances as ma y be determined by the State Bank  4[in 
consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central Government] .  
(4) The 2[managing director] vacating his office shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(5) The State Bank may, 4[in consultation wi th the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the 
Central Government] , for any sufficient r eason, remove from office the 2[managing director] of a 
subsidiary bank:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 7, for “and with the approval of the Re serve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 21 for “general manager ” (w.e.f. 1 -7- 1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 7, for “with the approval of the State Bank and the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “with the approval of the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 23 
 Provided that no such  1[managing director] shall be removed from office unless he has been g iven 
an opportunity of showing cause against such removal.  
30. Remuneration of director .―A director of a subsidiary bank shall be paid for attending the 
meetings of the Board of Directors or of any of its committees and for attending to any other business 
of the subsidiary bank such fees and allowances as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no f ees shall be payable to t he chairman of the State Bank 2[or the managing 
director of the subsidiary bank] or any other director who is a wholetime officer of the Central 
Government or the Reserve Bank or the State Bank.  
31. Removal from office of director .―(1) The State Bank may, 3[in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank and with the approval of the Central Government] , for any sufficient reason, remove 
from office a director nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 and not being an 
officer  of the State Bank.  
(2) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Bank, for any sufficient reason, 
remove from office a director 4[appointed under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) or nominated under clause 
(e)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 and not being an officer of the Central Government.  
(3) Any director elected under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, may be removed from 
office — 
(a) by the State Bank, 3[in consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the approval of the 
Central  Government] , if at the time of the removal there are no shareholders other than the State 
Bank registered in the books of the subsidiary bank concerned;  
(b) by a resolution passed by a majority of the votes of such shareholders holding in the 
aggregate no t less than one -half of the share capital held by all such shareholders:  
Provided that if the total amount of the holdings of all shareholders, other than the State Bank, 
registered in the books of the subsidiary bank, on the date of the resolution, is be low five per cent., of 
the total issued capital, the resolution shall not have effect unless confirmed by the State Bank.  
(4) No director shall be removed from office under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) unless he 
has been given an opportunity of show ing cause against such removal.  
32. Appointment of another person for discharging the duties of managing director during 
his absence .―If the 1[managing director] of a subsidiary bank is rendered incapable of discharging 
his duties by reason of infirmity or otherwise or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not 
involving the vacation of his office, the State Bank may appoint a nothe r person to officiate for the 
1[managing director ] until the date on which the 1[managing director] resumes duty.  
33. Casual vacancies among directors .―(1) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the 
term of office of a d irector of a subsidiary bank, 5[other than the managing director or a director 
appointed under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25] the vacancy shall be 
filled ― 
 (a) in the case of a director nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, not  
being an officer of the State Bank, by nomination by the State Bank;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 21, for “general manager ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
2. Ins. by, s. 25 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 8, for “with the approval of the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 26, for “nominated under clause ( e)” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
5. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  24 
 (b) in the case of a director elected under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, by 
election or where the proviso to that clause is applicable, by nomination by the State Bank:  
Provided that where the duration of the vacancy in the office of an elected director is likely to be 
less than six months, the vacancy may be filled by the remaining directors by co -opting a person from 
amongst the shareholders entitled to elect a directo r under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 
who is not disqualified under section 27;  
(c) in the case of a director nominated under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, not 
being an officer of the Central Government, by nomination by that Government in consultation 
with the State Bank.  
(2) A person nominated or elected or  co-opted, as the case may be , 1[under sub -section ( 1)] shall 
hold office for the unexpired portion of the term of his predecessor.  
2[(3) Where any vacancy occurs before the expiry of the term of office of a director appointed 
under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, such vacancy shall be filled in 
accordance with the said clause ( ca) or, as the case may be, clause ( cb), and the director so appoin ted 
shall hold office for the period specified under sub -section (2A) of section 26.]  
34. Meetings of the Board of Directors .―3[(1) The Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall 
meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be prescribed; and the meeting of the Board of Directors may be h eld 
by participation of the directors of the Board through video -conferencing or such other electronic 
means, as may be prescribed, which are capable of recording and recognising the participation of the 
directors and the proceedings of such meetings are c apable of being recorded and stored:  
Provided that the Central Government may in consultation with the Reserve Bank, by a 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the powers which shall not be exercised in a meeting of 
the Board of Directors held thro ugh video -conferencing or such other electronic means.]  
 (2) 4[The Chairman of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary Bank] shall preside at every meeting 
of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank and, in his absence such one of the directors as may 
generally or in relation to any particular meeting be authorised by the chairman in this behalf shall 
preside;  and in the absence of the chairman and also failing such authorisation, the directors of the 
subsidiary bank present at the meeting shall elect o ne from among themselves to preside at the 
meeting.  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this sub -section, “absence from a meeting ” means non -
attendance for any reason whatsoever at the meeting or any part of the meeting during which any 
business is transacte d.  
5[(3) All questions at the meeting of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall be decided 
by a majority of the votes of the directors present in the meeting or through video -conferencing or 
such other electronic means and in the case of equali ty of votes, the Chairman of Board of Directors 
of a subsidiary bank or, in his absence, the person presiding at the meeting shall have a second or 
casting vote.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 27, for “under this section ” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
2. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 16, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007)  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “The chairman of the State Bank ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
5. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  25 
  (4) Where any of the directors specified in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 25 or 
any of the directors, being an officer of the State Bank specified in clause ( c) of that sub -section is 
unable to attend any meeting of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank, and the State Bank or any 
other such director as may be present at the meeting considers that the State Bank would not be 
adequately or effectively represented at such meeting by reason of the absence of any such director, 
the State Bank or the director present may give notice in writing to that subsidiary bank — 
(i) that the meeting should be adjourned to such date as may be indicated in the notice; or  
(ii) that any matter, action, step or proceeding proposed to be considered, taken or carried out 
at that meeting, should not be so considered, taken or carried out; or  
(iii) that no decision should be taken at that meeting on any such matter, action, step or 
proceeding;  
and that subsidiary bank and its Board of Directors shall be bound to comply with such notice and act 
accordingly.  
(5) A director of a subsidiary bank who  is directly or indirectly concerned or interested in any 
contract, loan, arrangement or proposal, entered into or proposed to be entered into or made by or on 
behalf of the subsidiary bank shall, at the earliest possible opportunity, disclose the nature o f his 
interest to the Board of Directors of that bank; and any such director shall not be present at any 
meeting of the Board of Directors when any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal is discussed, 
unless his presence is required by the other dire ctors for the purpose of eliciting information and 
where any director is so required to be present, he shall not vote on any such contract, loan, 
arrangement or proposal:  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to such director b y reason only of 
his being — 
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) holding not more than two per cent. of the paid -up 
capital in any public company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any 
corporation established by or under any law for  the time being in force in India or any co - 
operative society, with which or to which the subsidiary bank has entered into or made, or 
proposes to enter into or make, a contract, loan, arrangement or proposal; or  
(ii) a director of the State Bank or of a ny other subsidiary bank being a director under clause 
(a) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 or being an officer 2[of the State Bank nominated 
under clause (c)] of that sub -section;] 3[or]  
4[(iii) an officer or other employee of the State Ban k, or any other institution, if he is the 
managing director appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 29 or under section 32; or  
(iv) an officer or other employee of the subsidiary bank, if he is a director appointed under 
clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) of s ub-section ( 1) of section 25.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 2, for the proviso (w.e.f. 14 -12-1962).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 16 , for “of the Reserve Bank or the State Bank nominated under clause ( b) or clause ( c)” 
(w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
3. Added by Act 48 of 1973, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  
4. Ins. by s . 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1974).  26 
 (6) A copy of the minutes of every meeting of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank, 
together with copies of all connected papers, shall be forwarded to the State Bank 1*** as soon as 
possible.  
35. Executive committee and other committees .―(1) There shall be an executive committee in 
respect of a subsidiary bank consisting of such directors as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if any such director being an officer of the State Bank and nominated by that bank 
under claus e (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25, is for any reason unable to exercise his functions or 
to discharge his duties in relation to the executive committee, the State Bank may depute any of its 
officers to exercise all the functions and to discharge all t he duties of such director in relation to the 
executive committee whenever such director is so unable to exercise his functions or discharge his 
duties; and the officer so deputed shall, for all purposes of this Act, in so far as it applies to the 
executiv e committee, be deemed to be a director of the subsidiary bank.  
(2) Subject to any regulations made under this Act, the executive committee may deal with any 
matter within the competence of the Board of Directors.  
(3) A copy of the minutes of every meeti ng of the executive committee of a subsidiary bank shall 
be forwarded to the State Bank and be laid before the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank as 
soon as possible after the meeting.  
(4) Without prejudice to the powers of the executive committee,  and subject to any regulations 
made under this Act, the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank may constitute such and so many 
other committees, whether consisting wholly of the directors or wholly of other persons, or partly of 
the directors and partly of other persons, as it deems fit, to exercise such powers and perform such 
duties as may, subject to such conditions, if any, as the Board of Directors may impose, be delegated 
to them by the Board of Directors.  
2[35A. Supersession of Board of Directors i n certain cases .―(1) 3[Where the Central 
Government, on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank  and in consultation with the State Bank] is 
satisfied that in the public interest or for preventing the affairs of a subsidiary bank being conducted in 
a manner detrimental to the interest, of the depositors or the subsidiary bank or for securing the proper 
management of the subsidiary bank, it is necessary so to do, 4[the Central Government may] , for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, supersede the Boar d of Directors of the subsidiary bank 
for a period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the order:  
Provided that the period of supersession of the Board of Directors may be extended from time to 
time, so, however, that the total period shall not  exceed twelve months.  
(2) 4[The Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank may] , on supersession of the 
Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank under sub -section ( 1), appoint, for such period as it may 
determine, an Administrator (not bein g an officer of the Central Government or a State Government) 
who has experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy.  
                                                           
1. The words “and the Reserve Bank ” omitted by Act 30 of 2007, s. 16 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. Ins. by s. 17 , ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 9, for “Where the Reserve Bank, on the recommendation of the St ate Bank ”  
(w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
4.  Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “the Reserve Bank may ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 27 
 (3) 1[The Central Government]  may issue such directions to the Administrator as it may deem 
appropriate and the Administrat or shall be bound to follow such directions.  
(4) Upon making the order of supersession of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, ― 
(a) the chairman, managing director and other directors shall, as from  the date of 
supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under this Act, or any other law for 
the time being in force, be exercised and discharged by or on behalf of the Board of Directors of 
such s ubsidiary bank, or by a resolution passed in general meeting of the subsidiary bank, shall, 
until the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank is reconstituted, be exercised and discharged 
by the Administrator appointed by 1[the Central Government]  under sub-section ( 2): 
Provided that the power exercised by the Administrator shall be valid notwithstanding that such 
power is exercisable by a resolution passed in the general meeting of the subsidiary bank.  
(5) 2[The Central Government in consultation with th e Reserve Bank may]  constitute a committee 
of three or more persons who have experience in law, finance, banking, economics or accountancy to 
assist the Administrator in the discharge of his duties.  
(6) The committee referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall me et at such times and places and observe 
such rules of procedure as may be specified by 1[the Central Government] . 
(7) The salary and allowances payable to the Administrator and the members of the Committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 5) by 1[the Central  Government]  shall be such as may be specified by 
1[the Central Government]  and be payable by the concerned subsidiary bank.  
(8) On and before the expiration of two months before expiry of the period of supersession of the 
Board of Directors as specified i n the order issued under subsection ( 1), the Administrator of the 
subsidiary bank, shall call the general meeting of the subsidiary bank to elect new directors and 
reconstitute its Board of Directors.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  or in any contract, the memorandum or 
articles of association, no person shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the loss or 
termination of his office.  
(10) The Administrator appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall vacate office immediately after th e 
Board of Directors of the subsidiar y bank has been reconstituted.]  
CHAPTER VI  
BUSINESS OF SUBSIDIARY  BANKS  
36. Subsidiary bank to act as agent of the State Bank .―(1) A subsidiary bank shall, if so 
required by the State Bank, act as agent of the State Ba nk at any place in India for ― 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bullion and securities on behalf of any 
Government in India; and  
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which the Reserve Bank may, from time to 
time, entrust to the State Bank.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 9 for “the Reserve Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “the Reserve Bank may ” (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 28 
 (2) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business shall be carried on by the 
subsidiary bank on behalf of the State Bank shall be such as may be determined by the State Bank, 
after consultation with the subsidiary bank and w ith the approval of the Reserve Bank.  
1*    *    *    *    * 
2[36A. Subsidiary bank to act as agent of the Reserve Bank .―(1) A subsidiary bank shall, if so 
required by the Reserve Bank, act as agent of the Reserve Bank at all places in India, where it has a 
branch, for ― 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bullion and securities on behalf of any 
Government  in India; and  
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which the Reserve Bank may from time to 
time entrust to it.  
(2) The terms and conditions on which any such agency business shall be carried on by the 
subsidiary bank on behalf of the Reser ve Bank shall be such as may be agreed upon.  
(3) If, no agreement can be reached on any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2) or if a dispute 
arises between a subsidiary bank and the Reserve Bank as to the interpretation of any agreement 
between them, the  matter shall be referred to the Central Government and the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  
(4) A subsidiary bank may transact any business or perform any functions entrusted to it under 
sub-section ( 1), by itself or through any  agent approved by the Reserve Bank.]  
37. Other business which a subsidiary bank may transact .―3[(1) Subject to the other 
provisions contained in this Act, a subsidiary bank may carry on and transact the business of banking 
as defined in clause ( b) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), and may 
engage in one or more of the o ther forms of business specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that 
Act.]  
(2) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank and the State Bank, 
by order in writing ― 
(a) authorise a subsidiary bank to do such other forms of busi ness as the Central Government 
may consider necessary or expedient;  
(b) direct that any form of business as is mentioned in the order, shall be carried on subject to 
such restrictions, conditions and safeguards as may be specified therein; or  
(c) Prohibi t a subsidiary bank from carrying on or transacting any form of business which, but 
for this clause, it is lawful for the subsidiary bank to engage in.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), a subsidiary bank shall not engage in any form 
of bu siness other than that referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
38. Acquisition of business of other banks .―(1) A subsidiary bank may, with the approval of 
the State Bank, and shall, if the Reserve Bank, in consultation with the State Bank, so directs, enter 
into n egotiations for acquiring the business, including the assets and liabilities of any other banking 
institution.  
                                                           
1. Sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) omitted by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 49 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 29, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  29 
 (2) The terms and conditions relating to such acquisition, if agreed upon by the Board of Directors 
of the subsidiary bank concerned and the dir ectorate or management of the banking institution 
concerned and approved by the Reserve Bank, shall be submitted to the Central Government for its 
sanction and that Government may by order in writing (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
order of s anction) accord its sanction thereto.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force or 
any instrument regulating the constitution of the banking institution concerned, the terms and 
conditions as sanctione d by the Central Government shall come into effect on the date specified by 
the Central Government in this behalf in the order of sanction and be binding upon the subsidiary 
bank and the banking institution concerned as well as upon the shareholders (or, a s the case may be, 
proprietors) and creditors of that banking institution.  
(4) If for any reason the terms and conditions cannot come into effect on the date specified in the 
order of sanction, the Central Government may fix another suitable date for that  purpose.  
(5) On the date on which the terms and conditions as aforesaid come into effect, the business and 
the assets and liabilities of the banking institution concerned as covered by the acquisition shall, by 
virtue, and in accordance with the provisio ns, of the order of sanction stand transferred to, and 
become respectively the business and the assets and liabilities of, the subsidiary bank concerned.  
(6) The consideration for the acquisition of the business and the assets and liabilities of any 
banki ng institution under this section may, if so agreed upon, be paid either in cash or by allotment of 
shares in the capital of the subsidiary bank concerned or partly in cash and partly by allotment of 
shares, and the subsidiary bank may, for the purpose of any such allotment, increase, subject to the 
other provisions contained in this Act relating to the increase of capital, the capital of the subsidiary 
bank by the issue of such number of shares as may be determined by the subsidiary bank.  
(7) Any business acquired under this section shall thereafter be carried on by the subsidiary bank 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act subject to such exemptions or modifications as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make in this  behalf in cons ultation 
with the Reserve Bank:  
Provided that no such exemption or modification shall be made so as to have effect for a period of 
more than seven years from the date of acquisition.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in 
any other law or in any agreement for the time being in force, on the acquisition of the business and 
the assets and liabilities of any banking institution under this section, no officer or other employee of 
that bank ing institution shall be entitled to any compensation to which he may be entitled under that 
Act or that other law or that agreement, and no claim in respect of such compensation shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority if on his havi ng accepted in writing an offer of 
employment by the subsidiary bank concerned on the terms and conditions proposed by it he has been 
employed in accordance with such terms and conditions.  
(9) The Central Government may, if it consider necessary or expedi ent in the case of any banking 
institution in relation to which an order of sanction has been made under this section, appoint, whether 
before or after the coming into effect of the terms and conditions relating to the business and the 
assets and liabiliti es of that banking institution, a suitable person to take over the management of that 
banking institution for the purposes of winding up its affairs and distributing its assets, and the 
expenditure incurred in connection with such management (including the  remuneration of the person 
so appointed and his staff, if any) shall be paid out of the assets of the banking institution or by the 
subsidiary bank concerned as the Central Government may direct.  30 
 (10) Simultaneously with the appointment of a suitable per son under sub -section ( 9) or 
immediately thereafter, the Central Government shall issue directions to be followed by that person in 
the management of that banking institution for the purposes aforesaid and thereupon ― 
(a) the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or the 1[Banking Regulation  Act, 
1949  (10 of 1949) ], or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any such Act or law, in so far as they are inconsist ent with such directions, shall cease to 
apply to, or in relation to, that banking institution;  
(b) all persons in charge of the management, including any person holding office as manager 
or director, of the banking institution, immediately before the issu e of such directions, shall be 
deemed to have vacated their offices as such; and  
(c) the person appointed to take over the management of the banking institution shall, in 
accordance with those directions, take all such steps as may be necessary to facilita te the winding 
up of its affairs and the distribution of its assets.  
(11) The Central Government, when satisfied that nothing further remains to be done in order to 
windup the affairs of the banking institution concerned, may, by order in writing, direct t hat as from 
such date as may be specified therein, the banking institution shall stand dissolved and thereupon any 
such direction shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law.  
(12) No action under this section shal l be questioned on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of any banking institution in relation to which such action has been taken or in the 
constitution of its Board of Directors or in the appointment of any person entrusted with the 
manage ment of its affairs.  
(13) The provisions of this section shall apply in relation to the acquisition by one subsidiary bank 
of the business, including the assets and liabilities, of anothe r subsidiary bank as they apply in  
relation to the acquisition by a subsidiary bank of the business, including the assets and liabilities, of 
any other banking institution.  
(14) In this section, “banking institution ” includes any individual or any association of individuals 
(whether incorporated or not, or whether a depart ment of Government or a separate institution), 
carring on the business of banking.  
2[38A. Arrangement with subsidiary banks on appointment of directors to prevail .―(1) 
Where any arrangement entered into by a subsidiary bank with a company provides for the 
appointment by the subsidiary bank of one or more directors of such company, such provision and any 
appointment of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be val id and effective notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or in any other law for the 
time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other instrument relating to 
the company, and a ny provision regarding share qualification, age limit, number of directorships, 
removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument 
aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the subsidiary bank in  pursuance of the 
arrangement as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 18, for “Banking Compa nies Act, 1949 ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 50 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984) . 31 
 (2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the subsidiary bank and may be removed or substituted 
by any person by order in writing of the subsidiary bank;  
(b) not incu r any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in 
relation thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shal l not be taken into account for computing 
the number of directors liable to such retirement.]  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
39. Closing of annual accounts .―A subsidiary bank shall cause its books to be closed and 
balanced 1[as] on the thirty -first day of  2[March] 3[or such other date in each year as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify] .  
4[Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to another 
period of accounting under th is section, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and 
balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books in respect of the concerned years. ] 
40. Disposal of profits .―(1) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in 
assets, equalisation of dividends, contribution to staff and superannuation funds and for all other 
matters for which provision is necessary by or under this Act or which are usually provided for by 
banking companies, a subsidiary bank may, out of its net profits, declare a dividend.  
(2) The rate of dividend shall be determined by the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank 
concerned.  
(3) Nothing in this se ction shall be deemed to preclude the payment of interim dividends in such 
manner and to such extent as may be prescribed.  
5[40A. Transfer of unpaid or unclaimed dividend to unpaid dividend account .―(1) Where, 
after the commencement of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2007  
(30 of 2007) , a dividend has been declared by the subsidiary bank but has not been paid, or claimed, 
within thirty days from the date of declaration, to or by any shareholder entitled to the payment of the 
dividend, the subsidiary bank shall, within seven days from the date of the expiry of such period of 
thirty days, transfer the total amount of dividend which remains unpaid, or unclaimed within the sa id 
period of thirty days, to a special account to be called “unpaid dividend account of.................. (Name 
of the subsidiary bank) ”. 
Explanation .―In this sub -section, the expression “dividend which remains unpaid ” means any 
dividend the warrant in respect thereof has not been encashed or which has otherwise not been paid or 
claimed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 19, for “December ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007)  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 20, for “in each  year” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  32 
 (2) Where the whole or any part of any dividend, declared by the s ubsidiary bank before the 
commencement of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks Laws) Amendment Act, 2007  
(30 of 2007) , remains unpaid at such commencement, the subsidiary bank shall, within a period of six 
months from such commencement, transfer such unpaid amount to the account referred to in sub -
section ( 1). 
(3) Any money transferred to the unpaid dividend account of the subsidiary bank in pursuance of 
this section, which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven years from the date of such 
transfer shall be transferred by the subsidiary bank to the Investor Education and Protection Fund 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 205C of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(4) The money transferred under sub -section ( 3) to the Investor Educ ation and Protection Fund 
shall be utilised for the purposes and in the manner specified in section 205C of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) ]. 
41. Audit .―(1) Subject to the provisions of section 42, the accounts of a subsidiary bank shall be 
audited by an auditor duly qualified to act as an auditor of companies under sub -section ( 1) of section 
226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), who shall be appoin ted by the State Bank, with the 
approval of the Reserve Bank.  
(2) The auditor shall receive such remuneration as the State Bank may fix.  
(3) No director or officer of a subsidiary bank shall be eligible to be its auditor during his 
continuance in office as such director or officer.  
(4) The auditor shall be supplied wi th a copy of the annual balance sheet and profit and loss 
account, and a list of all books kept by the subsidiary bank, and it shall be the duty of the  auditor to 
examine the balance sheet a nd profit and loss account with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto, 
and in the performance of his duties, the auditor — 
 (a) shall have, at all reasonable times, access to the books, accounts and other documents of 
that subsidiary bank;  
(b) may, at  the expense of that subsidiary bank, employ accountants and other persons to 
assist him in investigating such accounts; and  
(c) may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director or any officer of that subsidiary 
bank.  
(5) The auditor shall hold of fice for such term not exceeding one year as the State Bank may fix at 
the time of his appointment; and if any vacancy arises before the expiry of the term of an auditor, the 
vacancy may be filled by the State Bank, with the approval of the Reserve Bank.  
(6) The auditor shall on relinquis hing office be eligible for re -appointment.  
(7) The auditor shall make a report to the Sta te Bank upon the annual balance sheet and accounts 
of the subsidiary bank, and, in every such report, he shall state — 
 (a) whether , in his opinion, the balance sheet is a full and fair balance -sheet containing all the 
necessary particulars and is properly drawn up so as to 1[exhibit a true and fair view] of the affairs 
of that subsidiary bank, and in case he has called for any explana tion or information, whether it 
has been given and whether it is satisfactory;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 31, for “exhibit a true and correct view”  (w.e.f. 31 -12- 1973).  
 33 
 (b) whether or not the transactions of that subsidiary bank which have come to his notice have 
been within the competence of the bank;  
(c) whether or not the returns received from the offices and branches of that subsidiary bank 
have been found adequate for the purpose of his audit;  
 (d) whether the profit and loss account shows a true balance of profit or loss for the period 
covered by such account; and  
(e) any other matter w hich he considers should be brought to the notice of the State Bank.  
1[Explanation  1.―For the purposes of this Act, ― 
(a) the balance -sheet shall not be treated as not disclosing a true and fair view of the affairs of 
the subsidiary bank, and  
(b) the profit and loss account shall not be treated as not showing a true balance of profit or 
loss for the period covered by such account,  
merely by reason of the fact that the balance -sheet or, as the case may be, the profit and loss account, 
does not disclose any matters which are, by the provisions of the Banking Re gulation Act, 1949,  
(10 of 194 9) read with the relevant provisions of this Act, not required to be disclosed.  
 Explanation 2 .―For the purposes of this Act, the accounts of the subsidiary bank shall not be 
deemed as having not been properly drawn up on the ground merely that they do not disclose certain 
matters if — 
(i) those matters are such as the subsidiary bank is, by virtue o f any provision contained in the 
Banking R egulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949 ), read with the relevant provisions of this Act, or any 
other Act, not required to disclose, and  
 (ii) the provisions referred to in clause ( i) are specified in the balance -sheet and  profit and 
loss account of the subsidiary bank or in the auditor ‟s report.]  
(8) The auditor shall forward a copy of the audit report to the subsidiary bank and to the Central 
Government.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Central Gove rnment may, at any time, 
appoint such number of auditors as it thinks fit to examine and report on the accounts of a subsidiary 
bank, and the auditors so appointed shall have all the rights, privileges and authority in relation to the 
audit of the accounts  of the subsidiary bank which an auditor appointed by the State Bank has under 
this section.  
42. Te mporary provision regarding exi sting auditors .―If, on the appointed day, any 
appointment of an auditor made by, or in respect of, an existing bank  2[or the Hyderabad Bank ], as the 
case may be, is subsisting, the State Bank may, on or after such day, either confirm the appointment in 
accordance with th e provisions of this Act, subject to such modifications  of the terms and conditions 
of the appointment, as it may deem necessary, or terminate the appointment; and may, if it so 
terminates the appointment, fix such remuneration as appears to it to be  reaso nable having regard to 
the work already done, functions discharged, or duties performed by the auditor concerned.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 31 ( w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 2009, s. 6, for “, the Hyderabad Bank or the Saurashtra Bank ” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 34 
 43. Returns to be furnished by a subsidiary bank .―(1) A subsidiary bank sh all furnish to the 
State Bank 1[, the Reserve Bank and the Central Government] ― 
 (a) 2[within three months from the 31st day of 3[March ] 4[or the date notified under section 
39, as the case may be,] as on which its books are closed  and balanced], its balance sheet, together 
with the profit and loss account and the auditor's report, and a report by the Boar d of Directors on 
the working 5[and activities] of the subsidiary bank during the period covered by the accounts; 
and  
(b) any ot her information relating to the affairs and business of the subsidiary bank which the 
State Bank or the Reserve Bank may require:  
 6[Provided that the Reserve Bank may, after consultation with the State Bank, extend the said 
period of three months by such further period, not exceeding three months, as it may think fit.]  
 7[(2) The balance -sheet and profit and loss account of the subsidiary bank shall be signed by 
persons holding the office of the chairman, managing director, and a majority of the other dire ctors of 
the subsidiary bank in office.]   
5[(3) The Central Government shall cause the auditor's report and the report by the Board of 
directo rs on the working and activities  of the subsidiary bank to be laid, as soon as may be after they 
are received, be fore each House of Parliament 8* * *.  
44. General meetings .―(1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as an annual general 
meeting) of a subsidiary bank shall be held 9[in each year] at the place where the head office of the 
subsidiary bank is situate , and any other general meeting may be convened by the Board of Directors 
at any time:  
10[Provided that such annual general meeting shall be held before the expiry of six weeks from the 
date on which the balance -sheet, together with the profit and loss acc ount and auditor's report, is, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 43, forwarded to 11[the State Bank, the Reserve Bank or the Central 
Government] whichever date is earlier.]  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall be entitled to 12[discuss and adopt  
the balance -sheet ] and profit and loss account of the bank concerned, made up to the previous  
31st day of 13[March] , 14[or the date notified under section 39, as the case may be], the report of the 
Boar d of Directors on the working 15[and acti vities] of that bank for the period covered by the 
accounts and the auditors' report on the balance -sheet and accounts.  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 1 of 1984 s. 51, for “and the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 32, for “within th ree months from the date on which its accounts are closed and balanced ” 
(w.e.f. 31 -12- 1973).   
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 21, for “December” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
4. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 21 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 51 (w.e.f . 15-2-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 32 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
7. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 21, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
8. The words “, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or  in two or 
more successive sessions” omitted by Act 81 of 1985, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -5-1986).  
9. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973 s. 33, for “annually before the end of March ” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
10. Added by s. 3 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
11. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984 , s. 52 , for “the State Bank, or to the Reserve Bank”  (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).   
12. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 22, for “discuss the balance -sheet ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
13. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “December ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
14. Ins. by Act 66  of 1988, s. 22  (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
15. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 52 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  35 
  (3) Nothing contained in this section relating to an annual general meeting shall apply in relation 
to a subsidiary bank if, as on the previous 31st day of  1[ March] 2[or the date notified under section 
39, as the case may be] all the shares in the issued capital of that bank are held by the State Bank.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
45. Power to issue directions for removing difficulties .―For the purpose of facilitating the full 
and effective transfer of the undertaking of an existing bank in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act, or in order to remove any difficulty which in the opinion of the Central Government has arisen or 
is likely  to arise in connection with such transfer, the Central Government may, in consultation with 
the Reserve Bank, give such direction s to any existing bank or the State Bank as appear to it to be 
necessary and the said bank or the State Bank, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions.  
46. Observers for existing banks  3***.―(1) The State Bank may, in relation to any existing 
bank 4***, at any time before the appointed day, ― 
(a) depute one or more persons to watch the proceedings at any meeting of th e Board of 
Directors, any committee or other body of the bank; require the bank to give an opportunity to the 
person or persons so deputed to be heard at such meetings and also require such person or persons 
to send a report of such proceedings to the Stat e Bank;  
(b) require the Board of Directors, any committee or other body of the bank to give in writing 
to any person specified by the State Bank in this behalf, at his usual address, all notices of, and 
other communications relating to, any meeting of the  Board, committee or other body, as the case 
may be;  
 (c) appoint one or more persons to observe the manner in which the affairs of the bank or of 
its officers or branches are being conducted and make a report thereon; and  
(d) require the bank to furnish  the State Bank, within such time as may be specified by the 
State Bank, with any statement or information relating to the business or affairs of the bank 
including copies of the proceedings of any meeting of the Board of Directors, any committee or 
other body, of the bank.  
(2) If a person deputed by the State Bank to watch the proceedings of any meeting of the Board of 
Directors, any committee or other body, as the case may be, gives notice in writing to the bank that 
such person considers that any action , step or proceeding proposed to be taken or carried out by the 
bank will be detrimental to the State Bank or to the bank itself, such action, step or proceeding shall 
not be taken or carried out by the bank unless and until the State Bank approves in writ ing of such 
action, step or proceeding.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
47. Inspection .―(1) Without prejudice to the other provisions contained in this Act, the State 
Bank may, at any time, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of its officers of any existing 
bank, a new bank,  6[or the Hyderabad Bank ].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 22, for “December ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2.  Ins. by Act 66 of 1988,  s. 22 (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. The words “and the Saurashtra Bank ” omitte d by Act 48 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ).  
4. The words “or the Sauras htra Bank ” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ). 
5. Explanation  omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “, the Hyderabad Bank or the Saurashtra Bank ” (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ). 36 
 (2) It shall be the duty of every person who is, or has, at any time, been a director, officer or other 
employee of a bank which is inspected under sub -section ( 1), to produce to any officer making the 
inspectio n, all such balances, books, accounts, securities and other documents in his custody or power 
and to furnish the said officer with any statements and information relating to the affairs of the bank 
as the said officer may require of him within such time as  the said officer may specify.  
(3) If any person — 
(a) fails, within the stipulated tim e, to produce any balance, book , account, security or other 
document or to furnish any statement or information which under sub -section ( 2) it is his duty to 
produce or furnish, or to answer any question relating to the business of the bank under inspection 
which is asked by an of ficer making the inspection, or  
(b) in any document or information required or furnished or while answering any question put 
to him, wilfully ma kes a statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, 
or wilfully omits to make a material statement,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine.  
48. Co st of development programme .―(1) A subsidiary bank may accept any subsidies offered 
by the State Bank to meet — 
(a) the cost of the whole or any part of any specific programme of development undertaken by 
that subsidiary bank with the approval of the State Bank; and  
(b) such losses o r expenditure as may be approved by the State Bank, with the consent of the 
Reserve Bank.  
(2) For the purposes of the 1[Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 )], any subsidy received by a 
subsidiary bank under sub -section ( 1) shall not be treated as income, pro fits or gains of the subsidiary 
bank.  
49. Special provision regarding existing officers and employees .―(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any of the other provisions of this Act, or in any other law or in any contract of 
service or other document, no appointment made or promotion, increment in salary, pension or 
allowance or any other benefit grante d to any person by an existing bank 2*** after the 10th day of 
February, 1958, and before the appointed day, which would not ordinarily have been made or granted 
or which would not ordinarily have been admissible under the rules or authorisations of the sa id banks 
or of any provident, pension or other fund in force before the 10th day of February, 1958, shall have 
effect or be payable or claimable from the subsidiary bank concerned, or from any provident, pension 
or other fund, or from any authority adminis tering any such fund, unless the State Bank has, with the 
approval of the Reserve Bank, by a general or special order, confirmed the appointment, promotion or 
increment or has directed the grant of the pension, allowance or other benefit, as the case may b e.  
(2) Where any officer or other employee of an existing bank 3*** has received any amount by 
reason of such appointment, promotion or increment or any such pension, allowance or other benefit 
as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), which has not been conf irmed or sanctioned by the State Bank 
under that sub -section, such officer or other employee shall be bound to refund such amount to the  
subsidiary bank concerned, and that bank shall be entitled to take all such steps as may be necessary 
for recovering su ch amount.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 23 for “Indian Income -tax Act, 1922  (11 of 1922) ” (w.e.f. 9 -7-2007).  
2. The words “or the Saurasht ra Bank ” omitted by Act 48  of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ).  
3. The words “or of the Saurashtra Bank ” omitted by s. 9,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ). 37 
 (3) Where any managing director, general manager or manager, deputy managing director or 
deputy general manager or other employee of an existing bank 1*** has, after the 10th day of 
February, 1958, and before the appointed day, been paid any su m by way of compensation or gratuity, 
the subsidiary bank concerned shall be entitled to claim a refund of any sum so paid if the payment is 
not confirmed by the State Bank by a general or special order.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to, or in r elation to, any officer or other employee of the 
Bank of Patiala, who does not become an officer or other employee of the State Bank of Patiala under 
the provisions of section 11.  
50. Staff of a subsidiary bank .―(1) A subsidiary bank may, subject to such limitations and 
conditions as may be prescribed, appoint such number of officers, advisers and employees as it 
considers necessary or desirable, for the efficient performance of its functions and on such terms an d 
conditions as it may deem fit.  
2[(1A) The officers, advisers and employees of the subsidiary bank concerned shall individually or 
jointly, or with other officers, advisers and employees in a committee exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may,  by general or special order, be entrusted or delegated to them by the 
Board of Directo rs or its Executive Committee.]  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the officers, advisers and employees of a 
subsidiary bank, in whatever capacity  engaged, shall not be deemed to be officers, advisers or 
employees of the State Bank for any purpose, unless otherwise provided in the contract or agreement 
of service of any such officer, adviser or employee.  
3[50A. Bonus .―(1) No officer, adviser or othe r employee [other than a n employee within the 
meaning of clause ( 13) of section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965  (21 of 1965) ] of a subsidiary 
bank shall be entitled to be paid any bonus.  
(2) No employee of a subsidiary bank, being an employee within t he meaning of clause ( 13) of 
section 2 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965) , shall be entitled to be paid any bonus 
except in accordance with the provisions of that Act.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding any jud gment, decree or order 
of any court, tribunal or other authority and notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision 
of this Act or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or any other law for the time being in 
force or any practice, u sage or custom or any contract, agreement, settlement, award or other 
instrument.]  
51. Establishment of pension and superannuation funds by subsidiary banks .― 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, a 
subsidiary bank may establish and maintain superannuation, pension, provident or other funds for the 
benefit of its officers or employees or the dependants  of such officers or employees or for the 
purposes of the subsidiary bank, and grant superannuation allowances, annuities and pensions payable 
out of any such fund.  
52. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .―(1) A subsidiary bank shall observe, except as 
otherwise required by law, the practices and usages customary among bankers, and in particular, it 
shall not divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in 
                                                           
1. The words “or the Sauras htra Bank ” omitted by Act 48 of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-6-2010 ). 
2.  Ins. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 24 (w.e.f.  9-7-2007).  
3.  Ins. by Act 64 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -9-1984).  38 
 circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or pr actice and usage customary  among 
bankers, necessary or appropriate for that bank to divulge such information.  
(2) Every director, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of a subsidiary bank shall, before 
entering upon his duties, make a declaration o f fidelity and secrecy as in the form set out in the 
Second Schedule:  
Provided that any declaration made under sub -section ( 2) of section 35 of the State Bank of 
Hyderabad Act shall be deemed to be a declaration made to the Hyderabad Bank under this  
sub-section.  
1[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005  (30 of 2005)] . 
53. Indemnity of directors .―(1) Every director of a subsidiary bank shall be indemnified by that 
bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties 
except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.  
(2) A director of a s ubsidiary bank shall not be responsible for any loss or expense caused to the 
bank by the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or 
taken on behalf of the bank or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any  customer or debtor or by 
anything done in, or  in relation to, the execution of the duties of his office or otherwise than for his 
wilful act or default.  
2[(3) Where the State Bank nominates any of its officers as director of a subsidiary bank, such 
direc tor shall not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as director or anything in 
relation thereto.]  
54. Defects in appointment or const itution not to invalidate acts or proceedings .―(1) No act 
or proceeding of the Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall be questioned on the ground merely 
of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board.  
(2) All acts done by any person acting in good faith as a di rector of a subsidiary bank shall, 
notwithstanding that he was disqualified to be a director or that there was any other defect in his 
appointment, be deemed to be valid.  
55. Companies Act, 1956, and Banking Regulation  Act, 1949, not to apply to certain ex isting 
banks .―Subject to the provisions of this Act and unless the Central Government, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, otherwise directs, on and from the appointed day, the provisions of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ), and the 3[Banking Regulation  Act, 19 49 (10 of 1949 )], shall not 
apply to an existing bank, in so far as the said provisions impose any obligation on, or require 
anything to be done by, any such bank.  
56. Continuance of special provisions respecting recovery of loans and advances made by 
the Bank of Patiala 4***.― The State Bank of Patiala 5*** shall be entitled to recover in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue any moneys due in respect of loans or advances made before the 
appointed day by the Bank of Patiala 6*** and the provisions of any law, relating t o such recovery as 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34 an d the Sche dule (w.e.f. 14 -12-2006 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 53 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 2007, s. 25, for “Banking Companies Act ” (w.e.f.  9-7-2007).  
4. The words “and the State Bank of Saurashtra ” omitted by Act 48 of 2009, s. 10  (w.e. f. 1-6-2010 ). 
5. The words “and the Saurashtra Bank” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
6. The words “or the Saurashtra Bank, as the case may be, ” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 39 
 were applicable to that bank before the appointed day shall continue to apply to the State Bank of 
Patiala 1*** in respect of such recovery after the appointed day.  
57. Bar to liquidation of a subsidiary bank .―No provision of law relatin g to the winding up of 
companies shall apply to a subsidiary bank nor shall it be placed in liquidation, save as provided in 
this Act or by order of the Central Government and in such manner as the Central Government may 
direct.  
58. Dissolution of existing  banks .―Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any 
other law for the time being in force or in any contract or other instrument, an existing bank shall, on 
such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf, stand dissolved.  
2[59. Construction of references to existing banks .―(1) For the purposes of sections 45, 49, 55, 
58 and the First Schedule, the expression „existing bank ‟ shall include the Bank of Jaipur Limited.  
(2) Except as otherwise prov ided in any general or special order made by the Central 
Government, any reference in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other instrument — 
(a) to an existing bank, shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding new bank;  
(b) to th e Bank of Jaipur Limited, shall be construed as a reference to the State Bank of 
Bikaner.]  
60. Exercise of powers and functions on behalf of the Reserve Bank .―Any powers, duties or 
functions conferred, imposed or entrusted by this Act on, or to, the Reserve Bank, shall be exercised 
or performed by the Governor of the Reserve Bank or, in his absence, by a Deputy Governor 
nominated under sub -section ( 3) of sectio n 7 of the R eserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or by 
such officer or officers of the Reserve Bank in respect of such matters and subject to such conditions 
and limitations as the Governor of the Reserve Bank may specify.  
61. Protection of action t aken under Act .―(1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government, the Reserve Bank or the State Bank or any officer of the Central 
Government, the Reserve Bank or the State Bank for any damage caused or likely to be caused by 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
(2) No person shall have any right, whether in contract or otherwise, to any compensation for any 
loss incurred or any damage caused by reason of the operation of, or anything done in pursuance of, 
the provisions contained in sections 46 and 47.  
62. Power of Central Government to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by 
notifica tion in the Official Gazette, 3[make rules to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act].  
(2) In particular, and without  prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, members and staff of the Tribunal;  
                                                           
1. The words “or the Saurashtra Bank, as the case may be, ” omitted by Act 48 o f 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 3, for section 59 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1963).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 34, for “make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act ” (w.e.f. 31 -12- 1973).  40 
 (b) the manner of, and the procedure for, payment of compensation (including allot ment of 
shares in lieu of compensation) under this Act, including the requirements subject to which the 
payment shall be made;  
(c) the determination of the persons to whom compensation shall be payable in all cases 
including cases where shares have been h eld by more than one person, or where they have been 
transferred before the appointed day, but the transfer has not been registered, or where the share -
holder is dead;  
(d) the circumstances under which claims for payment of the said compensation from pers ons 
claiming through or under a shareholder may be entertained;  
(e) the requirements to be complied with before receipt of the said compensation by a 
shareholder, whose share certificate has been lost, destroyed, mutilated or stolen;  
(f) the requirements  subject to which information regarding the payment of the said 
compensation may be granted or refused and the conditions subject to which such information 
may be given;  
1[(g) the manner of appointment of a director under clause ( ca) or clause ( cb) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 25, and all other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.]  
2[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modificatio n in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to  the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.]  
3[63. Power of subsidiary banks to make regulations .―(1) The Board of Directors of a 
subsidiary bank may, after consultation with the State Bank and the Reserve Bank and with the 
previous approval  of the Central Government, by notification in the official Gazette, make regulations 
not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which 
provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to  the provisions of this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for ― 
(a) the powers and duties of the managing director of the subsidiary bank;  
(b) the fees and allowances which may be paid to directors or others for attending any 
meetings of the Board of Directors or of its committees (including the executive committee) or 
other committees or for attending to any other work of the subsidiary bank;  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 48 of 1973, s. 34 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1973).  
2.  Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 54, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2011, s. 10, for section 63 (w.e.f. 1 -12-2011 ). 41 
 (c) the time and place at which, and the manner in which the business of the Board of 
Directors of the subsidiary bank shall be transacted and the procedure to be followed at th e 
meetings thereof;  
(d) the constitution of the executive committee of the subsidiary bank and the conditions and 
limitations subject to which the executive committee may exercise its powers and the procedure to 
be followed at the meetings thereof;  
(e) the formation of any other committees, whether of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary 
bank or otherwise, and the delegation of powers and functions of the Board to such committees 
and the conduct of business in such committees;  
(f) the nature of shares o f the subsidiary bank, the manner in which, and the conditions subject 
to which, shares may be held and transferred and generally all matters relating to the rights and 
duties of shareholders;  
(g) the procedure for issuing the certificates of shares;  
(h) the procedure with respect to increase, whether by public issue or rights issue or by 
preferential allotment or private placement, the issued capital by issue of equity or preference 
shares;  
(i) the manner of acce ptance of share money in instal ments, the ma nner of making calls and 
the manner of forfeiture of unpaid shares and their re -issue;  
(j) the maintenance of share registers, and the particulars to be entered in such registers in 
addition to those specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 21, the safeguar ds to be observed in the 
maintenance of the register of shareholders on computer floppies or diskettes or any other 
electronic form, the inspection and closure of the registers and all other matters connected 
therewith;  
(k) the manner in which every indivi dual registered shareholder nominate, an individual to 
whom all his rights in the shares shall vest in the event of his death under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18A;  
(l) the manner in which, the joint holders may nominate an individual to whom all their righ ts 
in the shares shall vest in the event of the death of all the joint holders under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 18A;  
(m) the manner in which nomination is varied or cancelled under sub -section ( 3) of section 
18A;  
(n) the manner in which every individual re gistered as the holder of the shares to make 
nomination where nominee is a minor to appoint, any person to  become entitled to the shares in 
the event of his death during the minority of the nominee under sub -section ( 4) of section 18A;  
(o) the holding and conduct of elections under this Act and the final determination of doubts 
or disputes regarding the qualifications of candidates for election or regarding the validity of 
elections;  
(p) the manner in which general meeting shall be convened, the procedure t o be followed 
thereat and the manner in which voting rights may be exercised;  
(q) the manner in which notices may be served on behalf of the subsidiary bank upon 
shareholders or other persons;  42 
 (r) the payment of dividends including interim dividends;  
(s) the delegation of powers and functions of the Board of Directors of the subsidiary bank to 
the managing director or directors or officers or other employees of that bank;  
(t) the conditions and limitations subject to which the subsidiary bank may appoint of ficers, 
advisers and other employees and fix their remuneration and other terms and conditions of 
service;  
(u) the duties and conduct of officers, advisers and other employees of the subsidiary bank;  
(v) the establishment and maintenance of superannuation,  pension, provident or other funds 
for the benefit of the officers or employees of the subsidiary bank or of the dependants of such 
officers or employees or for the purposes of the subsidiary bank, and the granting of 
superannuation allowances, annuities a nd pensions payable out of any such fund;  
(w) the conduct and defence of legal proceedings by or against the subsidiary bank and the 
manner of signing pleadings;  
(x) the provision of a seal for the subsidiary bank and the manner and effect of its use;  
(y) the form and manner in which contracts binding on the subsidiary bank may be executed;  
(z) the conditions and requirements subject to which loans or advances may be made or bills 
may be discounted or purchased by the subsidiary bank;  
(za) the conditions su bject to which loans or advances may be made by the subsidiary bank to 
its directors or officers or the relatives of such directors or officers or to companies, firms or 
individuals with which or with whom such directors or officers or relatives are connec ted as 
partners, directors, managers, servants, shareholders or otherwise;  
(zb) the persons or authorities who shall administer any pension, provident or other fund 
constituted for the benefit of the officers or employees of the subsidiary bank or their de pendants 
or for the purposes of that bank;  
(zc) the circumstances in which the specific approval of the State Bank shall be required to the 
grant of loans and advances or investment of funds by the subsidiary bank or to any contract, 
arrangement or proposa l entered into or proposed to be entered into by the subsidiary bank;  
(zd) the preparation and submission to the State Bank and the Reserve Bank of statements of 
programmes of activities and financial statements of the subsidiary bank and the periods for 
which, and the time within which such statements and estimates are to be prepared and submitted;  
(ze) generally, for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the subsidiary bank.  
(3) All regulations made under this section shall have effect from such earlier  or later date as may 
be specified in the regulations.  
(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this section by the Board of 
Directors of a subsidiary bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall 
cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately foll owing the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that 
the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 43 
 form or be  of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulat ion.] 
64. [ Amendment of certain enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing and A mending  Act, 1964  
(52 of 1964), s. 2 and Schedule  (w.e.f . 29-12-1964).  
65. Saving .―Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 35 of the 
State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955).  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See sections 13 and 14)  
PRINCIPLE S OF COMPENSATION  
1.  A. The compensation to be given by the State Bank shall in the case of the Hyderabad 
Bank,  1[or the Bank of Patiala], be an amount equal to the value of the assets of that bank as on the 
day immediately before the appointed day, compu ted in accordance with the provisions of Part I of 
this paragraph less the total amount of liabilities thereof computed in accordance with the provisions 
of Part II of this paragraph.  
B. The total compensation to be given by the State Bank in respect of th e transfer of the shares in 
the capital of the existing banks,  other than the Bank of Patiala, to the persons (including any State 
Government) who, immediately before the appointed day, are registered as holders of shares in the 
books of each of these bank s shall, in each case, be an amount equal to the value of the assets of that 
bank as on the day immediately preceding the appointed day in relation to the corresponding new 
bank, computed in accordance with the provisions of Part I of this paragraph less the total amount of 
liabilities thereof computed in accordance with the provisions of Part II of this paragraph.  
PART I―Assets 
For the purposes of this paragraph, assets m eans the total of the following :― 
(a) the amount of cash in hand and with the Reserve Bank and the State Bank (including 
foreign currency notes which shall be converted at the market rate of exchange);  
(b) the amount of balances with any other bank, not being the Reserve Bank or the State 
Bank, whether on deposit or current account, and mon ey at call and short notice, balances held 
outside India being converted at the market r ate of exchange :  
Prov ided that any balances which are  not realisable in full shall be deemed to be debts and v alued 
accordingly;  
(c) the market value as on the appoint ed day of any securities, shares, debentures, bonds and 
other investme nts, held by the bank concerned;  
Explanation .―For the purposes of this clause, ― 
(i) securities of the Central and State Governmen ts [other than the securities specified in sub -
clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of this Explanation ] maturing for redemption within five years from the 
appointed day shall be valued at the face value or the market value whichever is higher;  
(ii) securities of the Central Government, such as Post Office Certificates and Tr easury 
Savings Deposit Certifi cates and any other securities or certificates issued or to be issued under 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 2009, s. 11, for “, the Bank of Patiala or the Sau rashtra Bank, ” (w.e.f . 1-6-2010 ). 44 
 the Small Savings Scheme of the Central Government, shall be valued at their face value or the 
encashable value as on the appointe d day, whichever is  higher;  
(iii) where the market value of any Government security such as the zamindari abolition 
bonds or other similar security in respect of which the principal is payable in instalments, is not 
ascertainable or is, for any reason, not considered as refl ecting the fair value thereof or as 
otherwise appropriate, the security shall be valued of such an amount as is considered reasonable 
having regard to the instalments of principal and interest re maining to be paid, the period during 
which such instalments  are pay able, the yield of any sceurity , issued by the Government to which 
the security pertains and having the same or approximately the same maturity, and other relevant 
factors;  
(iv) where the market value of any security, share, debenture, bond or othe r inve stment is not 
considered reason able by reason of its having been affected by abnormal factors, the investment 
may be valued on the basis of its average market value over any reasonable period;  
(v) where the market value of any security, share, debent ure, bond or other investment is not 
ascertainable, only such value, if any, shall be taken into account as is considered reasonable 
having regard to the financial position of the issuing concern, the dividend paid by it during the 
preceding five y ears and  other relevant factors;  
(d) the amount of advances (including loans, cash credits, overdrafts, bills purchased and 
discounted), and other debts, whether secured or unsecured, to the extent to which they are reasonably 
considered recoverable, having regard  to the value of the security, if any, the operations on the 
account, the reported worth and respectability of the borrower, the prospects of realisation and other 
relevant considerations;  
(e) the market value of any land or buildings;  
(f) the total amount  of the premia paid, in respect of all leasehold properties, reduced in the case 
of each such premium by an amount which bears to such premium the same proportion as the expired 
term of the lease in respect of which such premium shall have been paid bears  to the total term of the 
lease;  
(g) the written down value us per books, or the realisable value, as may be considered reasonable, 
of all furniture, fixtures and fittings;  
(h) the market or realisable value, as may be appropriate, of other assets appearing  on the books of 
the bank, no value being allowed for capitalised expenses, such as share selling commission, 
organisational expenses and broker age, losses incurred and similar other items.  
PART II―Liabilities  
For the purposes of this paragraph, “liabilities ” means the total amount, of all outside liabilities 
existing on the appointed day and all contingent liabilities which the subsidiary bank concerned may 
reasonably be expected to be re quired to  meet out of its own resources on or after the appointed day.  
COMPENSATION PAYABLE TO SHAREHOLDERS  
2. Every shareholder of an existing bank other than the Bank of Patiala shall be given such 
amount as compensation as bears to the total compensation, in res pect of each of the said banks 
calculated in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1, the same proportion as the amount of the 
paid-up capital of the share held by the shareholder bears to the total paid -up capital of that bank.  45 
 CERTAIN DIVIDENDS NOT  TO BE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT  
3. No separate compensation shall be payable for any profits or any dividend in respect  of any 
period immediately preceding the appointed day for which, in the ordinary course, profits would have 
been transferred or dividend decla red after the appointed day.  
__________  
   
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 52)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I………………………………………........, do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the 
best of my skill and ability execute and perform the dut ies required of me 
as…………………………...... (director, auditor, adviser, officer or employee, as the cast may be) of 
the State Bank of …………………………...... * and which properly relate to the office or position 
held by me in, or in relation to , the said Bank.  
 I furth er declare that I will not communicate, or allow to be communicated, to any person not 
legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the State Bank of 
…………………………..... * or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said b ank nor 
will I allow any such person to inspect or have any access to any books or documents belonging to, or 
in the possession of , the State Bank of………………………….... * and relating to the business of the 
said bank or to the business of any person having any d ealing with the said Bank.  
 
*Here enter the name of the subsidiary bank concerned.  
 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE .―[Amendments to certain enactments .]  Repealed by the Repealing 
and Amending Act, 1964  (52 of 1964 ). s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 29-12-1964 ). 
 
--------------------------The Travancore-Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1959--------------------------
1 
 THE TRAVANCORE -COCHIN VEHICLES TAXATION                                              
(AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Amendment of Schedule I . 
3. Validation of levy, collection, etc., of t axes on certain types of vehicles . 
4. Repeal.  2 
 THE TRAVANCORE -COCHIN VEHICLES TAXATION                                              
(AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION) ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1959  
[12th September , 1959 .] 
An Act further to amend the Travancore -Cochin V ehicles Taxation Act, 1950, and to provide for 
certain other connected matters.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Trav ancore -Cochin Vehicles Taxation (Amendment an d 
Validation) Act, 1959.  
2. Amendment of Schedule I .―(1) In Schedule I to the Travancore -Cochin Vehicles Taxation                 
Act, 1950  (Travancore -Cochin Act XIV of 1950) , (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), ― 
(i) in the headings to the sec ond and third columns, for the abbreviations “Rs. As. Ps. ”, the 
abbreviations “Rs. np.” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in Item No. 2, for the entry in the second column under the heading “For vehicles fitted with 
pneumatic tyres ”, the entry “7 50” shall be sub stituted;  
(iii) in Item No. 3, in sub -items ( b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i) and ( j), for the entries in the 
second column under the heading “For vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres ”, the following entries 
shall respe ctively be substituted, namely: ― 
 
“134 50 
200 50 
227 50 
267 50 
307 50 
360 50 
427 50 
504 50 
544 50”; 
 
(iv) in Item No. 4, in sub -item ( ii) (a), for the entry in the second column under the heading               
“For vehicles fitted with pneumatic tyres ”, the entry “40  0” shall be substituted.  
(2) The amendments made by sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have come into force on the                       
24th day of September, 1957.  
3. Validation of levy, collection, etc., of taxes on certain types of vehicles .―(1) Notification II ,       
No. TB2 -14667/57/P.W., dated the 24th September, 1957, issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 3 
 principal Act, enhancing the rates of tax on certain vehicles, shall be deemed to have been issued under 
the principal Act, as amended by this A ct, and to have come into force on the 1st day of October, 1957.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, all taxes levied 
or collected or purporting to have been levied or collected in pursuance of the notification referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall for all purposes be deeme d to be, and to have always been, validly levied or 
collected, and accordingly ― 
(a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the Government or by any officer of 
Government or by any other authority in connection with the levy or collection of such taxes shall for 
all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, done or taken in accordance with law;  
(b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court against the 
Government or any person or authority whatsoever for the refund of any taxes so paid; and  
(c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any taxes so paid.  
4. Repeal.―The Travancore -Cochin Veh icles Taxation (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 
1959  (Kerala Ordinance 4 of 1959), is hereby  repealed.  
 
