--------------------------The Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE ACQUIRED TERRITORIES (MERGER)  ACT, 1960  
ACT No. 64 OF 1960  
[28th December , 1960 .] 
An Act to provide for the merger into the States of Assam, Punjab and West Bengal of certain 
territories acquired in pursuance of the agreements entered into between the Governments 
of India and Pakistan and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows :― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “acquired territories ” mean so much of the territories comprised in the Indo -Pakistan 
agreements and referred to in the First Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of being 
acquired by India in pursuance of the said agreements;  
(b) “appointed day ” means such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, appoint for  the merger of the acquired territories under section 3, after causing 
the territories to be so acquired demarcated for the purpose, and different dates may be ap pointed 
for the merger of such territories into different States;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have 
the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950   (43 of 1950) ; 
(d) “Indo-Pakistan agreements ” mean the Agreements dated the 10th day of September, 1958, 
the 23rd day of Octob er, 1959 and the 11th day of January, 1960 entered into between the 
Governments of India and Pakistan, the relevant extracts of which are set out in the Second 
Schedule;  
(e) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme,  
notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of the acquired 
territory;  
(f) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State, 
means a person who, immediately before the ap pointed day, is a member of that House;  
(g) “State concerned ”, in relation to the acquired territories referred to in Part I, Part II and 
Part III of the First Schedule, means, respectively, the State of Assam, the State of Punjab and the 
State of West Ben gal; and “State Government concerned ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(h) “Union purposes ” mean the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matters 
mentioned in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
3. Merger of acquired territories .―(1) As from the appointed day, the acquired territories 
referred to in Part I, Part II and Part III of the First Schedule sha ll, respectively be included in, and 
form part of the State s of Assam, Punjab and West Bengal.  
(2) As from the appointed day, the St ate Government concerned shall, by order in the Offi cial 
Gazette, provide for the administration of the acquired territories included in that State by including 
them or any part of them in such district, sub -division, police station or other admin istrati ve unit as 
may be specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. 17th January, 1961, vide notification No. G.S.R. 74, dated 14th January, 1961, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i). 2 
 4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .―As from the appointed day, in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, ― 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Assam, after the word s “the 
Assam Tribal Areas ”, the words, figures and brackets “and the territories referred to in Part I of 
the First Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960 ” shall be inserted;  
(b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of  Punjab, after the words and 
figures “the States Reorganisation Act, 1956  (37 of 1956) ”, the words, figures and brackets “and 
the territo ries referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 
1960 ” shall be inserted;  
(c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of West Bengal, after the words, 
brackets and figures “the Bihar and West Bengal  (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956  (40 of 
1956) ”, the words, figures and brackets “and the territories referred t o in Part III of the First 
Schedule to the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960 ” shall be inserted.  
5. Construction of references to existing constituencies .―As from the appointed day, ― 
 
(a) any reference in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies  
Order, 19 56,― 
(i) to the State of Assam or Punjab or West Bengal, shall be construed as including that 
part of the acquired territory which is  included in that State;  
(ii) to any district, sub -division, police station or other administrative unit, shall be           
construed as including that part of the acquired territory, if any, which is included in that 
district, sub -division, police stat ion or other administrative unit, by order made under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 ; 
(b) any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Punjab) Order, 1951 ― 
(i) to the State of Punjab, shall be construed as including that part of the acquired territory 
which is included in that State;  
(ii) to any district, shall be construed as including that part of the acquired territory, if 
any, which is included in that district, by order made under sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(c) any reference in the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (West Bengal) Order , 1951 ― 
(i) to the State of West Bengal, shall be construed as including that part of the acquired 
territory whic h is included in that State;  
(ii) to any division or district, shall be construed as including the acquired territory, if any, 
which is included in that division or district, by order made under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 . 
6. Provisions as to sitting mem bers.―(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing any parliamentary constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the 
provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed to have been elected as from 
the appointed day to that House by that constituency as so altered.  
(2) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam or Punjab or West 
Bengal representing any assembly constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of t he 
provisions of this Act shall, notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed to have been elected as from 
the appointed day to the said Legislative Assembly by that constituency as so altered.  3 
 (3) Every sitting member of the Legislative Council of Punjab or  West Bengal representing any 
Council constituency the extent of which has been altered by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall, 
notwithstanding such alteration, be deemed to have been elected as from the ap pointed day to the said 
Legislative Counc il by that constituency as so altered.  
7. Property and assets .―(1) All property and assets within the acquired territories which 
immediately before the appointed day, are vested in Pakistan or in the Province of East Pakistan or the 
Province of West Pakistan shall, as from that day, ― 
(a) where such property and asset s are relatable to Union purposes , vest in the Union;  
(b) in any other case, vest in the State concerned in which the acquired territories are 
included.  
(2) A certificate of the Central Government signed by a Secretary to that Government shall be 
conclusiv e as to whether the purposes for which any property or assets are held, immedi ately before 
the appointed day, are Union purposes.  
8. Appropriation of moneys for expenditure in acquired territories .―(1) As from the 
appointed day, any Act passed by the Legislature of the State of Assam or Punjab or West Bengal 
before that day for the appropriation of any moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of that State to meet 
any expenditure in respect of any part o f the financial year 1960 -61, shall have effect also in relation 
to the acquired territories included in that State and it shall be lawful for the State Government 
concerned to spend any amount in respect of those territories out of the amount authorised b y such 
Act to be expenditure for any service in that State.  
(2) The Governor of the State concerned may, after the appointed day, authorise such ex penditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of that State as he deems necessary for any purpose or service in the 
acquired territories included in that State for a period of not more than three months beginning with 
the appointed day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of that State.  
9. Extension of laws .―All laws in force in the acquired territ ories immediately before the 
appointed day shall, as from that day, cease to be in force in those territories and all laws in force 
generally in the State concerned in which the acquired territories are included shall, as from that day, 
extend to, or as th e case may be, come into force in , those territories:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken before the appointed day under any law in force 
in the acquired territories shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as from the ap pointed day, 
under the corresponding law extended to, and in force, in those territories.  
10. Power to name authorities for exercising statutory functions .―The State Govern ment 
concerned, as respects the acquired territories included in that State , may, by notification in t he 
Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, on or after the appointed day, shall be 
competent to exercise such functions, exercisable under any law in force on that day in those 
territories , as may be mentioned in that notification a nd such law shall have effect accordingly.  
11. Power to remove difficulties .―(1) If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition from 
any corresponding law to any law which by virtue of section 9 shall, as from the ap pointed day, 
extend to, or come into force in , the acquired territories, the Central Government may , by ord er 
notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be neces sary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty.  
(2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act (otherwise than in relation 
to the transition f rom any corresponding law) or in connection with the administration of the acquired 
territories as a part of the State in which they are included, the State Govern ment concerned may, by 
order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.  4 
 (3) No power under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be exercised by the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government after t he expiry of three years from the 
appointed day.  
(4) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be so made as to be retrospective 
to any date not earlier than the appointed day.  
 5 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( a), 2(g), 3 and 4 ] 
PART I 
The acquired territory in rel ation to item ( 7) of paragraph 2 of the Agreement dated the 10th day 
of September,  1958.  
PART II 
The acquired territory in relation to item ( ii) and item ( iii) of paragraph 1 of the Agreement dated 
the 11th day of January, 19 60. 
PART III 
The acquired territory in relation to item ( 5) and item ( 10) of paragraph 2 of the Agreement dated 
the 10th day of September, 1958 and paragraph 4 of the Agreement dated the 23rd day of October, 
1959.  6 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( d)] 
 
1. EXTRACTS FROM THE NOTE CONTAINING THE AGREEMENT DATED  THE 10TH DAY OF                             
SEPTEMBER, 1958 . 
*  *  *    *    *  
2. As a result of the discussions, the follow ing agreements were arrived at :― 
*   *   *    *    * 
 (5)  24 Parganas  ― Khulna  
24 Parganas  ― Jessore   ―Boundary disputes . 
   
It is agreed that the mean of the two respective claims of India and Pakistan should be adopted, 
taking the river as a guide, as far as possible, in the case of the latter dispute. (Ichhamati river).  
*   *   *    *    * 
(7) Piyain and Surma river regions t o be demarcated in accordance with the relevant notificati ons, 
cadastral survey maps and, if necessary, record of rights. Whatever the result of this demarcation  
might be, the nationals of both the Gove rnments to have the facility of navigation on both these rivers.  
*   *    *    *    * 
(10) Exchange of old Coo ch Behar enclaves in Pakistan and Pakistan enclaves in India without 
claim to compensa tion for extra area going to Pakistan, is agreed to.  
*   *    *    *    * 
Signed . ( M.S.A. BAIG)        Signed . (M. J. DESAI ) 
Foreign Secretary,        Commonwealth Secretary , 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations,   Ministry of External Affairs,  
Government of Pakistan .       Government of India.  
 
NEW DELHI, SEPTEMBER, 10, 1958.  
2. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT ENTITLED “AGREED DECISIONS AND PROCEDURES TO END 
DISPUTES AND INCIDENTS ALONG THE INDO -EAST PAKISTAN BORDER AREAS ”, DATED THE 23RD DAY 
OF OCTOBER, 1959.  
*  *    *    *    * 
4. West Bengal ― East Pakistan Boundary . 
Over 1,200 miles of this boundary have alr eady been demarcated. As regard s the boundary 
between West Ben gal and East Pakistan in the areas of Mahanada, Bur ung and Karatoa rivers, it was 
agreed that demarcation will be made in acc ordance with the latest cadastral survey maps supported 
by relevant notifications and record of rights.  
 *   *    *    *   * 7 
 (Sd.) (J. G. KHARAS)       (Sd.) (M. J. DESAI)  
Acting Foreign Secretary,       Commonwealth Secretary,  
Ministry of Foreign Affairs an d Commonwealth Relations   Ministry of External Affairs,  
       Karachi,                 New Delhi . 
NEW DELHI, 
October  23, 1959.  
3. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT ENTITLED “AGREED DECISIONS AND PROCEDURES  TO END 
DISPUTES AND INCIDENTS ALONG THE INDO -WEST PAKIST AN BORDER AREAS ”, DATED THE 11TH DAY 
OF JANUARY, 1960 . 
*   *    *    *    * 
1. West Pakistan -Punjab border .― Of the total of  325 miles of the border in this sector, 
demarcation has been completed along about 252 miles. About 73 miles of the border has not yet been 
demarcated due to differences between the Governments of India and Pakistan regarding 
interpretation of the decision and Award of the Punjab Boundary Commission presented by Sir Cyril 
Radcliffe as Chairman of the Commission. These differences have  been settled along the lines given 
below in a spirit of accommodation : 
*   *    *    *    * 
(ii) Chak Ladheke  (Amritsar -Lahore border ).―The Governments of India and Pakistan agree 
that the delineation of the boundary will be as shown in the map of the Kasur Tehsil by Sir Cyril 
Radcliffe and Chak  Ladheke will in consequence fall within the territorial jurisdiction of the 
Government of Indi a. 
(iii) Ferozepur (Lahore -Ferozepur border ).―The Governments of India and Pakistan agree 
that the West Paki stan-Punjab (India) boundary in this region is along the district boundaries of 
these districts and not along the actual course of the river Sutlej . 
 *   *    *    *    * 
(Sd.) M. J. DESAI,        (Sd.) J. G. KHARAS,  
Commonwealth Secretary,       Joint Secretary,  
Ministry of External Affairs,   Ministry of Foreign Affairs  and Commonwealth Relations,  
Government of India.       Government of Pakistan.  
NEW DELHI; 
January  11, 1960.  
--------------------------The Banking Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE BANKING COMPANIES (SECOND AMENDMENT ) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1960  
[19th September , 1960.]  
An Act further to amend the Banking Companies Act, 1949.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Banking Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 1960.  
1*                              *                                   *                                        *                                   * 
10. Certain winding -up proceedings  to be governed by original provisions. —The amendments 
made in the principal Act by section 3 and section 4 shall not apply to, and in relation to, the winding -up 
of a banking company where any preliminary dividend has been paid in the course of such windi ng-up 
before the commencement of this Act, but the provisions of the principal Act as they stood immediately 
before such commencement shall apply to, and in relation to, such winding -up. 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 9 rep. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  
--------------------------The Bilaspur Commercial Corporation (Repeal) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE BILASPUR COMMERCIAL CORPORATION (REPEAL) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1960  
[18th December,  1960.]  
An Act to repeal the Bilaspur Commercial Corporation Act, 2005 Bikrami and to provide for 
certain matters incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Bilaspur Commercial 
Corporation (Repeal) Act, 1960.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed ” day means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(b) “Corporation ” means the Bilasp ur Commercial Corporation established under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3 of the Bilaspur Commercial Corporation Act, 2005 (Bilaspur Act I of 2005 Bikrami ) 
Bikrami.  
3. Repeal of Bilaspur Commercial Corporation Act, 2005 Bikrami  and dissolution of Bilaspur  
Commercial Corporation. —On the appointed  day, the Bilaspur Commercial Corporation Act, 2005 
Bikarami  shall stand repealed, and the Corporation shall stand dissolved.  
4. Consequential provisions. — On the dissolution of the Corporation, — 
(a) all properties,  funds and dues which are vested in, or ralisable by, the Corporation shall vest 
in, and be reali sable by, the Central Government; and  
(b) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Corporation shall be enforceable only against 
that Governm ent. 
 
                                                           
1. 1st April , 196 1, vide notification No. G.S.R. 419 , dated 21th March , 196 1, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,           
sec. 3( i). 
--------------------------The Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960--------------------------
1 THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION ACT, 1960  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definition s. 
PART  II 
REORGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE  
3. Formation of Gujarat State.  
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
5. Saving power s of State Government.  
 PART  III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
7. Allocation of sitting members.  
8. Bye -elections to fill vacancies.  
9. Term of  office.  
The House of the People  
10. Representation in the House of the People.  
11. Delimitation of parliamentary constituencies.  
12. Provision as to sitting member s. 
The Legislative Assemblies  
13. Strength of Legislative Assemblies.  
14. Delimitation of assembly constituencies.  
15. Allocation of members.  
16. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.  
17. Speakers and Deputy Speakers.  
18. Rules of procedure.  
19. Special provisions in relation to Gujarat Legislative Assembly.  
The Legislative Council  
20. Amendment of article 168 of the Constitution.  
21. Legislative Council of Maharashtra.  
22. Council constituencies.  
23. Provision as to certain sitting members.  
24. Special provision as to biennial elections.  2 SECTIONS  
25. Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  
Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes  
26. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order.  
27. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.  
PART  IV 
HIGH COURTS  
28. High Court for Gujarat.  
29. Judges of Gujarat High Court.  
30. Jurisdiction of Gujarat High Court.  
31. [Repealed .] 
32. Practice and procedure in Gujarat High Court.  
 33. Custody of seal of Gujarat High Court.  
34. Form of writs and other processes.  
35. Powers of Judges.  
36. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 
37. Transfer of proceeding  from Bombay High Court to Gujara t High Court.  
38. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Gujarat High Court.  
39. Interpretation.  
40. Savings.  
41. Permanent Bench of Bombay High Court at Nagpur.  
PART  V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
42. Authorisation of expenditure of Gujarat State.  
43. Reports relating to accounts of Bombay State.  
44. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Gujarat.  
45. Distribution of revenues.  
PART  VI 
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
46. Application of Part.  
47. Land and goods.  
48. Treasury and bank balances.  
49. Arrears of taxes.  
50. Right to recover loans and advances.  
51. Credits in certain funds.  
52. Special Revenue Reserve Fund in Gujarat.  
53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.  
54. Public debt.  3 SECTIONS  
55. Floating Debt.  
56. Refund of taxes collect ed in excess . 
57. Deposits , etc. 
58. Provident fund.  
59. Pensions.  
60. Contracts.  
61. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
62. Liability as guarantor.  
63. Items in suspense.  
64. Residuary provision.  
65. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
66. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
67. Certain expenditure to be cha rged on Consolidated Fund.  
PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
68. Provisions as to Bombay Stat e Electricity Board and State Warehousing Corporation.  
69. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water.  
70. Provisions as to Bombay State Financial Corporation.  
71. Amendment of Act 64 of 1950.  
72. Special provision for Bar Council of Gujarat.  
73. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942.  
74. General provision as to statutory corporations.  
75. Amendment of Act 38 of 1957.  
76. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits . 
77. Sp ecial provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases.  
78. Special provision as to income -tax. 
79. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.  
PART VIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
80. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
81. Provisions relating to other services.  
82. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.  
83. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
84. Provisions as to Bombay Public Service Commission.  
PART  IX 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  
85. Amendment of article 371 of the Constitution.  
86. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  4 SECTIONS  
87. Territorial extent of law’s.  
88. Power to adapt laws.  
89. Power to construe laws.  
90. Power to name authorities, etc ., for exercising statutory functions.  
91. Legal  proceedings.  
92. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
93. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases.  
94. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws  
95. Power to remove difficulties.  
96. Power to make rules.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECON D SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE . 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE . 
THE TENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE . 5 THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1960  
[25th April , 1960 .] 
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the State of Bombay and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of May, 1960;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meaning as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(d) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the 
whole or in a ny part of the State of Bombay;  
(e) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official Gazette ; 
(f) “population ratio ”, in relation to the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, means the ratio of 
66.31 to 33.69;  
(g) “sitting member ”, in relation to eit her House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of 
Bombay, means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that House;  
(h) “transferred territory ” means the territories which, as from the appointed day, are the 
territori es of the State of Gujarat;  
(i) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury;  
(j) any reference to a district, taluka, village or other territorial division of the State of Bombay 
shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division as recognised 
for land revenue purposes on the 1st day of December, 1959.  
PART  II 
REORGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE  
3. Formation of Gujarat State .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new State 
to be known as the State of Gujarat comprising the following territories o f the State of Bombay, 
namely:— 
(a) Banaskantha, Mehsana, Sabarkantha, Ahmedabad, Kaira, Panch -mahals, Baroda, Broach, 
Surat, Dangs, Amreli, Surendranagar, Rajkot, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Bhavnagar and Kutch districts; 
and 
(b) the villages in Umbergaon taluka of Thana district, the villages in Nawapur and Nandurbar 
talukas of West Khandesh district and the villages in Akkalkuwa and Taloda talukas of West 
Khandesh district, respectively specified in Parts I, II and III of th e First Schedule;  
and thereupon, the said territories shall cease to form part of the State of Bombay, and the residuary State 
of Bombay shall be known as the State of Maharashtra.  6 (2) The villages in Umbergaon taluka specified in Part I of the First Sched ule shall form a separate 
taluka of the same name and be included in Surat district, and the remaining villages in the said taluka 
shall be included in, and form part of, Dahanu taluka of Thana district; and the villages specified in            
Parts II an d III of the First Schedule shall respectively be included in, and form part of, Songadh taluka of 
Surat district and Sagbara taluka of Broach district.  
 4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in the First 
Schedule to the Constitution, unde r the heading “1. THE STATES”, — 
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
“4. Gujarat  The territories referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960. ”; 
(b) after entry 7, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
“8. Maharashtra  The territories specified in sub -section ( 1) of              
section 8 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956,                 
but excluding the territories referred to in               
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bombay  
Reorganisation Act, 1960. ”; and  
 
(c) entries 8 to 14 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 15 respectively.  
5. Saving power s of State Government .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall  be 
deemed to affect the power of the State Government to alter, after the appointed day, the name, extent or 
boundaries of any district, taluka or village in the State.  
 PART  III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, there 
shall be allotted 19 seats to the State of Maharashtra, and 11 seats to the State of Gujarat, in the Council 
of States, and in the Fourth Schedule to t he Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
                    “4. Gujarat                     .      .      11”; 
(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
                    “8. Maharashtra             .      .      19”; 
(c) entries 8 to 18 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 19 respectively; and  
(d) for the figures “221” the figures “224” shall be substituted.  
7. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) The twelve sitting members of the Council of States 
representing the State of Bombay, whose names are specified in Part I of the Second Schedule, and such 
six of the nine sitting members elected to represent that State at the biennial elections held for the purpose 
of filling the vacancies existing on the 3 rd day of April, 1960, as the Chairman of the Council of States 
shall by order specify shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill 
eighteen of the nineteen seats allotted to the State of Maharashtra.  
(2) The five sitting m embers of the Council of States representing the State of Bombay, whose names 
are specified in Part II of the Second Schedule, and the remaining three of the nine members elected at the 
said biennial elections shall, as from the appointed day, be deemed to  have been duly elected to fill eight 
of the eleven seats allotted to the State of Gujarat.  7 8. Bye-elections to fill vacancies .—As soon as may be after the appointed day, bye -elections shall be 
held to fill the additional seats allotted to the States of Ma harashtra and Gujarat as well as the existing 
casual vacancy in the seats allotted to the State of Gujarat.  
9. Term of office .—(1) The term of office of the sitting members and of the member chosen to fill 
the casual vacancy shall remain unaltered.  
(2) The  term of office of the member elected to fill the one additional seat allotted to the State of 
Maharashtra shall expire on the 2nd day of April, 1966.  
(3) Out of the two members elected to fill the two additional seats allotted to the State of Gujarat, the  
term of office of that member who, at the counting of votes, is last declared elected, or if an equality of 
votes is found to exist, the term of office of such one of them as the returning officer shall decide by lot, 
shall expire on the 2nd day of April,  1964 and the term of office of the other member shall expire on the 
2nd day of April, 1966.  
The House of the People  
10. Representation in the House of the People .—As from the appointed day, there shall be allotted 
44 seats to the State of Maharashtra, and  22 seats to the State of Gujarat, in the House of the People, and 
in the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) — 
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted, namely: — 
                       “4. Gujarat               .      .    22”; 
(b) after entry 7, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
                       “8. Maharashtra      .      .    44”; and  
(c) entries 8 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 23 respectively.  
11. Delimitation of parliamentary constituencies .—As from the appointed day, the First Schedule 
to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Third Schedule to this Act.  
12. Provision as to sitting member s.—Every sitting member of the House of the People representing 
a constituency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of section 11, stands allotted, with 
or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Maharashtra or to the State of G ujarat, shall be deemed 
to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so allotted.  
The Legislative Assemblies  
13. Strength of Legislative Assemblies .—As from the appointed day, the total number of seats                 
to be filled by persons chosen by direct election in the Legislative Assemblies of Maharashtra and Gujarat 
shall be 264 and 132 respectively, and in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the  People                
Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) — 
(a) for entry 4, t he following entry  shall be substituted, namely: — 
                       “4. Gujarat              .      . 132 ”; 
(b) after entry 7, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
                       “8. Maharashtra       .      . 264 ”; and  
(c) entries 8  to 13 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 14 respectively.  
14. Delimitation of assembly constituencies .—As from the appointed day, the Second Schedule to 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Fourth Schedule to this Act.  
15. Allocation of members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay 
representing a constituency which on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 14 stands 
transferred, whet her with or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Gujarat shall, as from that 
day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay and shall be deemed to have been 
elected to the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat by that constituency a s so transferred.  8 (2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay shall become members of the 
Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra and any such sitting member representing a constituency the extent 
or the name and extent of which are alt ered by virtue of the provisions of section 14 shall be deemed to 
have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra by that constituency as so altered.  
(3) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay nominated to that Assembly under  
article 333 to represent the Anglo -Indian community shall be deemed to have been nominated to represent 
the said community in the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra under that article.  
16. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—The period of five years refe rred to in clause ( 1) of            
article 172 of the Constitution shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra or Gujarat, be 
deemed to have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative 
Assembly of Bombay.  
17. Speakers and Deputy Speakers .—(1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day 
are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay shall be the Speaker and 
Deputy Speaker respectively of the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat shall choose two 
members of that Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are so 
chosen, the duties of the office of Speake r shall be performed by such member of the Assembly as the 
Govern or may appoint for the purpose.  
18. Rules of procedure .—The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in force immediately 
before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative Assembl y of Bombay shall, until rules are made 
under clause (1) of article 208, have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra or of 
Gujarat, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.  
19. Special provisions in relation to Gujarat Legislative Assembly .—(1) The total number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat to be filled by persons chosen by direct election on the expiration 
of the duration of that Assembly under section 16 or on it s dissolution shall be increased from 132 to 154; 
and accordingly, as from the date of such expiration or dissolution, in the Second Schedule to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), in entry 4, for the figures “132”, the figures “154” 
shall be substituted.  
(2) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Election Commission 
shall determine in t he manner hereinafter provided — 
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes of the 
State in the Legislative Assembly, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Constitution;  
1[(b) the assembly constituencies into which the State shall be divided, the extent of each of such 
constituenc ies and in which of them seats sha ll be reserved for the scheduled castes or for the 
scheduled tribes; and ] 
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the parliamentary 
constituencies in the State that may be necessary or expedient.  
2[(3) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the Election 
Commission shall have regard to the following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all the constituencies shall be single -member constituencies;  
(b) all the constituencies shall, as far as pra cticable, be geographically compact areas and in 
delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and public convenience; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1961, s. 6, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 9 -3-1961).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -3-1961).   9 (c) constituencies in which seats are reserved either for the scheduled castes or for the scheduled 
tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in the areas in which the population of the scheduled 
castes or, as the case may be, of the scheduled tribes is most concentrated, but in regard to schedul ed 
castes, care should be taken to distribute the reserved seats in different areas of the State.]  
(4) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the performance of its functions under 
sub-section ( 2), the Commission shall associate with itsel f such five persons as the Central Government 
shall by order specify, being persons who are members either of the Legislative Assembly of the State or 
of the House of the People representing the State:  
Provided that none of the said associate members shall  have a right to vote or to sign any decision of 
the Election Commission.  
(5) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals in regard to matters mentioned in sub -section ( 2) in the Official Gazette 
of the State together with a notice specifying the date on or after which the proposals will be further 
considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified, and for the purpose of such consideration, hold one or more public sitti ngs at such place or 
places as it thinks fit;  
(c) make an order revising to such extent as may be necessary or expedient the Schedules to the 
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, in so far as they relate to 
the State; and  
(d) send authenticated copies of the order to the Central Government and to the State 
Government.  
(6) As soon as may be after the said order is received by the Central Government or the State 
Government, it shall be laid before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative 
Assembly of the State.  
(7) An order made by the Election Commission under this section shall have the full force of law and 
shall not be called in question in any court.  
The Legislative Council  
20. Amendment of article 168 of the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in article 168 of 
the Constitution, in sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1), the word “Bombay ” shall be omitted, and after the word 
“Madras ”, the word “Maharashtra ” shall be inserted.  
21. Legislative Council of Maharashtra .—As from the appointed day, there shall be 78 seats in the 
Legislative Council of Maharashtra, and in the Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (43 of 1950), — 
(a) the entry No. 3 relating to Bombay shall be omitted and the existing entries 4 and 5 shall be 
renumbered as entries 3 and 4 respectively;  
(b) after the entry relating to Madras, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
“5. Maharashtra.. 78 22 7 7 30 12 ”. 
22. Council constituencies .—As from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council Constituencies 
(Bombay) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule.  
23. Provision as to certain sitting members .—(1) On the appointed day — 
(a) the sitting members of the Legislative Council of Bombay specified in the Sixth Schedule 
shall cease to be members of that Council; and  
(b) all other sitting members of that Council shall become members of the Legislative Council of 
Maharashtra and any such sitting member representi ng a council constituency the extent of which is 
altered by virtue of the provisions of section 22 shall be deemed to have been elected to the 
Legislative Council of Maharashtra by that constituency as so altered.  10 (2) The term of office of the members refe rred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall remain 
unaltered.  
24. Special provision as to biennial elections .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in           
section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951), no notification unde r that section 
shall be published before the appointed day for holding biennial elections to fill the seats of members of 
the Legislative Council of Bombay, retiring on the expiration of their term of office on the 24th day         
of April, 1960.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the said Council elected to fill the vacancies at the said 
biennial elections shall expire on the 24th day of April, 1966.  
 25. Chairman and Deputy Chairman .—(1) The person who immediately before the appointed day 
is the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Bombay shall be the Deputy Chairman of the 
Legislative Council of Maharashtra.  
(2) As soon as may be after the completion of the biennial elections referred to in section 24, the 
Legislative Council of Maharashtra shall choose one of its members to be the Chairman thereof.  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
26. Amendment of the Sche duled Castes Order .—As from the appointed day , the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 19 50, shall stand amended as directed in the Seventh Schedule.  
27. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order .—As from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Eighth Schedule.  
PART  IV 
HIGH COURTS  
 28. High Court for Gujarat .—(1) As from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High Court 
for the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as “the High  Court of Gujarat ”) and the High Court of 
Bombay shall become the High Court for the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the High 
Court at Bombay).  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Gujarat shall be at such place as the President may, by 
notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division courts of the High 
Court of Gujarat may sit at such other place or places in the State of Gujarat other than its principal seat 
as the Chief  Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of Gujarat, appoint.  
29. Judges of Gujarat High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the High Court of Bombay holding 
office immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on tha t day 
cease to be Judges of the High Court at Bombay and become Judges of the High Court of Gujarat.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of Gujarat shall, 
except in the case where any such person is appointed to  be the Chief Justice of that High Court, rank in 
that Court according to the priority of their respective appointments as Judges of the High Court of 
Bombay.  
30. Jurisdiction of Gujarat High Court .—The High Court of Gujarat shall have, in respect of any 
part of the territories included in the State of Gujarat, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under 
the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said 
territories by the High Court of Bomb ay. 
 [31. Power to enrol advocates, etc .]—Rep. by the Advocates Act,  1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 and the 
Schedule (w.e.f . 4-1-1963).  
32. Practice and procedure in Gujarat High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law 
in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of 
Bombay shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat, and 
accordingly, the High Court of Gujarat shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with respect to 
practice and procedure as are immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court of 
Bombay:  11 Provided that any rules or orders which are  in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Bombay shall, until varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Gujarat, apply with the necessary modifications in relation to pra ctice 
and procedure in the High Court of Gujarat as if made by that Court.  
 33. Custody of seal of Gujarat High Court .—The law in force immediately before the appointed 
day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Bombay shall, with the  necessary 
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Gujarat.  
34. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, i ssued or awarded by the High Court of 
Bombay shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 
processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Gujarat.  
35. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately befor e the appointed day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Bombay and with 
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relat ion to the High Court of Gujarat.  
36. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Bombay and the Judges 
and division courts thereof shall, w ith the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Gujarat.  
37. Transfer of proceeding  from Bombay High Court to Gujarat High Court .—(1) Except as 
hereinafter provided, the High Court at Bombay shall, as from the appointed day, have no  jurisdiction in 
respect of the transferred territory.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Bombay immediately before the appointed day as 
are certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to the 
place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard 
and decided by the High Court of Gujarat shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be transferred 
to the High Court of Gujarat.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 30, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Bombay shall have, and the High Court of Gujarat shall 
not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief 
in respect of any order passed by the High Court of Bombay before the appointed day:  
Provided that i f after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Bombay, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Gujarat, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such pr oceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order ma de by the High Court of Bombay — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Gujarat by 
virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Bombay retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section (3),  
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Bombay, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Gujarat.  
38. Right to appear o r to act in proceedings transferred to Gujarat High Court .—Any person, 
who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to 
act, in the High Court of Bombay and was authorised to appear or to act in any  proceedings transferred 
from that High Court to the High Court of Gujarat under section 37, shall have the right to appear or to 
act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Gujarat in relation to those proceedings.  12 39. Interpretation .—For the purposes of section 37 — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applicatio ns for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and references to an order  made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
40. Savings .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Gujarat of any 
provisions of  the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority havin g 
power to make such provision.  
 41. Permanent Bench of Bo mbay High Court at Nagpur .—Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 51 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956), such Judges of the High Court at Bombay, 
being not less than three in number, as the Chief Justice may from time to time nominate, shall sit at 
Nagpur in order to exercise the jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court in 
respect of cases arising in the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, 
Bhandara, Chanda and Rajura:  
Provi ded that the Chief Justice may, in his discretion, order that any case arising in any such district 
shall be heard at Bombay.  
PART  V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE  
42. Authorisation of expenditure of Gujarat State .—The Governor of Bombay may, at any time 
before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Gujarat 
as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending 
the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislat ure of the State of Gujarat:  
Provided that the Governor of Gujarat may, after the appointed day, authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Gujarat for any period not 
extending beyond  the said period  of six months.  
43. Reports relating to accounts of Bombay State .—(1) The reports of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of 
Bombay in respect of any period prior to the  appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of 
the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.  
(2) The President may by order — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolid ated Fund of Bombay on any service in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year 1960 -61 or in respect of any 
earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in 
the repo rts referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter a rising out of the said reports.  
44. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Gujarat .—The allowances and privileges of the 
Governor o f Gujarat shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause (3) of 
article 158, be such as the President may, by order, determine.  
45. Distribution of revenues .—(1) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution)                       
Act, 1957 (55 of 1957), sections 3 and 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares 
(Distribution) Act, 1957 (57 of 1957), section 4 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Special Importan ce) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), and paragraph 3 of the Constitution 
(Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, shall have effect subject to such modifications as are 
specified in the Ninth Schedule.  13 (2) The total amount payable to the State of Maharashtra u nder the enactments and Order referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) in respect of the part of the financial year 1960 -61 beginning with the appointed                  
day and in respect of the financial year 1961 -62 shall be reduced by a sum of 602 lakhs of rupee s and  
614 lakhs of rupees, respectively and the total amount payable to the State of Gujarat, under those 
enactments and Order in respect of each of those periods shall be correspondingly increased.  
PART  VI 
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
46. Application of Part .—The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of 
the assets and liabilities of the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day.  
47. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging  to the State of Bombay shall, — 
(a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of Gujarat; or  
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Maharashtra:  
Provided that where  the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of goods should be 
distributed otherwise than according to the situation of the goods, the Central Government may issue such 
directions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable distribution of the goods and the goods shall remain the 
property of the State of Maharashtra or, as the case may be, pass to the State of Gujarat, accordingly.  
(2) Any such stores of the State of Bombay as are referred to in the Tenth Schedule shall be divided 
between th e States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the manner specified therein.  
(3) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, bank notes  and currency notes.  
48. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of 
Bombay and the credit balances of that State with the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India and 
the State Bank of Saurashtra immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any oth er treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances of 
the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the appointed day:  
Provided further that if the State of Gujarat has no account on the appointed day with th e Reserve 
Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, 
direct.  
49. Arrears of taxes .—The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the State in which the property is situated, and the right to recover arrears 
of any other tax or duty shall belong to the State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or 
duty is included on the appointed day:  
Provided that any sum recovered after the appointed day in respect of any arrears of tax accruing 
during the period between the 1st day of January, 1960, and the 30th day of April, 1960 (both                       
days inclusive) under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956), or the  Bombay Sales Tax                        
Act, 1959 (Bom. Act LI of 1959), shall, after deducting the cost of collection thereof, be divided between 
the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.  
 50. Right to recover loans and adva nces.—(1) The right of the State of Bombay to recover any 
loans or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person 
in an area within that State shall belong to the State in which that area is included on tha t day.  
(2) The right of the State of Bombay to recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day 
to any person or institution outside that State shall belong to the State of Maharashtra:  
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan  or advance shall be divided between the 
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.  14 51. Credits in certain funds .—(1) Out of the investments of the State of Bombay made before the 
appointed day in the cash balance investment accou nt of the State, such securities of the value of ten 
crores of rupees, as the Central Government may by order specify, shall pass to the State of Gujarat in 
connection with the construction of a capital for that State; and the remaining investments in the said 
account shall be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.  
(2) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day in the State 
Famine Relief Fund, the State Road Fund, the Fund for Development Schemes, the Insurance Fund, the 
Bombay State Milk Fund, the Securities Adjustment Reserve Fund and any other general fund and the 
sums at the credit of that State in the Central Road Fund shall be divided between the States of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.  
(3) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day in the Dangs 
District Reserve Fund, the Port Reserve Fund, the Port Development Fund and the Anand Institute Fund 
shall pass to t he State of Gujarat and the investments in any other special fund the objects of which are 
confined to a local area shall belong to the State in which that area is included on the appointed day.  
(4) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before  the appointed day in any private 
commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have not been made or are deemed not 
to have been made from the cash balance investment account, shall pass to the State in which the 
principal seat of bu siness of the undertaking is located.  
(5) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the 
State of Bombay or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter -State body 
corporate, t he investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the State of Bombay 
made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, be 
divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the same proportion in which the assets of the 
body corporate are divided under the provisions of Part VII.  
52. Special Revenue Reserve Fund in Gujarat .—(1) Out of the investments in the cash balance 
investment account which remain with the State of Maharashtra aft er giving effect to the provisions of 
section 51 , such securities of the value of 1,420 lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order 
specify shall stand transferred to the State of Gujarat.  
(2) There shall be constituted in the State of Gujarat a  Fund to be called the Special Revenue Reserve 
Fund consisting of the securities transferred to that State under sub -section ( 1) and such other securities 
belonging to the State of Gujarat of the value of 1,419 lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may  by 
order specify.  
(3) From and out of the fund constituted under sub -section ( 2), there shall be transferred as receipts in 
the revenue account of the State of Gujarat in each of the financial years specified in column 1 of the 
following Table a sum set o ut against that year in column 2 thereof, and in the financial year 1969 -70, the 
balance, if any, remaining in that fund: — 
                                                              TABLE  
Financial year  Amount in lakhs of rupees.  
(1) (2) 
1962 -63 612 
1963 -64 585 
1964 -65 561 
1965 -66 526 
1966 -67 433 
1967 -68 340 
1968 -69 209 15 53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings .—(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of the State of Bombay shall pass to the State in which the 
undertaking is located.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State of Bombay for any such commercial 
or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall pass to 
the Sta te in which the undertaking is located.  
54. Public debt .—(1) The public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to loans raised by the issue 
of Government securities and outstanding with the public immediately before the appointed day shall, as 
from that day, be the debt of the State of Maharashtra:  
Provided that — 
(a) the State of Gujarat shall be liable to pay to the State of Maharashtra its share of the sums due 
from time to time for the servicing and repayment of the debt; and  
(b) for the purpose of det ermining the said share, the debt shall be deemed to be divided between 
the States of Maharashtra , and Gujarat as if it were a debt referred to in sub -section ( 2) or                       
sub-section (3), as the case may be.  
(2) The public debt of the Stat e of Bombay attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, 
the National Co -operative Development and Warehousing Board or the Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission or from any other source for the express purpose of re -lending the same to a spe cific 
institution and outstanding immediately b efore the appointed day shall, — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of 
the State in which the local area is included on the appointed day; or  
(b) if re -lent to the Bombay State Electricity Board, the Bombay State Road Transport 
Corporation, or the Bombay Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an inter -State 
institution on the appointed day, be divided between the States of Maharashtr a and Gujarat in the 
same proportion in which the assets of such body corporate or institution are divided under the 
provisions of Part VII.  
(3) The remaining public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to loans taken from the Central 
Government, the R eserve Bank of India or any other body corporate and outstanding immediately before 
the appointed day shall be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in proportion to the 
total expenditure on all capital works and other capital outlays incur red or deemed to have been incurred 
up to the appointed day in the territories included respectively in each of those States:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, only the expenditure on assets for which capital 
accounts have been kept shall be  taken into account.  
Explanation .—Where any expenditure on capital works or other capital outlays cannot be allocated 
between the territories included in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, such expenditure shall, for the 
purposes of this sub -section, b e deemed to have been incurred in those territories according to the 
population ratio.  
(4) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the State of Bombay for repayment 
of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investment s made from that fund shall be divided 
between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the same proportion in which the total public debt is 
divided between the two States under this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the fund in the public account of the State of 
Bombay known as the Debt Redemption and Avoidance Fund sh all be deemed to be a sinking fund.  
(5) The share of the State of Gujarat in the liability on account of public debt apportioned under                
sub-section ( 3) shall be reduced by 1,419 lakhs of rupees and the share of the State of Maharashtra in 
such liability shall be correspondingly increased.  16 (6) In this section, the expression “Government security ” means a security created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944).  
55. Floating Debt .—(1) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any floating debt of a 
Merged State shall be the liability of the State in whose territories the area of the Merged State is included 
on the appointed day.  
(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any other floating loan to provide short -term 
finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose territories the 
undertaking is located.  
56. Refund of taxes collect ed in excess .—The liability of the State of Bombay to ref und any tax or 
duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the State in which the 
property is situated, and the liability of the State of Bombay to refund any other tax or duty collected in 
excess shall be the li ability of the State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is 
included:  
Provided that the liability to refund any amount after the appointed day on account of any excess 
collected in respect of any tax accruing during the period between the 1st day of January, 1960, and the 
30th day of April, 1960 (both days inclusive) under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) or the 
Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Bom. Act LI of 1959), shall be shared between the two States of 
Maharashtra an d Gujarat according to the population ratio.  
 57. Deposits , etc.—(1) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any civil deposit or local 
fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit has 
been made.  
(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall, as 
from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit of 
the endowment is located or of the State to which the objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, 
are confined.  
58. Provident fund .—The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of the provident fund account 
of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from tha t day, be the liability of the 
State to which that Government servant is permanently allotted.  
59. Pensions .—The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of pensions shall pass to, or be 
apportioned between, the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in acco rdance with the provisions contained 
in the Eleventh Schedule.  
60. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Bombay has made any contract in 
the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed  to have 
been made in the ex ercise of the executive power, — 
(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, exclusively purposes of either the State of Maharashtra 
or the State of Gujarat, of that State; and  
(b) in any other case, of the State of Maharashtra;  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the State of Bombay, be rights or liabilities of 
the State of Maharashtra or the State of Gujarat, as the case may be:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between the State of Maharashtra and the State of Gujarat or, in default of such agreement, as the Central 
Government may by order direct.  17 (2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or  may accrue under any c ontract— 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall  have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
 61. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
State of Bombay is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of  
contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that day, are the 
territories of the State of Maharashtra or the State of Gujarat, be a liability of that State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Maharashtra, but subject to such 
financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat or, in 
default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
62. Liability a s guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of Bombay is 
liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered cooperative society or other  person, that 
liability shall, — 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or pe rson is limited to the territories which, as from 
that day, are the territories of the State of Maharashtra or of the State of Gujarat, be a liability of that 
State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Maharashtra, subject t o such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat or, in default of 
such agreement, as the Central Government may by order direct.  
63. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an  asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
64. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the State of Bombay not 
dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Maharashtra in the first 
instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Maharashtra 
and Gujarat before the 1st day of April, 1961 or, in  default of such agreement, as the Central Government 
may by order direct.  
 65. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the States of Maharashtra and 
Gujarat agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be  apportioned between 
them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon.  
66. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat becomes 
entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes sub ject to any liability, and the Central 
Government, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either of the 
States, is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those benefits should be transferred 
to, or shared with, the other State or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the other 
State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between the two States, or the other 
State shall make to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect thereof, as the Central 
Government may, after consultation with the two State G overnments, by order determine.  18 67. Certain expenditure to be cha rged on Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable either by the 
State of Ma harashtra or by the State of Gujarat to the other State or by the Central Government to either 
of those States, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the 
State by which such sums are payable or, as the case m ay be, the Consolidated Fund of India.  
PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
68. Provisions as to Bombay Stat e Electricity Board and State Warehousing                      
Corporation .—(1) The following bodies corporate constituted fo r the State of Bombay, namely: — 
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 (54 of 1948); 
and 
(b) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Agricultural Produce (Development 
and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 1956),  
shall, as from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were 
functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as 
may, from time to time, be issued  by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board or 
the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which the Board or the Corporation was 
constituted shall, in its a pplication to that Board or Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions 
and modifications as the Central Government thinks fit.  
(3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as from, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on, the 1st day of October, 1960, or such earlier date as the Central 
Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets, rights and liabilities shall be 
apportioned between the State of Maharashtra and the State of Gujar at in such manner as may be agreed 
upon between them within one year of the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case may 
be, or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may by order determine.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the State of Maharashtra or, as the case may be, the Government of the State of Gujarat 
from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a State Electricit y Board or a State 
Warehousing Corporation for that State under the provisions of the Act relating to such Board or 
Corporation; and if such a Board or Corporation is so constituted in either of the States before the 
dissolution of the Board or the Corpora tion referred to in sub -section (1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board or the 
new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any of its undertakings, 
assets, rights and liabilit ies in that State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board or Corporation, any assets, rights and liabilities 
which would otherwise have passed to that State by or under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall 
pass to the new Board or the new Co rporation instead of to that State.  
69. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and 
supply of water .—If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the 
generation or supply of electric pow er or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the execution of 
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of that 
area by reason of the fact that it is, by virtue of the provisions of Part II , outside the State in which the 
power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, 
reservoirs and other works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the Central 
Government may give  such directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other authority 
concerned for the maintenance, so far as practicable, of the previous arrangement.  19 70. Provisions as to Bombay State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Bombay State Financial 
Corporation established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951  (63 of 1951)  shall, as from the 
appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately 
before that day, subject to the provisions of thi s section and to such directions as may, from time to time, 
be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation shall include a direction that the said Act, in its app lication to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the direction.  
(3) A general meeting of the Corporation shall be convened, in accordance with the rules to be made 
in this behalf by the Central Government, by the Board thereof before the 31st day of July, 1960, or 
within such further time as the Central Government may al low, for the consideration of a scheme for the 
reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, including proposals 
regarding the formation of new corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights and liab ilities               
of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting by a resolution 
passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted to the              
Central Government for  its sanction.  
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification, the scheme sh all, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the  Central Government may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court at Bombay as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, 
and the decision of the Judge in regard to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on the 
corporation s affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing                                
the Government of the State of Gujarat from constituting, at  any time on or after the appointed day, a 
State Financial Corporation for that State under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
71. Amendment of Act 64 of 1950 .—In the Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950 ,— 
(1) in section 47A, — 
(a) in sub-section ( 1),— 
(i) for the words, letters and figures, “the whole or any part of a State in respect of which 
a Corporation was, immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, ” the words “or any 
other enactment relating to reorganisation of States, t he whole or any part of a State in respect 
of which a Corporation was, immediately before the day on which the reorganisation takes 
place, ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in the Explanation , for clause ( i), the following clause  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(i) in relation to the Bombay State Road Transport Corporation, shall mean                         
the Government of the State of Maharashtra or of Gujarat as formed under the               
Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960; ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 3), in clause ( f), after the words and figures "the States Reorganisation Act, 
1956 ”, the words “or any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States" shall be inserted;  
(2) after section 47A, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“48. Transiti onal provision relating to Bombay State Road Transport                 
Corporation .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47A, it shall be lawful for the 
Government of the State of Bombay to frame a scheme under sub -section ( 1) thereof and forward 
the same to the Central Government before the 1st day of May, 1960, and in such a case, the 
power conferred on the Central Government to make an order under sub -section ( 2) thereof may 
be exercised before that day but no order so made shall take effect til l that day. ”. 20 72. Special provision for Bar Council of Gujarat .—(1) In the Indian Bar Co uncils                               
Act, 1926 (38 of 1926), — 
(a) in section 4, — 
(i) to sub -section ( 2), the following Explanation  shall be added, namely:  — 
“Explanation .—For the purpose of election to the Bar Council for the High Court of 
Gujarat, the period of ten years aforesaid shall be computed after taking into account the 
period for which the person concerned was entitled as of right to practise in the H igh Court of 
Bombay or of Saurashtra or in the Judicial Commissioner's Court of Kutch before the 1st day 
of May, 1960. ”; 
(ii) for the proviso to sub -section ( 4), the following proviso shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Provided that the Advocates -General of West Bengal, Madras, Maharas htra and Gujarat 
shall be Chair men ex-officio , respectively, of the Bar Councils constituted for the                  
High Courts of those States. ”; 
(b) after section 5, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“5A. Ad hoc Bar Council for Gujarat High Court .—Notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act, the Chief Justice of the High Court of Gujarat shall nominate the members of the first 
Bar Council under this Act for the High Court of Gujarat and the members so nominated shall 
remain in office for a period of twelve months. ”. 
(2) The assets and liabilities of the Bar Council for the High Court of Bombay shall be divided 
between the Bar Councils for the High Court at Bombay and the High Court of Gujarat in such ma nner as 
may be agreed upon, and in default of such agreement, as may be directed by the Attorney -General for 
India.  
73. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942 .—In the Multi -unit Co -operative Societies Act, 1942, after              
section 5B, the following sect ion sha ll be inserted, namely: — 
“5C. Transitional provision relating to certain multi -unit cooperative societies .—(1) Where, 
in respect of any co -operative society specified in the Twelfth Schedule, which under the provisions 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 5A becomes a multi -unit co -operative society, the Board of Directors 
unanimously adopts any scheme for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the society, 
including proposals for the formation of new co -operative societies and th e transfer thereto of the 
assets and liabilities and employees of that society and the State Government of Bombay certifies the 
scheme at any time before the 1st day of May, 1960, then notwithstanding anything contained in            
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of the said section or any other law, regulation or 
bye-law for the time being in force in relation to that society, the scheme so certified shall be binding 
on all societies affected by the scheme, as well as the shareholde rs, creditors and employees of all 
such societies, subject to such financial adjustments as may be directed in this behalf under                     
sub-section ( 3), but no such scheme shall be given effect to before the said day.  
(2) When a scheme in resp ect of a co -operative society is so certified, the Central Registrar shall 
place the scheme at a meeting, held in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act, of 
all the persons who, immediately before the date of certification of the sch eme, were members of the 
society and the scheme may be approved by a resolution passed by a majority of the members present and 
voting at the said meeting.  
(3) If the scheme is not so approved or is approved with modifications, the Central Registrar may 
refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court at Bombay as may be nominated in this behalf by the 
Chief Justice thereof and the Judge may direct such financial adjustments to be made among the societies 
affected as he deems necessary, and the scheme sha ll be deemed to be approved subject to those financial 
adjustments.  
(4) If in consequence of the directions given under sub -section ( 3), a society becomes liable to pay 
any sum of money, the State within whose area the society is located shall be liable as  guarantor in 
respect of the payment of such money. ”. 21  74. General provision as to statutory corporations .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Ac t 
or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, 
become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, as from the appointed day, continue 
to function and operate in those areas in  respect of which it was functioning and operating immediately 
before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central Government, 
until other provision is made by law in respect of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, 
in its application to that body corporate, have effect subjec t to such exceptions and modifications as may 
be specified in the direction.  
75. Amendment of Act 38 of 1957 .—In the Inter -State Corporations Act, 1957, in the preamble, in 
section 2, in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 and in section 5, after th e words and figures “the 
States Reorganisation Act, 1956 ”, wherever they occur, the  words “or of any other enactment relating to 
reorganisation of States ” shall be inserted.  
76. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport                                      
permits .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Motor Vehicles                            
Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), a permit granted by the State Transport Authority of Bombay or any Regional 
Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed day, valid 
and effective in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in 
that area after that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and 
it shall not be necessary for any such permit to be c ountersigned by the State Trans port Authority of 
Gujarat or any Regional Transport Authority therein for the purpose of validating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Governments of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat, add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority by 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entra nce fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in the State of Gujarat under any such permit, if such 
vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from the payme nt of any such toll, entrance fees or 
other charges for its operations in the transferred territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Governments of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat, authorise the levy of any such toll, en trance fees or oth er charges, as the case 
may be.  
77. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases .—Where on 
account of the reorganisation of the State of Bombay under this Act, any body corporate constituted under 
a Central Act , State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any law relating to 
co-operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or 
reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with an y other body corporate, co -operative 
society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation, 
amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or in any such co -operative 
society or underta king, is transferred to, or re -employed by any other body corporate, or in any other co -
operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), such transfer or re -employme nt shall not entitle him to any 
compensation under that section;  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or               
re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the transfer or re -employment;  22 (b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the cooperative society or the undertaking 
where the workman is transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable                           
to pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under section 25F of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), on the basis that his service has been continuous and has 
not been interrupted by the trans fer or re -employment.  
78. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body 
corporate carrying on any business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other                  
bodies corporate which a fter the transfer carry on the same business, the losses of profits or gains 
sustained by the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to 
be carried forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of sectio n 24 of the Indian Income -tax 
Act, 1922 ( 11 of 1922), shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with 
the rules to be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share of 
loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of 
section 24 of the said Act, as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business 
carried on by it in the years in which these losses were su stained.  
79. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of the State of 
Maharashtra or, as the case may be, the Government of the State of Gujarat shall, in respect of the 
institutions specified in the Thirteenth Schedule located in that State, continue to provide facilities to the 
people of th e other State which shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were 
being provided to them before the appointed day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as 
may be agreed upon between the two State Governments befo re the 1st day of October, 1960, or, if no 
agreement is reached by the said date, as may be fixed by order of the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time before the 1st day of October, 1960, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in the Thirteenth Schedule any other institution existing on the appointed day 
in the State of Maharashtra or of Gujarat, and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be 
deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said institution the rein. 
PART VIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
80. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section , the expression “State cadre” — 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the               
Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, and  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954.  
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Po lice Service existing 
in the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day, there shall, as from that day, be two 
separate cadres, one for the State of Maharashtra, and the other for the State of Gujarat, in respect of each 
of these services.  
(3) Th e initial strength and composition of each of the State cadres shall be such as the                      
Central Government may by order determine before the appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said services borne on those cadres for the State of  Bombay 
immediately before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same service for each of 
the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in such manner and with effect from such date or dates as the 
Central Government may, by order, specif y. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, after the appointed day, of the               
All-India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951), or the rules made thereunder in relation to the State cadres of 
the said services constituted un der sub -section ( 2) and in relation to the members of those services borne 
on the said cadres.  23  81. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person who, immediately before the appointed 
day, is serving in connection with the affairs of the State of  Bombay shall, as from that day, provisionally 
continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Maharashtra, unless he is required, by 
general or special order of the Central Government, to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs  
of the State of Gujarat.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general or special 
order, determine the State to which every person provisionally allotted to the State of Maharashtra or 
Gujarat, shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take 
effect or be deemed to have taken effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to the State of 
Maharashtra or Gujarat shall, if h e is not already serving therein, be made available for serving in that 
State from such date as may be agreed upon between the two State Governments or, in default of such 
agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Governmen t may by order establish one or more Advisory Committees for the 
purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the division and integration of the services among the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.  
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to a ny person to whom the 
provisions of section 80 apply.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, after the appointed day, the operation of the 
provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the condi tions 
of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of 
any person provisionally or finally allotted t o the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat under this section shall 
not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
82. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post .—Every person who, immediately before 
the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs 
of the State of Bombay in any area which on that day falls within the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat 
shall continue to hold the same post or office in that State and shall be deemed, as from that day, to have 
been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other appropriate authority in, that 
State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authori ty, after the 
appointed day, from passing, in relation to such person, any order affecting his continuance in such post 
or office.  
83. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat as may appear to it to be necessary for 
the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State Government shall 
comply with such directions.  
84. Provisions as to Bombay Public Service Commission .—(1) The Public Service Commission for 
the State of Bombay shall, as from the appointed day, become the Public Service Commission for the 
State of Maharashtra.  
(2) The report of the Bombay Public Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in 
respe ct of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented under clause ( 2) of article 323 to the 
Governors of Maharashtra and Gujarat, and the Governor of Maharashtra shall, on receipt of such report, 
cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum ex plaining, as far as possible, as respects the cases, if 
any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non -acceptance to be 
laid before the Legislature of the State of Maharashtra and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or 
any such memorandum to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat.  24 PART  IX 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  
85. Amendment of article 371 of the Constitution .—As from the appointed day, in article 371 of 
the Constitution, in  clause ( 2)— 
(a) for the words “the State of Bombay ”, the words “the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat ” shall be 
substituted; and  
(b) for the words “the rest of Maharashtra ”, the words “and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case 
may be, ” shall be substituted.  
86. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—In section 15 of the S tates Reorganisation Act, 1956 — 
(i) in clause ( d), for the words “Bombay and Mysore ”, the words “Gujarat and Maharashtra ” shall 
be substituted; and  
(ii) in clause ( e), for the words “Madras and Kerala ”, the words “Madras, Mysore and Kerala ” 
shall be substituted.  
 87. Territorial extent of law ’s.—The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 
applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Bombay shall, until otherwise provided 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories with in 
that State immediately before the appointed day.  
88. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Maharashtra or Gujarat of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, 
before  the expiration of one year from that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of the 
law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union L ist, the Central Government, and as respects any o ther law, 
the State Government.  
89. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 88 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed d ay, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application 
in relation to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the 
substance, as ma y be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
 90. Power to name authorities, etc ., for exercising statutory functions .—The Government of the 
State of Gujarat, as respects the transferred territory may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
the authority, officer or person who, on or after the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such 
functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and 
such law shall have effect accordingly.  
91. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day, the State of Bombay is a 
party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to apportionment 
between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat under this Act, the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat which 
succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of 
this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of  Bombay as a party to those proceedings, and the 
proceedings may continue accordingly.  
92. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State of Maharashtra shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the 
transferred territory stand transferred to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the State 
of Gujarat.  25 (2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court at Bombay and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) in this section — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any  suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in the State of Gujarat means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have lain if it had been instituted after the a ppointed day; or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that State, as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed day 
by the Government of Bombay, to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
 93. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the State of 
Bombay shall, for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, 
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts has 
been transferred to the State of Gujarat.  
94. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
95. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect t o the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him 
to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulties.  
 96. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Governmen t may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a to tal period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or 1[in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so , however , that any such modifications or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule , for certain words  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  26 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1) (b)] 
TERRITORIES TRANSFERRED FROM THE STATE OF BOMBAY TO THE STATE OF GUJARAT  
(Any reference in this Schedule to a census code numb er in relation to a village means the code number 
assigned to that village in the census of  1951).  
PART I  
Umbergaon taluka of Thana District  
 
Name of Village  Census Code No.  
*Umbergaon  1 
Kalgaon  2 
Kalai  3 
Govad  4 
Tadgaon  6 
Dehari  7 
Nargol  8 
Phansa (whole)  9 
Mamakwada  11 
*Maroli  12 
Saronda  13 
Achhari  14 
Angaon  15 
Ahu 16 
Eklahare  17 
Kachigaon  18 
Bhati Karambeli  19 
Karambeli Pali  20 
Karambele  21 
*Khattalwada  22 
Ghimse Kakaria  23 
Jamburi  24 
Tembhi  25 
Tumb  26 
Dahad  27 
Nahuli  28 
Palgaon  29 
Pali 30 
Punat  31 
Borigaon Tarf Kachigaon  32 
Borlai  33 
Bhilad  34 27 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Manda  35 
Manikpur  36 
Mohan  37 
Vankas  38 
Valvada  39 
Shirgaon  40 
Sanjan  41 
Sarai  42 
Solsumba  43 
Humran  44 
Dehali  48 
Talwada  49 
Dhanoli  50 
Nandgaon  51 
Malav  52 
Anklas  55 
Zaroli  67 
Nagvas  70 
NOTE: * includes towns of the same name.  
________________  
PART II 
West Khandesh District  
Nawapur taluka  
 
Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Abhankuwa (Forest)  — 
Anandpur  2 
Babarghat  3 
Bhadbunja  6 
Bhint Bk.  11 
Bhint Khurd  12 
Chacharbunde  18 
Chadhavbunde (Forest)  — 
Chhapti  19 
Chikhli (Forest)  — 
Dhaj  27 
Haripur  35 
  28 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Jamaki  38 
Jamane  36 
Kachali  39 
Kamalapur  41 
Kataswan  48 
Khabade  50 
Kokambe (Forest)  — 
Manikpur  68 
Mirkot  70 
Mogarbara (Forest)  72 
Mograni (Forest)  — 
Nanchhal  75 
Narayanpur  77 
Nurabad  82 
Pakhari  83 
Parchuli  86 
Pethapur  89 
Sakarde (Digar)  94 
Sase 96 
Shelud  101 
Sundarpur  106 
Thuti  108 
Uchhal  111 
Vadadhe Kd.  115 
Vadapatal  117 
Zaranpada  123 
Nandurbar taluka  
Adade  2 
Anturli  5 
Arkunda (Forest)  — 
Bhilbhavali  19 
Bhiljamboli  20 
Borathe  25 
Borde  23 
Chinchode  28 
Chorgaon (Deserted)  28A 
Devhale  31 29 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Dev Mogra -Gaibi Umber  (Forest village Coupe  Nos. 1, 2 and 20 
of felling series XX and Coupe Nos. 1 
to 9 of felling series XXI).  
Gamadi  39 
Gujarpur 43 
Harduli (Digar)  44 
Hatnoor (Digar)  46 
Hingani (Digar)  48 
Kavithe  63 
Khairave Kd. T. Dhanore  65 
Khodade  69 
Kothali Budruk  77 
Lakhmikhede  79 
Lekurwali  80 
Mubarakpur  86 
Nasarpur  93 
Newale  96 
Nizar  99 
Pimplod T. Nisar  108 
Raigad  109 
Ranikhadkale (Deserted)  112A  
Sarvale  115 
Shale  119 
Shelu  121 
Sulvade  125 
Tapikhadkale  128 
Vadali  136 
Vake  143 
Velade  149 
Vyawal  154 
________________  
PART III 
West Khandesh District  
Akkalkuwa taluka  
 
Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Akkalkuwa Budruk  1 
Anghat  6A 
Barktura  15 
Bhogwad  23 30 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Chatwad  32 
Choti Korali (Deserted)  35A 
Davariamba  37 
Dogaripada (G)  44 
Gangtha  50 
Itwai  59 
Javali  63 
Kenvada  78 
Kevadamoi  79 
Khairpada  84 
Khanore  85 
Khokwad  91 
Koktipada  94 
Kolwan  95 
Langadi  104 
Medhi  111 
Nawagaon (G)  120 
Nevadi (Amba)  126 
Palaswada  132 
Pana  133 
Parod  135 
Parodi  136 
Patipada  138 
Pimparipada (R)  143 
Ranipur  150 
Ranjaniwad  152 
Rundigavan  156 
Uman  176 
Umja  175 
Umran  180 
Vadgav  189 
Zapa -amli 196 
Ziribeda  197 
Taloda taluka  
Akkalutar  1 
Amode Tarf Satone  6 31 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Amode T. Taloda  7 
Asapur  10 
Ashrave  11 
Ashte T. Budhawal  13 
Bahurupe  14 
Balade  16 
Balambe  15 
Bej 20 
Bhamsal  21 
Borikuva  25 
Chirmati  31 
Chokhiamali  33 
Fulwadi  90 
Gadid  41 
Gorase  44 
Hatode  47 
Hol 48 
Kelani  56 
Kondaraj  64 
Kukurmunde  66 
Mohammadpur (Deserted)  70A 
Matawal  73 
Mendhpur  74 
Modale  77 
Morambe  80 
Nimbhore  84 
Panibare  87 
Pati 89 
Pimplas  91 
Pisawar  93 
Rajpur  95 
Ranaichi  98 
Sadgaven  106 
Satole  108 
Torande  120 
Tulse  122 32 Name of Village  Census Code No.  
Ubhad  123 
Untavad  126 
Varpade  128 
Vesgaon  129 
Zumkati  131 
 
  33 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 7)  
PART I 
Maharashtra Members of the Council of States  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1962  
1. Shri P.N. Rajabhoj.  
2. Dr. Waman Sheodas Barlingay.  
3. Shri T.R. Deogirikar.  
4. Shri G.R. Kulkarni.  
5. Shri Dhairyashilrao Yeshwantrao Pawar.  
6. Shri M.D. Tumpalliwar  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1964.  
7. Shri Babubhai M. Chinai.  
8. Shri Ramrao Madhaorao Deshmukh.  
9. Shri Bhaurao Dewaji Khobaragade.  
10. Shri Sonusing Dhansing Patil.  
11. Shri Lalji Pendse.  
12. Shri Abid Ali.  
PART II 
Gujarat M embers of the Council of States  
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1962.  
1. Shri Jadavji Keshavji Modi.  
2. Professor Dr. Raghu Vira.  
3. “Vacant ” 
Members whose term of off ice expires on the 2nd April, 1964  
4. Shri Rohit Manushankar Dave.  
5. Shri Khandubhai K. Desai.  
6. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel.  
  34 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 11)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRST SCHEDULE  TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY  
CONSTITUENCIES  ORDER , 1956  
(1) For the heading “4-BOMBAY ”, substitute “4-GUJARAT ”. 
(2) In entry 111, after the word “Pardi ”, insert the word “Umbergaon ” and for the words “Surat 
district ”, substitute the words “Surat district; and Dangs district ”. 
(3) After  entry 111, add the following Note: — 
“Note .—Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or Dangs district or to Songadh or 
Umbergaon taluka of Surat district or to Sagbara taluka of Broach district shall be taken to mean the 
area comprised in that district  or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960. ”. 
(4) Immediately before entry 112, insert the heading “4A-MAHARASHTRA ”. 
(5) In entry 129, omit the words “Dangs district; ”. 
(6) To the note after entry 148, add: — 
“(3) Any reference in this Part  to Thana or West Khandesh district or to Nawapur, Nandurbar, 
Akkalkuwa or Taloda taluka of West Khandesh district shall be taken to mean the area comprised in 
that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960. ”. 
(7) In the Appendix — 
(a) for the heading “II-Bombay ”, substitute “II-Gujarat ”; and  
(b) immediately before the sub -heading “KOLABA District ”, insert the heading “II-A 
MAHARASHTRA ”. 
  35 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 14)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE SECOND  SCHEDULE TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY  
CONSTITUENCIES  ORDER , 1956. 
(1) For the heading “4-BOMBAY ”, substitute “4-GUJARAT ”. 
(2) In entry 103, for the words “Sagbara mahal ”, substitute “Sagbara taluka ”. 
(3) For the sub -heading “SURAT DISTRICT ” appearing before entry 106 substitute the sub -heading 
“SURAT AND DANGS DISTRICTS ”. 
(4) In entry 114, for the words “Bansda taluka; ”, substitute the words “Dangs district; Bansda 
taluka; ”. 
(5) In entry 118, for the words “Pardi taluka ” in column 3, substitute the words “Pardi and 
Umbergaon talukas ”. 
(6) After entry 118 — 
(a) add the following Note: — 
“Note.—Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or Dangs district or to Sagbara taluka of 
Broach district or to Songadh or Umbergaon taluka of Surat district shall be taken to mean the 
area comprised in that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960. ”; 
(b) after the said Note, insert an Appendix reproducing items ( 1) to ( 33) of the existing Appendix 
to Part 4 o f the Order.  
(7) Immediately before the sub -heading “GREATER BOMBAY DISTRICT ”, insert the heading “4-A 
MAHARASHTRA ” to make all following entries, together with the Appendix and Annexure, a separate 
Part for the State of Maharashtra.  
(8) Omit the asterisk mark before the sub -heading “GREATER BOMBAY DISTRICT ” and                    
foot-notes 1 and 2.  
(9) In entry 143, for the words “Dahanu and Umbergaon talukas ”, substitute the words “Dahanu 
taluka ”. 
(10) For the sub -heading immediately before entry 228, fo r the words “NASIK AND DANGS 
DISTRICTS ”, substitute “NASIK DISTRICT ”. 
(11) In entry 230, for the words “Peint and Surgana mahals ”, substitute the words “Peint mahal ”. 
(12) In entry 231, for the word “Dangs ” in column 2, substitute the word “Kalwan ” and for the words 
“Dangs district; ” in column 3, substitute the words “Surgana mahal ”. 
(13) In entry 238, for the entry in column 3, substitute “Sakri and Nandurbar talukas ”. 
(14) In entry 239, for the entry in column 3, substitute “Nawapur taluka ”. 
(15) For the Note appearing immediately after entry 339, substitute: — 
“Note.—(1) Any reference in this Part to Thana or West Khandesh district or to Dahanu taluka of 
Thana district or to Nawapur, Nandurbar, Akkalkuwa or Taloda taluka of West Khandesh district 
shall be taken to mean the area comprised in that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day 
of May, 1960.  
(2) The names of the 77 census wards of Greater Bombay are set out in item ( 1) of the Appendix; 
and a fuller description of the Assembly constituencies Nos. 1 to 21 in terms of roads, streets and 
other thoroughfares and of villages is given in item (2) of the Appendix.  
(3) The names of the villages in Banoti and Soegaon circles referred to in the Assembly 
constituencies Nos. 220 and 221, re spectively, are set out in the Annexure to this Part. ”. 36 (16) Renumber entries 119 to 339 as entries 1 to 221 respectively, and the references in those entries 
to items ( 36) to ( 71) and ( 73) to ( 79) of the Appendix as ( 3) to ( 45) respectively.  
(17) In the A ppendix,— 
(a) omit items ( 1) to ( 33) and the sub -headings thereof;  
(b) renumber items ( 34) to ( 71) as items ( 1) to ( 38) respectively;  
(c) omit item ( 72); 
(d) renumber items ( 73) to ( 79) as items ( 39) to ( 45) respectively; and  
(e) in item ( 2) as so renumbered, renumber the references to Assembly constituencies Nos. 119 to 
139 as Nos. 1 to 21 respectively.  
  37 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 22)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES  (BOMBAY ) ORDER , 1951.  
(1) In paragraph 2, for the word “Bombay ” substitute the word “Maharashtra ”. 
(2) In the Table, omit  
(a) the entries relating to — 
(i) Gujarat (Graduates) constituency;  
(ii) Gujarat (Teachers) constituency;  
(iii) Saurashtra (Local Authorities) constituency;  
(iv) Gujarat North (Local Authorities) constituency;  
(v) Gujarat South (Local Authorities) constituency; and  
(b) the word “Dangs ” wherever it occurs in column 2.  
(3) In the Table, in column 2, — 
(a) against “Vidarbha (Graduates) ” in column 1, for “Bhandara and Chanda districts, ” substitute 
“Bhandara, Chanda and Rajura districts ”; 
(b) against “Vidarbha (Teachers) ” in column 1, after “Chanda ”, insert “Rajura ”; 
(c) against “Vidarbha (Local Authorities) ” in column 1, for “Bhandara and Chanda districts, ” 
substitute “Bhandara, Chanda and  Rajura districts ”. 38 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 23( 1)] 
SITTING MEMBERS WHO SHALL CEASE TO BE MEMBERS OF THE BOMBAY  LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL  
(i) Members representing any of the five Constituencies specified in item ( 2) (a) of the Fifth 
Schedule.  
(ii) The following members elected by the members of the Bombay Legislative Assembly, namely: — 
1. Shri Dadoobhai Amin.  
2. Shri Chandrakant Chhotalal Mehta.  
3. Shri Gulam Haider Walimohammed Momin.  
4. Shrimati Madinabai A kbarbhai Nagori.  
5. Shrimati Bhanumatiben Manilal Parekh.  
6. Shrimati Anasuya Chhotalal Shah.  
7. Shrimati Jyotsnaben Bahusukhram Shukla.  
  39 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 26)  
AMENDMENTS OF THE  CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
(1) For paragraph  4, substitute: — 
“4. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and VII -A of the Schedule, to a State or to a 
district or other territorial division thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or 
other territorial division, constitu ted as from the 1st day of November, 1956; and any reference in 
Parts IV and VII -A of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof               
shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial  division constituted as from 
the 1st day of May, 1960 ”. 
(2) For Part IV, substitute the following: — 
“PART IV.—Gujarat  
1. Throughout the State except  the Rajkot Division and the district of Kutch: — 
1. Ager  
2. Bakad or Bant  
3. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, 
Harali, Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, 
Rohidas, Rohit or Samgar  
4. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmiki, Korar or Zadmalli  
5. Chalvadi or Channayya  
6. Chenna Dasar or Holaya Dasar  
7. Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya  
8. Garoda or Garo  
9. Halleer  
10. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar or Halasvar  
11. Holar or Valhar  
12. Holaya or Holer  
13. Lingader  
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu  
15. Mahyavansh i, Dhed, Vankar or Maru Vank ar 
16. Mang, Matang or Minimadig  
17. Mang -Garudi  
18. Meghval or Menghvar  
19. Mukri  
20. Nadia or Hadi  
21. Pasi  
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma or Rawat  
23. Tirgar or Tirbanda  
24. Turi.  40 2. In the district of Dangs and Umber gaon taluka of Surat district: — 
Mochi.  
3. In the Rajkot Division: — 
1. Bawa (Dedh) or Dedh -Sadhu  
2. Bhangi or Rukhi  
3. Chamadia  
4. Chamar, Nalia or Rohit  
5. Dangashia  
6. Garoda  
7. Garmatang  
8. Hadi  
9. Meghwal  
10. Senva  
11. Shemalia  
12. Thori  
13. Turi  
14. Turi -Barot or Dedh -Barot  
15. Vankar, Dhedh or Antyaj.  
4. In the district  of Kutch:— 
1. Bhangi  
2. Chamar  
3. Garoda  
4. Meghwal  
5. Turi  
6. Turi -Barot.  
(3) After P art VII, insert the following: — 
“PART VII-A.—Maharashtra  
1. Throughout the State except  the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, 
Bhandara, Chanda, Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nande d, Bhir, Osmanabad and Rajura: — 
1. Ager  
2. Baked or Bant  
3. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar, Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, H arali, 
Khalpa, Machigar, Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, 
Rohidas, Rohit or Samgar  
4. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, Malkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmiki, Korar or Zadmalli  
5. Chalvadi or Channayya  
6. Chenna Dasar or Hola ya Dasar  
7. Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya  41 8. Garoda or Garo  
9. Halleer  
10. Halsar, Haslar, Hulasvar or Halasvar  
11. Holar or Valhar  
12. Holaya or Holer  
13. Lingader  
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu  
15. Mahyavanshi, Dhed, Vankar or Maru Vankar  
16. Mang, Matang or Minimadig  
17. Mang -Garudi  
18. Meghval or Menghvar  
19. Mukri  
20. Nadia or Hadi  
21. Pasi  
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma or Ravat  
23. Tirgar or Tirbanda  
24. Turi  
2. In the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha , Nagpur, Bhandara and Chanda: — 
1. Bahna or Bahana  
2. Balahi or Balai  
3. Basor, Burud, B ansor or Bansodi  
4. Chamar, Chamari  Mochi, Nona, Rohidas, Ramnami, Satnam i Surjabanshi or Surjyaramnami  
5. Dom or Dumar  
6. Dohor  
7. Ganda or Gandi  
8. Ghasi or Ghasia  
9. Kaikadi  
10. Katia or Patharia  
11. Khatik, Chikwa or Chikvi  
12. Madgi  
13. Mahar or Mehra  
14. Mang, Dankhni -Mang, Mang Mahashi, Mang -Garudi, Madari, Garudi or Radhe -Mang  
15. Mehtar or Bhangi  
16. Sansi.  
3. In the districts o f Akola, Amravati and Buldana: — 
    Bedar.  
4. In the district of Bhandara: — 
1. Chadar  
2. Holiya.  42 5. In the districts of Bhandara and Buldana: — 
Khangar, Kanera or Mirdha.  
6. In the districts of A mravati, Bhandara and Buldana: — 
Kori.  
7. In the districts of Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nande d, Rajura, Bhir and Osmanabad: — 
1. Anamuk  
2. Aray (Mala)  
3. Arwa Mala  
4. Beda (Budga) Jangam  
5. Bindla  
6. Byagara  
7. Chalvadi  
8. Chambhar  
9. Dakkal (Dokkalwar)  
10. Dhor  
11. Ellamalwar (Yellammalawandlu)  
12. Holeya  
13. Holeya Dasari  
14. Kolupulvandlu  
15. Madiga  
16. Mahar  
17. Mala  
18. Mala Da sari 
19. Mala Hannai  
20. Malajangam  
21. Mala Masti  
22. Mala Sale (Netkani)  
23. Mala Sanyasi  
24. Mang  
25. Mang Garodi  
26. Manne  
27. Mashti  
28. Mehtar  
29. Mitha Ayyalvar  
30. Mochi  
31. Samagara  
32. Sindhollu (Chindollu) ”. 43 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) ORDER , 1960  
(1) For paragraph 3, substitute: — 
“3. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and VII -A of the Schedule, to a State or to a 
district or other territorial division thereof , shall be construed  as a reference to the State, district or 
other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st day of November, 1956; and any reference in 
Parts IV and VII -A of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall 
be cons trued as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division, constituted as from the  
1st day of May, 1960. ” 
(2) For Part  IV, substitute the following: — 
“PART IV.—Gujarat  
1. Throughout the State except  the Rajkot Divis ion and the district of Kutch:— 
1. Barda  
2. Bavacha or Bamcha  
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri Bhil, Dungri, Garasia, Mewasi Bhil, Rawal Bhil, 
Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, Bhilala, Pawra, Vasava and Vasave  
4. Chodhara  
5. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi  
6. Dhodia  
7. Dubla, including Talavia or Halpati  
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Mavchi, Padvi, Vasava, Vasave and Valvi  
9. Gond or Rajgond  
10. Kathodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor Katkari and Son Kathodi or Son Katkari  
11. Kokna, Kokni, Ku kna 
12. 1[Koli Dhor ], Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha  
13. Naikda or Nayaka, including Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia Nayaka, Mota Nayaka and Nana 
Nayaka  
14. Pardhi, including Advichincher and Phanse Pardhi  
15. Patelia  
16. Pomla  
17. Rathawa  
18. Varli  
19. Vitolia, Kotwalia or Barodia  
2. In Dangs district, Kunbi.  
3. In Surat District: — 
(a) in Umbergaon taluka, Koli Malhar, Ko hi Mahadev or Dongar Koli;  
(b) in th e other talukas, Chaudhri  
4. In the Rajkot Division, Siddi.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “Koli, Dhor”  (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  44 5. In Nasses area in the for ests of Alech, Gir a nd Barada: — 
1. Bharwad  
2. Charan  
3. Rabari  
6. In Surendranagar district: — 
Padhar . 
7. In Kutch district: — 
1. Bhil  
2. Dhodia  
3. Koli  
4. Paradhi  
5. Vaghri  
(3) After P art VII, insert the following: — 
“PART VII-A.—Maharashtra  
1. Throughout the State except  the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, 
Bhandara, Chanda, Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bhir, Osmanabad and Rajura: — 
1. Barda  
2. Bavacha or Bamcha  
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri Bhil, Dungri Garasia, Mewasi  Bhil, Rawal Bhil, 
Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, Bhilala, Pawra, Vasava and Vasave  
4. Chodhara  
5. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi  
6. Dhodia  
7. Dubla, including Talavia or Halpati  
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Mavchi, Padvi, Vasav a, Vasave and Va lvi 
9. Gond or Rajgond  
10. Kathodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor Katkari and Son Kathodi or Son Katkari  
11. Kokna, Kokni, Kukna  
12. 1[Koli Dhor ], Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha  
13. Naikda or Nayaka, including, Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia Nayaka, M ota Nayaka and Nana 
Nayaka  
14. Pardhi, including Advichincher and Phanse Pardhi  
15. Patelia  
16. Pomla  
17. Rathawa  
18. Varli  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1964, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “Koli, Dhor” (w.e.f. 29 -12-1964).  45 19. Vitolia, Kotwalia or Barodia  
2. In Thana district: — 
Koli Malhar  
3. (a) In Ahmednagar district: — 
Akola, Rahuri and Sangamner talukas.  
(b) In Kolaba district: — 
Karjat, Khalapur, Alibagh, Mahad and Sudhagad talukas.  
(c) In Nasik district: — 
Nasik, Niphad, Sinnar, Chandor, Baglan, Igatpuri, Dindori 
and Kalvan talukas and Surgana and Peint Mahals.   
 
 
 
 
   Koli Mahad av or Dongar Koli.  
(d) In Poona district: — 
Ambegaon, Junnar, Khe d, Mawal and Mulshi talukas and 
Velhe Mahal.  
(e) In Thana district: — 
Thana, Murbad, Bhivandi, Bassein, Wada, Shahapur, 
Dahanu, Palghar, Jawhar and Mokhada talukas.  
4. (a) In Ahmednagar district: — 
Akola, Rahuri and Sangamner talukas.  
(b) In Kolaba district: — 
Karjat, Khalapur, Pen, Panvel and Sudhagad talukas  
    and Matheran.  
(c) In Nasik district: — 
Igatpuri, Nasik and Sinnar talukas.  
(d) In Poona district: — 
Ambegaon, Junnar, Khed and Mawal talukas.  
(e) In Thana district: — 
Thana, Kalyan, Murbad, Bhivandi, Bassein, Wada, 
Shahapur, Palghar, Jawhar and Mokhada talukas.   
 
 
 
Thakur or Thakar including 
Ka Thakur, Ka Thakar, Ma 
Thakur and Ma Thakar.  
5. In ( 1) Melghat tahsil of Amravati district, ( 2) Gadchiroli and Sironcha tahsils of the Chanda 
district, ( 3) Kelapur, Wani and Yeotmal tahsils of the Yeotmal district: — 
1. Andh  
2. Baiga  
3. Bhaina  
4. Bharia -Bhumia or Bhuinhar -Bhumia including Pando  
5. Bhattra  
6. Bhil  
7. Bhunjia  
8. Binjhwar  
9. Birhul or Birhor  
10. Dhanwar  46 11. Gadaba or Gadba  
12. Gond, including — 
Arakh or Arrakh  
Agaria  
Asur  
Badi Maria or Bada Maria  
Bhatola  
Bhimma  
Bhuta, Koilabhuta or Koilabhuti  
Bhar  
Bisonhorn Maria  
Chota Maria  
Dandami Maria  
Dhuru or Dhurwa  
Dhoba  
Dhulia  
Dorla  
Gaiki  
Gatta or Gatti  
Gaita  
Gond Gowari  
Hill Maria  
Kandra  
Kalanga  
Khatola  
Koitar  
Koya  
Khirwar or Khirwara  
Kucha Maria  
Kuchaki Maria  
Madia (Maria)  
Mana  
Mannewer  
Moghya or Mogia or Monghya  
Mudia (Muria)  
Nagarchi  
Nagwanshi  47 Ojha  
Raj 
Sonjhari Jhareka  
Thatia or Thotya  
Wade Maria or Vade Maria  
13. Halba or Halbi  
14. Kamar  
15. Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cherwa, Rathia Tanwar or Chattri  
16. Khairwar  
17. Kharia  
18. Kondh or Khond or Kandh  
19. Kol  
20. Kolam  
21. Korku, including Bopchi, Mouasi, Nihal or Nahul and Bondhi or Bondeya  
22. Korwa, inc luding Kodaku  
23. Majhwar  
24. Munda  
25. Nagesia or Nagasia  
26. Nihal  
27. Oraon, including Dhanka and Dhangad  
28. Pardhan, Pathari and Saroti  
29. Pardhi, including Bahelia or Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli Pardhi, Phans Pardhi, Shikari, 
Takankar and Takia  
30. Parja  
31. Saonta or Saunta  
32. Sawar or Sawara  
6. In the districts of Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Rajura, Bhil and Osmanabad: — 
1. Andh  
2. Bhil  
3. Gond (including Naikpod and Rajgond)  
4. Kolam (including Mannervarlu)  
5. Koya (including Bhine Koya and Rajkoya)  
6. Pardhan  
7. Thoti.  
  48 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 45( 1)] 
I—MODIFIED FORM OF SECTION  3 OF THE UNION  DUTIES OF EXCISE  (DISTRIBUTION ) ACT, 1957  
(1) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of 
May, 1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely: —  
In the Table below section 3, for the entry relating to Bombay, the 
following entries shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Maharashtra   
 
8.07 
Gujarat  4.10”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under section 3 to Bombay in the first month 
of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and Gujarat during 
the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the distributable Union du ties of excise shall be 
deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, respectively, of the distributable Union duties of excise for 
that financial year.  
II—MODIFIED FORM OF SECTIONS 3 AND 5 OF THE ESTATE  DUTY AND TAX ON RAILWAY  
PASSENGER  FARES  (DISTRIBUTION ) ACT, 1957  
A—Distribution of estate duty  
(1) Section 3 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, 
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
 
In clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2), for the entry relating to Bombay, the 
following entries  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Maharashtra   
 
8.97 
Gujarat  4.55”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 to Bombay 
in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and 
Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the total amount falling to be 
distributed shall be deemed to be one -twelfth and el even-twelfths, respectively, of the total amount falling 
to be distributed for that financial year.  
B—Distribution of tax on railway passenger fares  
(1) Section 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, 
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
 
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries  shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“Maharashtra   
 
10.80  
Gujarat  5.48”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under section 5 to Bombay in the first month 
of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and Gujarat during 
the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net proceeds of the tax on railway  passenger fares 
shall be deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of such tax for 
that financial year.  49 III—MODIFIED FORM OF THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF EXCISE                             
(GOODS OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE) ACT, 1957  
A—Distribution of additional duties on sugar  
(1) In the Second Schedule, the Table at the end of Part I shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, 
have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall  be substituted , namely: — 
“Maharashtra  8.07 162 13.37  
Gujarat  4.10 83 6.80”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under Part I of the Second Schedule to 
Bombay in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to 
Maharashtra and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net proceeds of 
the additional duties in respect of sugar shall be deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, 
respectively, of the net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; and in respect of that financial year, 
the sums specified in the third column of the Table shall be deemed to have been replaced by 20 for the 
first month in rel ation to Bombay and by 149 for the remaining eleven months in relation to Maharashtra 
and by 76 in relation to Gujarat.  
B—Distribution of additional duties on tobacco  
(1) In the Second Schedule, the Table below paragraph 4 shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, 
have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
For the entries relating to Bombay, the following entries  shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“Maharashtra   
8.07  
76  
11.54  
Gujarat  4.10 39 5.87”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the  amount payable under paragraph 4 to Bombay in the first 
month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and Gujarat 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial year, the net proceeds of the additional duti es on 
tobacco shall be deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of such 
duties for that financial year; and in respect of that financial year, the sums specified in the third column 
of the Table shall be deemed to hav e been replaced by 10 for the first month in relation to Bombay and by 
70 for the remaining eleven months in relation to Maharashtra, and by 35 in relation to Gujarat.  
C—Distribution of additional duties on textiles  
(1) In the Second Schedule, the Table at  the end of Part III shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, 
have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries  shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“Maharashtra  399 10.91  
Gujarat  202 5.55”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under Part III of the Second Schedule to 
Bombay in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to 
Maharashtra and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of th at financial year, the net proceeds of 
the additional duties in respect of cotton fabrics, rayon or artificial silk fabrics and woollen fabrics shall 
be deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of such duties for that  
financial year; and in respect of that financial year the sums specified in the second column of the Table 
shall be deemed to have been replaced by 50 for the first month in relation to Bombay and by 365 for the 
remaining eleven months in relation to Maha rashtra, and by 185 in relation to Gujarat.  50 IV—MODIFIED FORM OF PARAGRAPH 3 OF THE CONSTITUTION ( DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES)                           
NO. 2 ORDER , 1957  
(1) Paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, shall, as from the 
1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
In the Table at the end of paragraph 3, for the entry relating to Bombay, the 
following entries  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Maharashtra  10.59  
Gujarat  5.38”. 
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under paragraph 3 to Bombay in the first 
month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and Gujarat 
during the remaining eleven months of that financial yea r, the net proceeds of taxes on income shall be 
deemed to be one -twelfth and eleven -twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of taxes on income for 
that financial year.  
  51 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 47( 2)] 
1. Stores held for specific purposes such as for use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops 
or undertakings or on particular works under construction shall pass to the State in which such 
institutions, workshops, undertakings or works are located on the appointed day.  
2. Stores relat ing to Sachivalaya and offices of Heads of Departments having, immediately before the 
appointed day, jurisdiction over the whole of the State of Bombay shall remain the property of the State 
of Maharashtra:  
Provided that typewriters, duplicators, clocks an d vehicles shall be divided between the States of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.  
3. All other unissued stores, pooled stores, and stores purchased on or after the 1st July, 1959, of any 
class shall be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in proportion to the total stores of 
that class purchased in the period of three years ending with the 31st March, 1960 for the territories 
included respectively in each of those States:  
Provided that where such proportion cannot  be ascertained in respect of any class of stores or where 
the value of any class of such stores does not exceed Rs. 10,000, that class of stores shall be divided 
between the two States according to the population ratio.  
  52 THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See sectio n 59)  
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat 
shall, in respect of pensions granted by the State of Bombay before the appointed day, pay the pen sions 
drawn in its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection 
with the affairs of the State of Bombay who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before 
the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be 
the liability of the State of Maharashtra.  
3. There shall be computed in respect of the part of the financial year commencing on the appointed 
day and in respect of ea ch subsequent financial year, the total payments made in each of the States of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat in respect of pensions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2; that total, representing 
the liability of the State of Bombay in respect of pensions, shall be apportioned between the States of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat in the population ratio, and the State paying more than its due share shall be 
reimbursed the excess amount by the other State.  
4. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed 
day in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of 
the State which grants him the pension; but the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any 
such of ficer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay shall be 
allocated between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the population ratio, and the Government 
which grants the pension shall be entitled to receive from the  other Government its share of this liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day for some period in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Maharashtra and for some period in connection with the affairs of the  State of 
Gujarat, the Government other than the one granting the pension shall reimburse to the Government by 
which the pension is granted on amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to his 
service after the appointed day the same ratio as the period of his qualifying service after the appointed 
day under the reimbursing State bears to the total qualifying service after the appointed day reckoned for 
the purposes of pension.  
5. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed as in cluding a reference to the 
commuted value of the pension.  53 THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 73)  
1. The Bombay State Cooperative Bank Limited.  
2. The Bombay State Cooperative and Mortgage Bank Limited.  
3. The Bombay State Cooperative Housing Finance Society.  
4. The Bombay State Industrial Cooperative Association.  
5. The Bombay State Cooperative Union.  
6. Mumbai Rajya Sahakari Karkhana Sangh.  
  54 THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 79)  
1. J. J. College of Architecture, Bombay.  
2. J. J. Institute  of Applied Art, Bombay.  
3. School of Printing Technology, Bombay.  
4. Government Tanning Institute, Bombay.  
5. Government Leather Working School, Bombay.  
6. Veterinary College, Bombay.  
7. R.  A. Podar Medical College (Ayurvedic), Bombay.  
8. C.  E. M. Dental College, Bombay.  
9. Haffkine Institute, Bombay.  
10. Forensic Science Laboratory and Chemical Analysers Department, Bombay.  
11. State Fire School, Ghatkopar, Bombay.  
12. Secretariat Record Office, Bombay.  
13. Mathematical Instruments Depot and Workshop, Bom bay. 
14. Drugs Testing Laboratory, Bombay.  
15. Training Institute for Physical Education, Kandivli, Bombay.  
16. J.  J. School of Art, Bombay.  
17. S.  T. College, Bombay.  
18. Jail Officers ’ Training School, Yeravda, Poona.  
19. Alienation Office, Poona.  
20. Government Photozinco Press, Poona.  
21. Government Photo Registry, Poona.  
22. Institute of Veterinary Biological Products, Poona.  
23. Police Wireless Training Centre, Dapodi, Poona.  
24. Public Health Institute, Nagpur.  
25. Vaccine Institute, Nagpur.  
26. Bo mbay State Hemp Drugs and Opium Packing and Supply Depot, Ahmedabad.  
27. Police Training School, Nasik.  
 
--------------------------The British Statutes (Application to India) Repeal Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE BRITISH STATUTES (APPLICATION TO INDIA) REPEAL ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1960  
[26th December, 1960 .] 
An Act to repeal certain British statutes in their application to India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the British Statutes (Application to India) Repeal Act, 1960.  
2. Repeal of certain British statutes in their application to India .—The British statues specified in 
the Schedule, in so far as they extend to, and operate as part of the law of, India or any part thereof, are 
hereby repealed.  
3. Savings .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the repeal by this Act of any B ritish 
statute shall not affect the operation of any such statute in relation to India and to persons and things in 
any way belonging to or connected with India in any country to which the India (Consequential 
Provision) Act, 1949 (12, 13 and 14 Geo VI, c.  92), extends.  
  
  2 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
BRITISH STATUTES REPEALED IN THEIR APPLICATION TO INDIA  
 
Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
1 1297  Magna Carta (25 Edw.  1, c. 1 and 29).  
2 1331  Unlawful attachment (5  Edw.  3, c. 9). 
3 1354  Non-condemnation without due process (28  Edw. 3, c. 3). 
4 1540  The Marriage Act, 1540 (32 Hen.  8, c. 38). 
5 1551 -2 The Sale of Office s Act, 1551 (5  & 6 Edw.  6, c. 16). 
6 1677  The Statute of Frauds (29 Cha.  2, c. 3). 
7 1679  The Habeas Corpus Act, 1679 (31 Cha.  2, c. 2). 
8 1688  Coronation Oath ( I Will.  & Mar., c.  6). 
9 1698  Governors of plantations ( II Will.  3, c. 12). 
10 1700  The Act of Settlement (12 & 13 Will.  3, c. 2). 
11 1702  Demise of the Crown, 1702 ( I Anne, c.  2).  
12 1707  The Succession to the Crown Act, 1707 (6  Anne, c.  41). 
13 1782  The House of Commons (Disqualification) Act, 1782 (22  Geo.  3, c. 45). 
14 1802  The Criminal Jurisdiction Act, 1802 (42  Geo.  3, c. 85). 
15 1809  The Sale of Office s Act, 1809 (49 Geo.  3, c. 126).  
16 1812  The Prisoners of War (Escape) Act, 1812 (52 Geo.  3, c. 156).  
17 1820  The Divorce Bills Evidence Act, 1820 ( 1 Geo. 4, c. 101). 
18 1824  The Salve Trade Act, 1824 ( 5 Geo. 4, c. 113).  
19 1830  The I llusory  Appointments Act, 1830 ( II Geo. 4 & 1 Will. 4, c. 46). 
20 1830  The Debts Recovery Act, 1830 ( II Geo.  4 & I Will.  4, c. 47). 
21 1830  The Infants ’ Property Act, 1830 ( II Geo.  4 & I Will.  4, c. 65). 
22 1830  The Colonial Offices Act, 1830 ( I Will.  4, c. 4). 
23 1831  The Evidence on Commission Act, 1831 ( I Will.  4, c. 22). 
24 1833  The Judicial Committee Act,  1833  (3 & 4 Will.  4, c. 41). 
25 1833  The Government of India Act,  1833 (3  & 4 Will.  4, c. 85). 
26 1834  The Superannuation Act,  1834 (4  & 5 Will.  4, c. 24). 
27 1840  The Debtors (Ireland) Act,  1840  (3 & 4 Vict.,  c. 105).  
28 1843  The (Colonies) Evidence Act,  1843 (6  & 7 Vict., c.  22). 
29 1843  The Judicial Committee Act, 1843 (6  & 7 Vict., c. 38). 
30 1843  The Slave Trade Act, 1843 (6  & 7 Vict., c.  98). 
31 1844  The Judicial Committee Act, 184 4 (7 & 8 Vict., c. 69). 3 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
32 1847  The Naval Deserters Act,  1847 ( 10 & 11 Vict., c.  62). 
33 1849  The Portuguese Deserters Act,  1849 (12  & 13 Vict., c.  25). 
34 1851  The Lunatics ’ Removal (India) Act,  1851 (14  & 15 Vict., c.  81). 
35 1851  The Court of Chancery Act,  1851 (14  & 15 Vict., c.  83). 
36 1853  The Coinage (Colonial Offences ) Act, 1853  (16 & 17 Vict., c.  48). 
37 1854  The Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act,  1854               
(17 & 18 Vict.,  c. 80). 
38 1856  The Foreign Tribunals Evidence Act, 1856 (19  & 20 Vict., c.  113).  
39 1858  The Government of India Act,  1858  (21 & 22 Vict ., c. 106).  
40 1859  The Evidence by Commission Act, 1859 (22 Vict., c.20).  
41 1859  The Royal Naval Reserve ( Volunteer) Act,  1859 (22  & 23 Vict., c.  40). 
42 1860  The Indian Securities Act,  1860 (23  & 24 Vict., c.  5). 
43 1861  The Malicious Damage Act,  1861 (24  & 25 Vict., c.  97). 
44 1861  The Wills Act, 1861 (24  & 25 Vict., c.  114).  
45 1861  The Domicile Act,  1861 (24  & 25 Vict., c.  121).  
46 1862  The India Stock Transfer Act,  1862 (25  & 26 Vict., c.  7). 
47 1862  The Habeas Corpus Act, 1862 (25  & 26 Vict., c. 20). 
48 1862  The Fine Arts Copyright Act,  1862 (25  & 26 Vict., c.  68). 
49 1863  The Colonial Letters Patent Act,  1863 (26  & 27 Vict., c.  76).`  
50 1866  The Indian Military Funds Act, 1866  (29 & 30 Vict., c.  18). 
51 1866  The Indian Prize Money Act, 1866 (29  & 30 Vict., c.  47). 
52 1868  The Indian Railway Companies Act, 1868 (31 & 32 Vict., c.  26). 
53 1868  The Documentary Evidence Act, 1868  (31 & 32 Vict., c.  37). 
54 1868  The Indian Prize Money Act, 1868 (31 & 32 Vict., c. 38). 
55 1869  The East India Irrigation and Canal Act, 1869 (32 & 33 Vict., c.  7). 
56 1870  The Coinage Act, 1870 (33 & 34 Vict., c.  10). 
57 1873  The East India Stock Dividend Redemption Act, 1873 (36 & 37 Vict., c.  17). 
58 1873  The Indian Railway Companies Act, 1873 (36 & 37 Vict., c.  43). 
59 1873  The Salve Trade (East African Courts) Act, 1873 (36 & 37 Vict., c.  59). 
60 1873  The Salve Trade Act, 1873 (36 & 37 Vict., c.  88). 
61 1874  The East India Annuity Funds Act, 1874 (37 &  38 Vict., c.  12). 
62 1876  The Royal Titles Act, 1876 ( 39 & 40 Vict., c.  10). 
63 1876  The Statute Law Revision (Substituted Enactments) Act, 1876                        
(39 & 40 Vict., c.  20). 
64 1876  The Customs Consolidation Act, 1876 (39 & 40 Vict., c.  36). 
65 1876  The Salve Trade Act, 1876 (39 & 40 Vict., c.  46). 4 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
66 1878  The Dentists Act, 1878 ( 41 & 42 Vict., c.  33). 
67 1878  The Elders ’ Widows’ Found (India) Act, 1878 ( 41 & 42 Vict., c.  47). 
68 1879  The Registration of Births, Deaths an d Marriages (Army) Act, 1879               
(42 &  43 Vict., c.  8). 
69 1879  The Slave Trade (East African Courts) Act, 1879 (42 & 43 Vict., c.  38). 
70 1879  The Indian Guaranteed Railways Act, 1879 (42 & 43 Vict., c.  41). 
71 1881  The Judicial Committee Act , 1881 (44 & 45 Vict., c.  3). 
72 1881  The India Office (Sale of Superfluous Land) Act, 1881 (44 & 45 Vict., c.  7). 
73 1881  The Army Act, 1881 (44 & 45 Vict., c.  58). 
74 1882  The Documentary Evidence Act, 1882 (45 & 46 Vict., c.  9). 
75 1882  The Bombay Civil Fund Act, 1882 (45 & 46 Vict., c.  45). 
76 1882  The Reserve Fo rces Act, 1882 ( 45 & 46 Vict., c.  48). 
77 1884  The Naval Discipline Act, 1884 (47 & 48 Vict., c. 39). 
78 1884  The Criminal Lunatics Act, 1884 (47  & 48 Vict ., c. 64). 
79 1885  The East India Unclaimed Stock Act, 1885 (48  & 49 Vict., c. 25). 
80 1885  The Indian Army Pension Deficiency Act, 1885  (48 & 49 Vict., c.  67). 
81 1885  The Evidence by Commission Act, 1885 (48  & 49 Vict., c.  74). 
82 1886  The Medical Act, 1886 (49  & 50 Vict., c.  48). 
83 1887  The Conversion of India Stock  Act, 1887 (50 &  51 Vict., c.  II). 
84 1887  The British Settlements Act, 1887 (50  & 51 Vict., c.  54). 
85 1887  The Superannuation Act, 1887 (50  & 51 Vict., c.  67). 
86 1887 The Appellate Jurisdiction Act,  1887 (50 &  51 Vict., c.  70). 
87 1889  The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 1889 (52 & 53 Vict., c.  10). 
88 1890  The Commissioners for Oaths Amendment Act, 1890 (53 & 54 Vict., c.  7). 
89 1890  The Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1890 (53 & 54 Vict., c.  37). 
90 1891  The Commissioners for Oaths Act, 1891 (54 & 55 Vict., c.  50). 
91 1891  The Coinage Act, 1891 (54 &  55 Vict., c.  72). 
92 1892  The Foreign Marriage Act, 1892 (55 & 56 Vict., c.  23). 
93 1892  The Superannuation Act, 1892 (55  & 56 Vict., c.  40). 
94 1893  The Regimental Debts Act, 1893 (56 & 57 Vict., c.  5). 
95 1893  The Trustee Act, 1893 (56 &  57 Vict., c.  53). 
96 1894  The Trustee Act, 1893, Amendment Act, 1894 (57 &  58 Vict., c.  10). 
97 1894  The Indian Railways Act, 1894 (57 & 58 Vict., c.  12). 
98 1894  The Finance Act, 1894 (57  & 58 Vict., c.  30). 
99 1894  The Uniforms Act,  1894 (57 &  58 Vict., c.  45). 5 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
100 1895  The Documentary Evidence Act, 1895 (58 &  59 Vict., c.  9). 
101 1895  The Judicial Committee Amendment Act, 1895 ( 58 & 59  Vict., c.  44). 
102 1896 The Short Titles Act, 1896 ( 59 & 60 Vict., c.  14). 
103 1896 The Finance Act, 1896 (59 & 60 Vict., c.  28). 
104 1896 The Royal Naval Res erve Volunteer Act, 1896 ( 59 & 60 Vict., c.  33). 
105 1897  The Regular and Elders’ Windows ’ Funds Act, 1897 ( 60 & 61 V ict., c. 11). 
106 1898  The Reserve  Forces and Militia Act, 1898 ( 61 & 62 Vict., c. 9). 
107 1898  The S tatute Law Revision Act, 1898 ( 61 & 62 Vict., c.  22). 
108 1899  The Army (Annual) Act, 1899 ( 62 & 63 Vict., c.  3). 
109 1899  The Reserve Forces Act, 1899  (62 & 63 Vict., c.  40). 
110 1900  The Colonial Solicitors Act, 1900 ( 63 & 64 Vict., c.  14). 
111 1900  The Reserve Forces Act, 1900 ( 63 & 64 Vict., c.  42). 
112 1900  The Colonial Stock Act, 1900 ( 63 & 64 Vict., c.  62). 
113 1901 The Army ( Annual) Act, 1901 (1 Edw.  7, c. 2). 
114 1901  The Demise of the Crown Act, 1901  (1 Edw.  7, c. 5). 
115 1901  The Royal Titles Act, 1901  (1 Edw.7 , c. 15). 
116 1902  The Royal Naval Reserve Act, 1902 ( 2 Edw.  7, c. 5). 
117 1905  The Medical Act (1886) Amendment Act, 1905 (5 Edw . 7, c. 14). 
118 1906  The Seamen ’s and Soldier s’ False Characters Act, 1906 ( 6 Edw.  7, c. 5). 
119 1906  The Reserve Forces Act, 1906 ( 6 Edw.  7, c. 9). 
120 1907  The Territorial  and Reserve Forces Act, 1907 ( 7 Edw.  7, c. 9). 
121 1907  The Evidence ( Colonial Statutes) Act, 1907 ( 7 Edw. 7, c. 16). 
122 1907  The Deceased Wife ’s Sister ’s Marriage Act, 1907 (7 Edw.  7, c. 47). 
123 1908  The Statute Law Revision Act, 1908  (8 Edw.  7, c. 49). 
124 1908  The App ellate Jurisdiction Act, 1908 ( 8 Edw.  7, c. 51). 
125 1909  The Army ( Annual) Act, 1909 ( 9 Edw.  7, c. 3). 
126 1909  The Naval Establishments in the British Possession s Act, 1909                         
(9 Edw.  7, c. 18). 
127 1909  The Naval Discipline Act, 1909 ( 9 Edw.  7, c. 41). 
128 1910  The Army (Annual) Act, 1910 (10 Edw.  7, c. 6). 
129 1910  The Accession Declaration Act, 1910 (10 Edw.  7 & 1 Geo . 5, c. 29). 
130 1910  The Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Amendment     
Act, 1910 (10 Edw.  7 & 1 Geo.  5, c. 32). 
131 1911  The Army (Annual) Act, 1911 (1 & 2 Geo.  5, c. 3). 
132 1911  The Parliament Act, 1911 (1 & 2 Geo.  5, c. 13). 
133 1911  The Official Secrets Act, 1911 (1 & 2 Geo.  5, c. 28). 6 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
134 1912  The Army (Annual) Act, 1912 (2 & 3 Geo.  5, c. 5). 
135 1912  The Marriages in Japan (Validity) Act, 1912 (2 & 3 Geo.  5, c. 15). 
136 1913  The Army (Annual) Act, 1913 (3 Geo.  5, c. 2). 
137 1913  The Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1913 (3 & 4 Geo.  5, c. 16). 
138 1913  The Appellate Jurisdiction Act, 1913 (3 & 4 Geo.  5, c. 21). 
139 1914  The Army (Annual) Act, 1914 (4 & 5 Geo.5, c.  2). 
140 1914  The Aliens Restriction Act, 1914 (4 & 5 Geo.5, c.  12). 
141 1914  The Army (Supply of Food, Forage and Stores) Act, 1914                                 
(4 & 5 Geo.  5, c. 26). 
142 1914  The Superannuation Act, 1914 (4 & 5 Geo.  5, c. 86). 
143 1914  The Navy (Pledging of Certificates, etc.) Act, 1914 (4 & 5  Geo. 5, c. 89). 
144 1915  The Army (Amendment ) Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo.  5, c. 26). 
145 1915  The Naval Discipline Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo.  5, c. 30). 
146 1915  The Marriage of British Subjects (Facilities) Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo.  5, c. 40). 
147 1915  The Army (Amendment ) No.  2 Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo.  5, c. 58). 
148 1915  The Naval Discipline (No.  2) Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo.  5, c. 73). 
149 1915  The Judicial Committee Act, 1915 (5 & 6 Geo . 5, c. 92). 
150 1916  The Army (Annual) Act, 1916 (6 & 7 Geo.  5, c. 5). 
151 1916  The Imperial Institute (Management) Act, 1916 (6 & 7 Geo.  5, c. 8). 
152 1916  The Marriage of British Subjects (Facilities) Amendment Act, 1916                 
(6 & 7 Geo . 5, c. 21). 
153 1916  The Government of India (Amendment) Act, 1916 (6 & 7 Geo.  5, c. 37). 
154 1917  The Army (Annual) Act, 1917 (7 &  8 Geo.  5, c. 9). 
155 1917  The Naval Discipline Act, 1917 (7 &  8 Geo.  5, c. 34). 
156 1917  The Air Force (Constitution) Act, 1917 (7 & 8 Geo . 5, c. 51). 
157 1918  The Army (Annual) Act, 1918 (8 & 9 Geo . 5, c. 6). 
158 1918  The Termination of the Present War (Definition) Act, 1918                                 
(8 & 9 Geo.  5, c. 59). 
159 1919  The Army (Annual) Act, 1919 (9  & 10 Geo.  5, c. 11). 
160 1919  The Treaty of Peace Act, 1919 (9 & 10 Geo.  5, c. 33). 
161 1919  The British Mercantile Marine Uniform Act, 1919 (9 & 10 Geo.  5, c. 62). 
162 1919  The Aliens Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1919 (9 & 10 Geo . 5, c. 92). 
163 1919  The Government of India Act, 1919 (9 & 10 Geo . 5, c. 101).  
164 1920  The Treaties of Peace (Austria  and Bulgaria) Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo . 5, c. 6). 
165 1920  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo . 5, c. 7). 7 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
166 1920  The Maintenance Orders (Facilities for Enforcement) Act, 1920                      
(10 & 11 Geo. 5, c. 33). 
167 1920  The Indemnity Act, 1920 (10 & 11 Geo.  5, c. 48). 
168 1921  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act, 1921 (11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 9). 
169 1921  The Treaty of Peace (Hungary) Act, 1921 (11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 11). 
170 1921  The Importation of Plumage (Prohibition) Act, 1 921 ( 11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 16). 
171 1921  The Indian Divorces (Validity) Act, 1921 ( 11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 18). 
172 1921  The Deceased Brother ’s Widow ’s Marriage Act, 1921 ( 11 & 12 Geo.  5, c. 24). 
173 1921  The Territorial Army and Militia Act, 1921 (11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 37). 
174 1921  The Trade Facilities Act, 1921 ( 11 & 12 Geo . 5, c. 65). 
175 1922  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act, 1922 (12 & 13 Geo . 5, c. 6). 
176 1922  The Empire Settlement Act, 1922 ( 12 & 13 Geo . 5, c. 13). 
177 1922  The Naval Discipline Act, 1922 ( 12 & 13 Geo . 5, c. 37). 
178 1922  The Trade Facilities and Loans Guarantee Act, 1922 (13 Geo . 5, c. 4). 
179 1923  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act, 1923 (13 & 14 Geo.  5, c. 3). 
180 1923  The Fees (Increase) Act, 1923 ( 13 & 14 Geo.  5, c. 4). 
181 1923  The Matrimonial Causes Act, 1923 (13 & 14 Geo.  5, c. 19). 
182 1924  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1924 ( 14 & 15 Geo . 5, c. 5). 
183 1924  The Treat y of Peace (Turkey) Act, 1924 ( 14 & 15 Geo. 5, c. 7). 
184 1924  The Trade Facilities Act, 1924 ( 14 & 15 Geo.  5, c. 8). 
185 1924  The Auxiliary Air Force and Air Force Reserve Act, 1924                                
(14 & 15 Geo . 5, c. 15). 
186 1924  The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1924 (14 &  15 Geo . 5, c. 22). 
187 1924  The Expiri ng Laws Continuance Act, 1924 ( 15 Geo . 5, c. 1). 
188 1925  The Trade Facilities Act, 1925 ( 15 & 16 Geo . 5, c. 13). 
189 1925  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act , 1925 (15 Geo.  5, c. 25). 
190 1925  The Expiring Laws Act, 1925 ( 15 & 16 Geo.  5, c. 76). 
191 1926  The Trade Facilities Act, 1926 ( 16 & 17 Geo.  5, c. 3). 
192 1926  The S ecretaries of State Act, 1926 ( 16 & 17 Geo . 5, c. 18). 
193 1927  The Royal and P arliamentary Titles Act, 1927 ( 17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 4). 
194 1927  The Workmen ’s Compensation (Transfer of Funds) Act, 1927                         
(17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 15). 
195 1927  The Royal Naval Reserve Act, 1927 (17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 18). 
196 1927  The Cinematograph Films Act, 1927 (17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 29). 
197 1927  The Indian Church Act, 1927 (17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 40). 8 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
198 1927  The Colonial Probates (Protected States and Ma ndated Territories) Act, 1927 
(17 & 18 Geo . 5, c. 43). 
199 1929  The Appellate Jurisdiction Act, 1929 (19 & 20 Geo . 5, c. 8). 
200 1929  The Companies Act, 1929 (19 & 20 Geo . 5, c. 23). 
201 1934  The Air Force Reserve (Pilots and Observers) Act, 1934 (24 & 25 Geo.  5, c. 5). 
202 1935  The Superannuation Act, 1935 (25 & 26 Geo.  5, c. 23). 
203 1935  The Finance Act, 1935 ( 25 & 26 Geo.  5, c. 24). 
204 1935  The Government of Burma Act, 1935 ( 26 Geo.  5 and 1 Edw.  8, c. 3). 
205 1936  His Majesty ’s Declar ation of Abdication Act, 1936                                            
(1 Edw. 8 and 1  Geo.  6, c. 3). 
206 1937  The East India Loans Act, 1937 ( 1 Edw.  8 and 1 Geo. 6, c. 14). 
207 1937  The Regency Act, 1937 ( 1 Edw.  8 and 1 Geo. 6, c. 16). 
208 1937  The Reserve Forces Act, 1937 ( 1 Edw.  8 and 1 Geo.  6, c. 17). 
209 1937  The Empire Settlement Act, 1937 ( 1 Edw.  8 and 1 Geo. 6, c. 18). 
210 1938  The Cinematograph Films Act, 1938 ( 1 & 2 Geo.  6, c. 17). 
211 1938  The Trade Marks Act, 1938 ( 1 & 2 Geo . 6, c. 22). 
212 1939  The Prevention of Fraud (Investments) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 16). 
213 1939  The Army and Air F orce ( Annual) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 17). 
214 1939  The Reserve a nd Auxiliary Forces Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo.  6, c. 24). 
215 1939  The Marriage (Scotland) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 34). 
216 1939  The Emergenc y Powers (Defence) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 62). 
217 1939  The Armed Forces (Con ditions of Service) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 68). 
218 1939  The Ships and Aircraft (Tr ansfer Restriction) Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo.  6, c. 70). 
219 1939  The Tra ding with the Enemy Act, 1939 ( 2 & 3 Geo . 6, c. 89). 
220 1939  The Expiri ng Laws Continuance Act, 1939 ( 3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 1). 
221 1940  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1940 ( 3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 18). 
222 1940  The Emergen cy Powers (Defence) Act, 1940 ( 3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 20). 
223 1940  The Treachery Act, 1940 (3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 21). 
224 1940  The Evidence and Powers of Attorney Act, 1940 (3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 28). 
225 1940  The Emergency Powe rs (Defence) (No.  2) Act, 1940 ( 3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 45). 
226 1940  The Prolong ation of Parliament Act, 1940 ( 3 & 4 Geo.  6, c. 53). 
227 1940  The Expiring L aws Continuance Act, 1940 ( 4 & 5 Geo.  6, c. 2). 
228 1940  The Naval and Marine Forces (Temporary Re lease from Service) Act, 1940            
(4 & 5 Geo . 6, c. 4). 
229 1941  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1941 ( 4 & 5 Geo . 6, c. 17). 
230 1941  The Naval Discipline (Am endment) Act, 1941 ( 4 & 5 Geo . 6, c. 29). 9 
 Serial No. Year  Short title or subject  
231 1941  The Prolong ation of Parliament Act, 1941 ( 4 & 5 Geo . 6, c. 48). 
232 1941  The Expiri ng Laws Continuance Act, 1941 ( 5 & 6 Geo . 6, c. 3). 
233 1942  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1942 ( 5 & 6 Geo . 6, c. 15). 
234 1942  The Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve Act, 1942 ( 5 & 6 Geo . 6, c. 18). 
235 1942  The United States of Americ a (Visiting Forces) Act, 1942                                 
(5 & 6 Geo. 6, c. 31). 
236 1942  The Prol ongation  of Parliament Act, 1942 ( 5 & 6 Geo . 6, c. 37). 
237 1943  The Workmen ’s Com pensation Act, 1943 Act, 1943 ( 6 & 7 Geo.  6, c. 6). 
238 1943  The Army and Air Force (Annual) Act, 1943 (6 & 7 Geo . 6, c. 15). 
239 1943  The Evidence and Powers of Attorney Act, 1943 (6 & 7 Geo . 6, c. 18). 
240 1943  The Foreign Service Act, 1943 ( 6 & 7 Geo . 6, c. 35). 
241 1943  The Regency Act, 1943 ( 6 & 7 Geo . 6, c. 42). 
242 1943  The Prolong ation of Parliament Act, 1943 ( 6 & 7 Geo . 6, c. 46). 
243 1943 The Expiri ng Laws Continuance Act, 1943 ( 7 & 8 Geo . 6. c. 1). 
244 1944  The Naval Forces (Extension of Service) A ct, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo . 6, c. 13). 
245 1944  The India (At tachment of States) Act, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo.  6, c. 14). 
246 1944  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo . 6, c. 18) 
247 1944  The Finance Act, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo . 6, c. 23). 
248 1944  The Matrimonial Caus es (War Marriages) Act, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo.  6, c. 43). 
249 1944  The Prolong ation  of Parliament Act, 1944 ( 7 & 8 Geo . 6, c. 45). 
250 1944  The Expiring Laws Continuance Act, 1944 (8 & 9 Geo.  6, c. 2.) 
251 1945  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1945 ( 8 & 9 Geo . 6, c. 22). 
252 1946  The Patents and Designs Act, 1946 (9 & 10 Geo.  6, c. 44). 
253 1946  The United Nations Act, 1946 ( 9 & 10 Geo.  6, c. 45). 
254 1946  The Army and  Air Force (Annual) Act, 1946 ( 9 & 10 Geo . 6, c. 47). 
255 1946  The Superannuation Act, 1946 (9 & 10 Geo.  6, c. 60). 
256 1946  The National Insurance (Industrial I njuries) Act, 1946 (9  & 10 Geo.  6, c. 62). 
257 1946  The Expiring Laws Continuance Act, 1946 (10 & 11 Geo.  6, c. 1). 
258 1947  The Foreign Marriage Act, 1947 (10 & 11 Geo.  6, c. 33). 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Central Excises (Conversion to Metric Units) Act, 1960--------------------------
THE CENTRAL EXCISES (CONVERSION TO METRIC UNITS) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 38 OF 1960  
[20th September,  1960.]  
An Act further to amend certain laws relating to duties of excise for the purpose of introducing metric 
units in such laws.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ―  
1. Short title and commenc ement .―(1) This Act may be called the Central Excises (Conversion 
to Metric Units) Act, 1960.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
official Gazette, appoint.  
[Section s 2 to 8.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1964  (52 of 1964 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 29-12-1964) . 
9. Savings .―Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the validity of any 
notification, rule or order issued under any of t he enactments amended thereby and in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act merely by reason of the fact that the rate of any 
duty of excise specified therein has been expressed in terms of annas, pice or pies or with reference to 
any weight  or measure other than a standard mass or measure under the Standards of Weights and 
Measures Act, 1956  (89 of 1956) ; and every such notification, rule or order shall, until altered, 
repealed or amended by the Central Government or other competent authority, continue to have effect 
as if this Act had not been passed.  
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1964 (52 of 1964 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f. 29-12-1964) . 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE .] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f . 29-12-1964).   
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1960, vide notific ation No. G.S. R. 1098, dated 24th September, 1960, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i). 
--------------------------The Customs Duties and Cesses (Conversion to Metric Units) Act, 1960--------------------------
THE CUSTOMS DUTIES AND CESSES (CONVERSION TO METRIC UNITS)  
ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1960  
[21st September , 1960.]  
An Act further to amend certain laws relating to customs duties and cesses for the purpose of 
adopting metric units in those laws.  
BE it enact ed by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Customs Duties and Cesses 
(Conversion to Metric Units) Act, 1960.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
[Sections  2 to 9.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1964  (52 of 1964 ), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f . 29-12-1964 ). 
10. Savings .―Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the validity of any 
notification, rule or order issued unde r any of the enactments amended thereby and in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act merely by reason of the fact that the rate of any 
customs duty or cess specified therein has been expressed in terms of annas, pice or pies or with 
referen ce to any weight or measure other than a standard mass or measure under the Standards of 
Weights and Measures Act, 1956  (89 of 1956) , and every such notification, rule or order shall, until 
altered, repealed or amended by the Central Government or other competent authority, continue to 
have effect as if this Act had not been passed.  
[THE SCHEDULE .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1964  (52 of 1964 ), s. 2 and the 
First Schedule  (w.e.f. 29-12-1964 ). 
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1960, vide notification No. S.O. 2348, dated 23rd September, 1960, see Gazette of  India, Extraordinary,              
Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
--------------------------The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI LAND HOLDINGS (CEILING) ACT, 1960  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMIN ARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definition .  
CHAPTER II  
CEILING ON HOLDINGS AND VESTING AND ALLOTMENT OF EXCESS LAND  
3. Ceili ng on holding.  
4. Submission of returns.  
5. Collection of information through other agency.  
6. Procedure for determination of excess land.  
7. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers.  
7A. Abatement of certain suits.  
8. Excess land to vest in  Government.  
9. Public ation of the final list and con sequences thereof.  
10. Compensation.  
11. Manner of payment of amount.  
12. Limit of future acquisition of land.  
13. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases.  
14. Power of Deputy Commissioner to take possession of excess land.  
15. Reservation of land for certain purposes.  
16. Allotment of excess land.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Act to override contract and other laws.  
18. Mode of recovery of any amount due under the Act.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Appeal.  
20. Revision.  
21. Power of officers while holding inquiries , etc., under the Act.  
22. Entry upon land for purposes of survey, etc.  
23. Offences and penalties.  
24. Finality of orders and bar of jurisdiction.  
25. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
26. [Omitted. ] 
27. Power to make rules.  
28. [Repealed. ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE DELHI LAND HOLDINGS (CEILING) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 24 OF  1960  
[26th August , 1960 .] 
An Act to provide for the imposition of a ceiling on land holdings in the Union territory of Delhi 
and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Land Holdings 
(Ceiling) Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi, but shall not apply to ― 
(a) the areas which, immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, were included in a 
municipality or in a notified area under the provisions of the Punjab Municipal A ct, 1911(Punjab Act 
3 of 1911), or in a cantonment under the provisions of the Cantonments Act, 1924  (2 of 1924);  
(b) the areas 1[owned and held by the Central Government or any State Government] or any local 
authority ; 2*** 
3[(bb) the areas owned and held by any corporation owned or controlled by the Central 
Government;]  
4[(c) the areas acquired under any law relating to the acquisition of land for a public purpos e; 
(d) the areas held and occupied, on the appointed day, for the purpose of a goshala or for t he 
purpose of breeding, or feeding, or both, of horses, and, in either case, declared as such in the 
prescribed manner by the Chief Commissioner:  
Provided that, no declaration under this clause shall be made by the Chief Commissioner in 
respect of an area held and occupied for the purpose of a goshala unless the goshala has been 
established for a charitable purpose without any motive for profit and registered as a society under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and the entire income from suc h area is utilised for the 
purpose of the goshala:  
Provided further that, when any area or any part thereof ceases to be held and occupied for the 
purpose referred to in this clause any declaration made under this clause, shall cease to have effect 
either in whole or in part, as the case may be, and the provisions of this Act shall apply to the whole 
or part of such area accordingly; and  
(e) the areas owned and held by any agricultural co -operat ive land mo rtgage  bank, any State or 
Central Co -operative Bank  or any other bank.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 15  of 1976, s. 2, for “owned by the Central Government” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. The word “and” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  4 
 Explanation .―Fo r the purpose of this clause, “bank ” means a banking company as defined in 
section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) and includes the State Bank of India 
constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 195 5 (23 of 1955), a subsidiary bank as defined in the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959), a corresponding new bank as defined 
in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) and the 
Agricul tural Refinance Corporation established under the Agricultural Refinance Corporation Act, 
1963 (10 of 1963) ]. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition s.―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
1[(a) “appointed day ” means the 2 4th day of January, 1971 ;] 
2[(aa)] “ceiling limit ”, in relation to land, means the limit fixed under section 3;  
(b) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of  Delhi;  
(c) “competent authority ” means any person or authority authorised by the Chief Commissioner 
by notification in the Official Gazette to perform the functions of the competent authority under this 
Act for such area as may be specified in the notific ation;  
3[(d) “family ”, in relation to a person, means the person, the wife or husband, as the case may be, 
and the minor sons and unmarried minor daughters  of such person; ] 
(e) “minor ” means a person who is deemed not to have attained majority under the In dian 
Majority Act, 1875;  
4[(ee) “orchard ” means a compact area of land, having fruit bearing trees grown thereon in such 
number that they preclude or when fully grown, would preclude, a substantial part of such land from 
being used for any agricultural pur pose, but does not include any land, being a banana or guava 
garden or vine yard;  
(eee) “person ” includes a company, family, association or other body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not, and any institution capable of holding property;]  
(f) “perso n under disability ” means ― 
(i) a widow;  
(ii) a minor;  
(iii) a woman unmarried or, if married, divorced or judicially separated from her husband or 
whose husband is a person falling under sub -clause ( iv) or sub -clause ( v); 
(iv) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union;  
(v) a person incapable of cultivating land by reason of some physical or mental disability;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Cl ause (a) re-lettered as cl ause (aa) by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause  (d) (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  5 
 (h) the words and expressions “Asami ”, “Bhumidhar ”, “Deputy Commissioner ”, “Gaon 
Panch ayat”, “improvement ”, “land” 1*** and “village ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954  (Delhi Act 8 1954).  
CHAPTER II  
CEILING ON HOLDINGS AND VESTING AND ALLOTMENT OF EXCESS LAND  
2[3. Ceiling on holding .―(1) Subject to the provis ions of this section, on and from the 
commencement of the Delh i Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment  Act, 1976, no person either by himself 
or, if he has a family, together with any other member of his family (hereinafter referred to  as the person 
representing the family) shall, whether as a Bhumidhar or an Asami or partly in one capacity and partly in 
another, be entitled to hold land in excess of ― 
(a) (i) 7.25 hectares, in the case of land which is assured of irrigation from a priva te source of 
irrigation and is capable of yielding at least two crops in a year; or  
(ii) 5.8 hectares, in the case of land which is assured of irrigation from a Government source of 
irrigation and is capable of yielding at least two crops in a year; or  
(b) (i) 10.9 hectares, in the case of land which is assured of irrigation from a private source of 
irrigation and is capable of yielding at least one crop in a year; or  
(ii) 8.7 hectares, in the case of land which is assured of irrigation from a Government  source of 
irrigation and is capable of yielding at least one crop in a year; or  
(c) 21.8 hectares, in the case of any other land, including an orchard.  
(2) Where a person holds land falling under more than one category specified in sub -section ( 1), then , 
the land held by him shall be converted into land falling under category ( c) and for the purpose of such 
conversion one hectare of land falling under category ( a) (i) shall be treated as equal to 3 hectares of land 
fallin g under category ( c), one hectare  of land falling under category ( a) (ii) shall be treated as equal to 
3.75 hectares of land falling under  category ( c), one hectare of land falling under category ( b) (i) shall be 
treated as equal to 2 hectares of land falling under category ( c) and one he ctare  of land falling under 
category ( b) (ii) shall b e treated as equal to 2.5 hectares of land falling under category ( c); and the extent 
of the land so converted together with the extent of the land, if any falling under category ( c) held by such 
person shall not exceed 21.8 hectares.  
 (3) For the purposes of this section, land which is assured of ir rigation fro m a Government source of 
irrigation means any land which is irrigated, or is capable of being irrigated, from such source.  
(4) If any question wh ether any land is capable of yielding only one crop or more than one crop in a 
year arises, such question shall be decided by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed and 
the decision of such authority thereon shall be final.  
(5) Where the nu mber of members of the family of a perso n exceeds five, he shall he entit led to hold 
land in excess of the c eiling limit to the extent of one -fifth of the ceiling limit fo r each membe r in excess 
of five; so, however, as not to exceed twice the ceiling limi t in the aggregate.  
(6) where a person is a me mber  of a family the l and held by such p erson together with the land held 
by every other member of the family , wh ether  individual ly or jointly, shall be taken into account in 
determining the ceiling limit.  
                                                           
1. The words „, “standard acre” ‟ omitted by Act 15 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 3  (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
 6 
 (7) A person representing a family shall also be entitled to hold land not exceeding the ceiling limit 
for each of his major sons,  if any:  
Provided that the land, if any, held by such major son or, if he has a family, by any other member of 
his family shall be taken into account in determining the ceiling limit for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(8) Where a family holds land in excess of the ceiling limit and such land includes land held by the 
wife or the husband, then, the share of the wife or the husban d, as the case may he, in the land that may be 
held by the family within the ceiling limit shall be in the same proportion as it was in the total extent of 
the land held by the family.  
(9) Where a person is a member of a registered co -operative farming soc iety his share in the land held 
by such society shall be taken into account in calculating the ceiling limit in relation to such person.]  
4. Submission of returns .―Every person representing a family 1[who on the appointed day or at any 
time thereafter held or holds,] land in excess of the ceiling limit shall submit to the competent authority, 
in such form and within such time as may be prescribed, a return giving t he particulars of all land held by 
him and indicating therein the parcels of land, not exceeding the ceiling limit, which he desires to retain:  
Provided that in the case of a joint holding, all co -sharers may submit the return jointly indicating the 
parcel s of land, not exceeding the aggregate of their individual ceiling limits, which they desire to retain.  
Explanation .―In the case of a person under disability, the return shall be furnished by his guardian or 
authorised agent, as the case may be.  
5. Collection of information through other agency .―If any person, who under section 4 is required 
to submit a return, fails to  do so in accordance with the provisions of that section, the competent authority 
shall collect the necessary information through such agency as may be prescribed.  
6. Procedure for determination of excess land .―(1) On receipt of any return under section 4 or 
information under section 5 or otherwise, the competent authority shell, after giving the persons affected 
an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, and having regard to 
the provisions of section 7 and section 8  or of any rules that may be made in this behalf, it shall 
determine ― 
(a) the total area of land held by each person representing the family;  
(b) the specific parcels of land which he may retain;  
(c) the land held by him in excess of the ceiling limit;  
(d) whether such excess land is held by him as a Bhumidhar or as an Asa mi; 
(e) the excess land in respect of which Bhumidhari rights may be acquired by an Asami;  
(f) the excess land which may be restored to a Bhumidhar;  
(g) the excess land which shall vest in the Government; and  
(h) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
2[(2) For the purpose of determining the  excess land under this section  any land transferred by sale, 
gift or otherwise (other than a bona fide  sale under a registered deed for valuable consideration) at any 
time during the period between the appointed day a nd the commencement of the Delhi Land Holdings 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 5, for certain words  (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 6 , ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  7 
 (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976, shall, notwithstanding such transfer, be deemed to be held by the 
transferor and the burden of proving the transfer by sale as bona fide shall be on the transferor.  
(3) The comp etent authority shall prepare a list in the prescribed form containing the particulars 
determined by him under sub -section ( 1) and shall cause every such list to be published in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as may be prescribed. ] 
1[7. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers .―(1)  Where any person transfers any 
land by sale, gift or otherwise (other than a bona fide sale under a  registered deed for valuable 
consideration) at any time during the period referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 6, the excess l and in 
relation to such person shall be selected from out of the land held by him after such transfer and in case 
the entire excess l and cannot be so selected, the balance, or, where no land is held by him after the 
transfer, the entire excess land, shall be selected out of the land held by the transferee:  
Provided that where such person has transferred his land to more than one person, the balance or the 
entire excess land, as the case may be, shall be selected out of t he land held by each of  the transfer ees in 
the same proportion as the area of the land transferred to him bears to the total area  of the l and transferred  
to all  the transferees.  
(2) Where any excess land is selected out of the land transferred, the transf er of such land shall be 
void.  
7A. Abatement of certain suits .―Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, every suit 
for the specific performanc e of a contract for the transfer of land,  instituted after the appointed day and 
before the commencement of the Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976 sh all abate and no 
suit for the specific performance of any such contract entered into before such commenc ement shall be 
maintainable.]   
8. Excess land to vest in Government .―(1) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in his actual 
possession, the excess la nd shall vest in the Government.  
(2) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in the possession of a person holding the same as an 
Asami and the excess land together with any other land held by such person exceeds his ceiling limit, the 
land in excess of th e ceiling limit shall vest in the Government.  
(3) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar is in the possession of a person holding the same as an 
Asami and such person is allowed to retain the excess land or a part thereof as being within his ceiling 
limit, t hat parson shall acquire Bhumidhari rights in respect of such excess land or part thereof on 
payment of compensation as hereinafter provided, but if that person refuses to pay such compensation, the 
excess land or part thereof shall vest in the Government.  
(4) Where there is any excess land of an Asami, the excess land shall vest in the Government:  
Provided that in any case where the excess land or any part thereof held by a Bhumidhar together 
with any other land held by such person does not exceed the ceil ing limit, the excess land or such part 
thereof as does not exceed the ceiling limit shall be restored to the Bhumidhar on an application made by 
him in this behalf to the competent authority within such time as may be prescribed.  
9. Publication of the fin al list and con sequences thereof .―(1) Any person aggrieved by an entry in 
the list published under sub -section ( 3) of section 6 may, within thirty days from the date of publication 
thereof in the Official Gazette, file objections thereto before the Deputy Commissioner:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of  1976, s. 7,  for section 7 (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  8 
 Provided that the Deputy Commissioner may entertain the objection after the expiry of the said period 
of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the objector was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the 
objection in time.  
(2) The Deputy Commissioner or any other officer a uthorised in this behalf by the Chief 
Commissioner may, after considering the objections and after giving the objector or his representatives an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter, approve or modify the list  
(3) The list as approved or modified under  sub-section ( 2) shall then be published in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as may be prescribed and, subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
list shall be final.  
(4) With effect from the date of the publication of the list in the Off icial Gazette under                           
sub-section ( 3), the excess land shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Government free of all 
encumbrances or, as the case may be, the excess land shall stand restored to the Bhumidhar or the 
Bhumidhari rights in respect of the excess land shall stand transferred to the Asami free of all 
encumbrances.  
10. Compensation .―1[(1) Where any excess land of a Bhumidhar vests in the Government, there 
shall be paid by the Government to the Bhumidhar an amount calcu lated at the rates specified in the Table 
below, namely:―  
THE TABLE  
_____________________________________________________________________________________  
Rates per hectare in rupees  
Class of land   For the first 3 
hectares  For the next 3 
hectares  For the 
remaining area  
(a) Land under assured irrigation and capable of 
yielding at least two crops in a year  5,000 4,400 4,000 
(b) Land under assured irrigation and capable of 
yielding at least one crop in a year  2,500 2,200  2,000  
(c) Any other land (including a n orchard)  1,250 1,100  1,000  
 Provided that where such excess land or any part thereof is in the possession of an Asami, the 
amount payable in respect of the land shall be apportioned between the Bhumidhar and the Asami in such 
proportion as may be determ ined by the competent authority in the prescribed manner, having regard to 
their respective shares in the net income from such land  to be determined by the competent authority in 
the prescribed manner . 
 (2) In addition to the amount  payable in respect of a ny excess land under sub -section ( 1), there shall 
also be paid an amount  in respect of any structure or building, including wells, tube -wells and 
embankments constructed on such excess land and such amount shall be fifty p er cent.  of the market 
value of su ch structure or building and shall be paid to the person who has constructed the structure or 
building. ] 
 (3) Where any excess land in respect of which 2[an amount ] is payable is subject to any mortgage or 
other encumbrance, the amount due under the mortga ge or other encumbrance in respect of such excess 
land, or where a transfer in respect of excess land is void by virtue of 3[sub-section ( 2) of section 7 ], the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 8 , for sub -section s (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “compensation” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “sub -section ( 4) of sect ion 7” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  9 
 consideration money paid by the transferee in respect of such excess land, shall be a charge on the 
1[amount ] payable in respect of the excess land to the person who has created the mortgage or 
encumbrance or, as the case may be, to the transferor.  
(4) Where an Asami acquires Bhumidhari rights in respect of any excess land, 2[the amount]  payable 
by him in respect of that land shall be equal to the amount which the Bhumidhar would have been paid 
3*** under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), if the land had vested in the Government; and 
the amount shall, in the first instance, be paid to  the Bhumidhar by the Government and shall be 
recovered from the Asami in such manner as may be prescribed  
(5) Where any excess land of a religious or charitable insti tution vests in the Government such 
institution shall, in lieu of 1[the amount ] payable u nder sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) be paid an 
annuity equal to the net annual income of the excess land and such net annual income shall be determined 
by the competent authority in the prescribed manner.  
(6) The competent authority shall, after holdin g an inquiry in the prescribed manner, make an order 
determining the amount 4*** payable to any person under this section.  
11. Manner of payment of amount.―(1) The 5[amount]  payable under section 10 shall be due on 
the date of the publication of the list i n the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 3) of section 9 and may be 
paid in cash, in a lump sum or in instalments or in bonds.  
(2) Where the 6[amount]  is payable in bonds, the bonds may be made not transferable or transferable 
by endorsement or in any oth er manner but all such bonds shall be redeemed within such period, not 
exceeding ten years from the dare of issue, as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where there is any delay in the payment of 6[amount]  or where the 6[amount]  is paid either in 
instalments or in bon ds, it shall carry interest at the rate of two and a half per cent.  per annum from the 
date on which it falls due.  
12. Limit of future acquisition of land .―No person representing a family shall acquire in any 
manner whatsoever whether by transfer, exchange , lease, agreement or succession any land where such 
acquisition has the effect of making the total area of the land held by him exceed the ceiling limit; and any 
such land in excess of the ceiling limit shall, subject to the provisions of the Delhi Land R eforms Act, 
1954  (Delhi Act 8 of 1954), be treated as excess land of the transferee and the provisions of sections 6 to 
11 shall, as far as may be, apply to such excess land.  
13. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases .―Where a person representing a family 
holds land not exceeding the ceiling limit, but subsequently the land held exceeds the ceiling limit, then,  
notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, such person shall not be required to surrender any 
part of  the land on the ground that it is excess land, if such excess is due to any improvements effected in 
the land by the efforts of the family or to a decrease in the number of its members.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 15 of 1976, s. 8, for “compensation” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “the c ompensation” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
3. The words “as compensation” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
4. The words “ of compensation” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “compensation” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  10 
 14. Power of Deputy Commissioner to take possession of excess land .―After the publication of 
the list of excess land under sub -section ( 3) of section 9, and after demarcation in the prescribed manner 
of such land where necessary, the Deputy Commissioner may take possession of any excess land and may 
use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary for the purpose.  
15. Reservation of land for certain purposes .―The Chief Commissioner may reserve any excess 
land vesting in the Government under the provisions of this Act for the benefit of the village community 
or for any work of public utility or for such other purposes as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where s uch land is not being used for the aforesaid purposes, it may be used by the 
Gaon Panchayat for such purposes as the Chief Commissioner may direct.  
16. Allotment of excess land .―Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Chief 
Commissioner o r any officer authorised by him may allot any excess land vesting in the Government 
(other than land reserved under section 15) 1[to such persons  (preference being given to landless 
agricultural labourers particularly those belonging to the Scheduled Caste s or the Scheduled Tribes)]  and 
on such terms and conditions as he thinks fit.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Act to override contract and other laws .―Save as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions 
of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, custom 
or usage or agreement or decree or order of a court.  
18. Mode of recovery of any amount due und er the Act .―Any sum payable to the Government 
under the provisions of this Act may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
19. Appeal .―Any person aggrieved by an order made by the competent authority under section 10, 
may, within a pe riod of thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Deputy 
Commissioner:  
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period, if 
he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficie nt cause from preferring the appeal in time.  
20. Revision .―(1) The Chief Commissioner may, on an application for revision made to him or 
otherwise, call for the record of any proceeding pending before, or disposed of by, the competent 
authority or the Deputy Commissioner or any officer authorised by the Chief Com missioner under                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9.  
(2) No order varying the decision of the competent authority or the Deputy Commissioner or revising 
the list published under section 9 which prejudicially affects any person shall be made withou t giving him 
an opportunity of being heard.  
21. Power of officers while holding inquiries , etc. under the Act .―Any officer or authority while 
holding an inquiry or hearing an appeal or exercising powers of revision under this Act shall have the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 10, for “to such persons” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  11 
 same power s as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908), when 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:―  
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and pr oduction of documents and material objects;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and  
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
22. Entry upon land for purposes of survey, etc. ―Subject to any conditions and restrictions that 
may be prescribed, any office r entrusted with the performance of any duty under this Act may, in the 
discharge of such duty, enter upon and survey and take measurement of any land and do all other acts 
necessary for carrying out his duties under this Act.  
23. Offences and penalties .―(1) Whoever being bound to submit a return under section 4 fails 
without reasonable cause to do so, within the prescribed time, or submits a return which he knows or has 
reason to believe to be false, 1[shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which  may extend to six 
months and with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees ]. 
(2) Whoever contravenes any lawful order made under this Act or otherwise obstructs any person 
from lawfully taking possession of any land shall be punishable with fine which  may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
24. Finality of orders and bar of jurisdiction .―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every 
order made under this Act shall be final.  
(2) No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in  so far as it relates to 
any matter which the competent authority or the Deputy Commissioner is empowered by or under this 
Act to deci de. 
25. Protection of action taken under the Act .―No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Government or an y authority or officer in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder.  
26. [Power to exempt, etc .] Omitted by  the Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment  Act,                    
(15 of 1976 ), s. 12 (w.e.f. 8-12-1975) . 
27. Power to make rules .―(1) The Chief Commissioner may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gen erality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely:―  
(a) the form in which and the period within which a return under section 4 may be submitted;  
(b) the agency through which information under section 5 m ay be collected;  
(c) the manner of holding inquiries under this Act;  
(d) the matters which may be determined by the compelent authority under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6 and the manner of determination of excess land under the Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 11, for “shall be punish able with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  12 
 (e) the form in which a  list under sub -section ( 3) of section 6 or sub -section ( 3) of section 9 may 
be prepared and the manner of publication of such list;  
(f) the period within which an application for restoration of excess land of an Asami may be made 
by the Bhumidhar;  
(g) the manner of apportionment of 1[amount]  between the Bhumidhar and the Asami in respect 
of any excess land in the possession of the Asami;  
(h) the manner of determination of the net annual income of any excess land for the purposes of 
payment of 1[amount] ; 
(i) the manner of assessment of market value of structures and buildings and the value of trees for 
the purpose of payment of 1[amount] ; 
(j) the number of instalments in which 1[any amount]  under this Act may be paid or recovered; 
and the period within which  bonds may be redeemed;  
(k) the manner of demarcation of excess land;  
(l) the purposes for which land may be reserved under section 15;  
(m) the categories of persons to whom excess land may be allotted and the terms and conditions 
on which such allotment m ay be made;  
(n) the powers of a civil court which may be vested in any officer or authority holding an inquiry;  
(o) the conditions and restrictions subject to which an officer may enter upon any land for the 
purpose of survey and taking measurement;  
(p) the levy of fees in respect of any matter under this Act;  
(q) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed.  
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in ses sion fo r a total period of thirty days 2[which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session  immediately 
following the session or th e successive sessions aforesaid ], both Houses agree in mak ing any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be wit hout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
28. [Amendment of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 .] Rep. b y the Repealing and Amending Act, 
1964 (52 of 1964),  s. 2 and the  First Schedule  (w.e.f. 29-12-1964).   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1976, s. 13, for “compensation” (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -12-1975).  
--------------------------The Delhi Primary Education Act, 1960--------------------------
1 THE DELHI PRIMARY EDUCATION ACT, 1960  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Schemes for primary education.  
4. Primary education to be compulsory in areas covered by schemes.  
5. Grants -in-aid. 
6. Duty of local authority to prepare lists of children.  
7. Attendance authorities . 
8. Attendance authority to notify parent of his obligation towards his child.  
9. Responsibility of parent to cause his child to attend school . 
10. Reasonable  excuse for non -attendance.  
11. Special schools for physically or mentally deficient children.  
12. Special provision for part -time education in certain cases . 
13. Attendance orders.  
14. Children not to be employed so as to prevent them from attending schoo l. 
15. Primary education to be free.  
16. Age of child how to be computed.  
17. Failure of local authority to prepare or implement scheme.  
18. Penalty for contravention of section 13 . 
19. Penalty for contravention of section 14.  
20. Courts competent to try offences.  
21. Cognizance of offences.  
22. Certain persons to be public servants . 
23. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
24. Delegation of powers.  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Repeal of Punjab Primary Education Act.  2 THE DELHI PRIMARY EDUCATION ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1960  
[20th September , 1960 .] 
An Act to provide for free and compulsory Primary education for children in the Union territory 
of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Primary Education 
Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “academic year ” means the year beginning on such date as a local authority may specify with 
respect to any specified area or with respect to approved schools generally or any approved school or 
class of approved schools in particular within its jurisdiction;  
(b) “approved school ” means any school in any speci fied area within the jurisdiction of a local 
authority imp arting primary education which — 
(i) is under the management of the State Government or the local authority, or  
(ii) being under any other management, is recognised by the local authority as an approved 
school for the purposes of this Act;  
(c) “attendance authority ” means any person appointed to be an attendance authority under 
section 7;  
(d) “to attend an approved school ” means to be present for instruction at an approved school on 
so many days in a year and at such time or times on each one of those days as may be fixed by the 
local authority concerned;  
(e) “child” means a boy or girl within such age group, not being less  than six or more than 
fourteen, as may be specified in a declaration made under section 4;  
(f) “local authority ” means the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee and the Delhi Cantonment Board;  
(g) “parent”, in relation to any c hild, includes a guardian and every person who has the actual 
custody of the child;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “primary education ” means education up to such class or standard, not beyond the eighth class 
or standar d, as may be prescribed;  
(j) “rural areas ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957  (66 of 1957);  
(k) “special school ” means any institution which imparts such primary education as is in the 
opinion of the State Government suitable for children suffering from any physical or mental defect;  
                                                           
1. 2nd October , 1960 , vide notification No. S.O. 2391 (E), dated 27th September , 196 0, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 3 (l) “specified area ” means any area within the jurisdiction of a local authority in  which primary 
education is declared by that authority to be compulsory under section 4.  
3. Schemes for primary education .—(1) It shall be the duty of every local authority to provide for 
compulsory primary education for children ordinarily resident within  its jurisdiction, and for this purpose 
it shall, from time to time, submit to the State Government such proposals in the form of a scheme as it 
may think fit providing for such compulsory primary education in the whole or any part of the area within 
its jurisdiction for children of such ages and up to such class or standard as it may decide.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, at any time, 
call upon a local authority to submit to it within such time as may b e specified a scheme for compulsory 
primary education in such area within the jurisdiction of the local authority for children ordinarily 
resident therein, and of such ages and up to such class or standard, as the State Government may specify.  
(3) The sche me submitted under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be in such form as the State 
Government may specify and shall cont ain the following particulars, — 
(a) the area in which primary education shall be compulsory;  
(b) the approximate number of children to whom the scheme will apply, classified according to 
age and mother -tongue ; 
(c) a list of existing approved schools and the schools, if any, proposed to be opened for the 
purpose, classified by languages in which instruction is given or is propo sed to be given;  
(d) the number of teachers already employed and the additional staff proposed to be recruited;  
(e) the recurring and non -recurring cost of the scheme; and  
(f) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(4) The State Government may, after  making such inquiry as it may consider necessary, sanction with 
or without modifications the scheme submitted by the local authority under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section 
(2). 
 4. Primary education to be compulsory in areas covered by schemes .—(1) On receipt of sanction 
under sub -section ( 4) of section 3, the local authority shall give effect to the scheme so sanctioned by 
means of a declaration that with effect from the first day of the next academic year primary education 
shall be compulsory in any a rea specified in the declaration for children ordinarily resident in that area 
and within such age group and up to such class or standard as may be specified in the declaration.  
(2) Every declarat ion under sub -section ( 1) shall— 
(a) be published in the Off icial Gazette and in such other manner as the local authority may 
decide;  
(b) be so made as to ensure that there is an interval of not less than one hundred and twenty days 
between the date of the publication of the declaration and the first day of the nex t academic year.  
5. Grants -in-aid.—The State Government shall, in respect of every scheme sanctioned under               
sub-section ( 4) of section 3 or prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 17, bear such part of the recurring 
and non -recurring cost of the scheme as it may from time to time determine.  
6. Duty of local authority to prepare lists of children .—It shall be the duty of the local authority to 
cause to be prepared as early as possible after the publication of a declaration under section 4, and in such 
manner as may be prescribed, a list of children in any specified area; and the local authority shall cause 
the list to be revised at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
 7. Attendance authorities .—(1) The local authority may appoint as many person s as it thinks fit to 
be attendance authorities for the purposes of this Act, and may also appoint as many persons as it 
considers necessary to assist the attendance authorities in the discharge of their duties.  4 (2) In the exercise of any of the powers con ferred by or under this Act, the attendance authority or 
any person appointed to assist the attendance authority may put such questions to any parent or require 
any parent to furnish such information, about his child as it or he considers necessary, and ev ery such 
parent shall be bound to answer such questions or to furnish such information, as the case may be, to the 
best of his knowledge or belief.  
 8. Attendance authority to notify parent of his obligation towards his child .—It shall be the duty 
of the attendance authority to notify the parent of every child to whom the declaration under section 4 
applies that he is under an obligation to cause the child to attend an approved school with effect from the 
beginning of the next academic year.  
 9. Responsibi lity of parent to cause his child to attend school .—It shall be the duty of the parent 
of every child to cause the child to attend an approved  school unless there be a reasonable excuse for his 
non-attendance within the meaning of section 10.  
10. Reasonabl e excuse for non -attendance .—For the purposes of this Act, any of the following 
circumstances shall be deemed to be a reasonable excuse for the non -attendance of a child at an approved 
school,— 
(a) that there is no approved school within the prescribed distance from his residence;  
(b) that the child is receiving instruction in some other manner which is declared to be 
satisfactory by the State Government or by an officer authorised by it in this behalf;  
(c) that the child has already completed primary ed ucation up to the class or standard specified in 
the declaration under section 4;  
(d) that the child suffers from a physical or mental defect which prevents him from attendance;  
(e) that there is any other compelling circumstance which prevents the child from attending 
school, provided the same is certified as such by the attendance authority;  
(f) such other circumstance as may be prescribed.  
11. Special schools for physically or mentally deficient children .—If there is in existence a special 
school within  the prescribed distance from the residence of a child who is suffering from a physical or 
mental defect, the attendance authority may, if it is satisfied that the child is not receiving any instruction 
in some other manner considered by it to be satisfact ory, by order require the child to attend the special 
school; and it shall be the duty of the parent of such child to cause the child to attend the special school 
unless there be a reasonable excuse for the non -attendance of the child within the meaning of  clause ( e) of 
section 10.  
12. Special provision for part -time education in certain cases .—(1) If the attendance authority is 
satisfied that a child, due to economic or other circumstances connected with the family to which the 
child belongs, is unable to attend an approved school in the manner required by or under this Act, it may, 
by order and s ubject to such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to impose, permit the child to attend any 
approved school established as a part -time institution or in which primary education is imparted on a  
part-time basis.  
(2) Any parent who causes a child in re spect of whom an order under sub -section ( 1) has been made 
to attend an approved school in the manner specified in the order shall be deemed to have complied with 
the provisions of this Act.  
13. Attendance orders .—(1) Whenever the attendance authority has reason to believe that the parent 
of a child has failed to cause the child to attend an approved school and that there is no reasonable excuse 
for the non -attendance of the child within the meaning of section 10, it shall hold an inquiry in the 
prescribed manner.  
(2) If as a result of the inquiry the attendance authority is satisfied that the child is liable to attend an 
approved school under this Act and that there is no reasonable excuse for his non -attendance within the 
meaning of section 10, it shall pa ss an attendance order in the prescribed form directing the parent to 
cause the child to attend the -approved school with effect from the date specified in the order.  5 (3) An attendance order passed against a parent in respect of his child under this section  shall, subject 
to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), remain in force for so long as this Act continues to apply to the child.  
(4) If any parent against whom an attendance order has been passed in respect of his child under              
sub-section ( 2) tran sfers the custody of the child to another person during the period in which the 
attendance order is in force, such parent shall be bound to immediately inform the attendance authority in 
writing of such transfer.  
(5) Where an attendance order has been pass ed against a parent in respect of his child under this 
section, such order shall have effect in relation to every other person to whom the custody of the child 
may be transferred during the period in which the attendance order is in force as it has effect in relation to 
the person against whom it is passed.  
(6) A parent may at any time apply to the attendance authority for cancellation of an attendance order 
on the ground — 
(i) that he is no longer the parent in respect of the child; or  
(ii) that circumstances have arisen which provide a reasonable excuse for non -attendance;  
and thereupon the attendance authority may, after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, cancel or 
modify the attendance order.  
14. Children not to be employed so as to prevent them from attending school .—No person shall 
employ a child in a manner which shall prevent the child from attending an approved school.  
15. Primary education to be free .—(1) No fee shall be levied in respect of  any child for attending an 
approved school which is under the management of the State Government or a local authority.  
(2) Where, in respect of any child an attendance order has been passed under section 13 and the only 
school which he can attend is an ap proved school under private management falling within sub -clause ( ii) 
of clause ( b) of section 2, the local authority shall take such steps as it may think fit for the purpose of 
ensuring that the primary education which the child is to receive is free.  
16. Age of child how to be computed .—The age of a child for the purposes of this Act shall be 
computed in terms of years completed by the child on or before the first day of the academic year:  
Provided that where the birthday of a child falls on a day not la ter than sixty days from the first day of 
the academic year, the birthday shall be deemed to fall on the first day of the academic year for the 
purpose of  computing the age of the child . 
17. Failure of local authority to prepare or implement scheme .—(1) If any local authority when 
called upon to submit a scheme under sub -section (2) of section 3 fails so to do, or, after a scheme has 
been sanctioned under sub -section ( 4) of section 3 fails to give effect to a scheme as so sanctioned, 
whether wholly or i n part, the State Government may, after making such inquiry as it may consider 
necessary and after giving an opportunity to the local authority to be heard in the matter, appoint any 
person to prepare the scheme or to give effect to it, as the cas e may be,  and may direct that such part of 
the expenses as that Government may determine shall be defrayed out of the funds belonging to the local 
authority.  
(2) Where any such direction as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) is issued, any person who has for the 
time being the custody of any moneys on behalf of the local authority, either as a banker or in any other 
capacity, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, be bound to 
comply with such direction.  
18. Penalty for contr avention of section 13 .—(1) If any parent fails to comply with an attendance 
order passed under section 13. he shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two rupees, and, in the case 
of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine not exceeding fif ty naye paise  for every day during 
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first of such contraventions:  
Provided that the amount of fine payable by any one person in respect of any child in any one year 
shall not exceed fifty rupees.  6 (2) If any person fails to furnish any information as required by sub -section ( 4) of section 13, he shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees.  
 19. Penalty for contravention of section 14 .—If any person contravenes the provisions of              
section 14, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees and, in the case of a 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine not exceeding one rupee for every day during which 
such contravention continues after conviction for the first of such contraventions.  
20. Courts competent to try offences .—(1) The courts competent to try offences under th is Act shall 
be the following, — 
(a) in rural areas to which the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954  (Delhi Act III of 19 55) extends, the 
Panchayati Adalat, constituted under section 50 of that Act, within whose jurisdiction the person 
committing the offence resides;  
(b) in other areas, the court of a magistrate having jurisdiction.  
(2) Any offence triable by the Panchayati Adalat shall be tried in the manner provided for the trial of 
criminal cases by the Delhi Panchayat Raj Act, 1954  (Delhi Act II I of 1955), and any offence triable by a 
magistrate shall be tried in a summary way.  
21. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on 
the complaint of an attendance authority or any other person authorised in this behalf by the local 
authority by general or special order.  
22. Certain persons to be public servants .—The attendance auth ority, every person appointed to 
assist the attendance authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 and every person authorised to make 
complaints under section 21 shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal C ode (45 of 1860).  
 23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any authority or person in respect of anything which is in good faith done 
or intended to be done under this  Act. 
 24. Delegation of powers .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, authorise any officer or 
authority subordinate to it to exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the State Government by or 
under this Act.  
(2) A local authority may, by general or special order and with the previous approval of the State 
Government, authorise any officer or authority subordinate to it to exercise all or  any of the powers 
conferred on a local authority by or under this Act.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the purpose s of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the class or standard education up to which shall be considered as primary educat ion; 
(b) the particulars to be contained in any scheme submitted under this Act, including particulars 
relating to the provision made or to be made in any area for the establishment of special schools or of 
schools imparting primary education on a part-time basis or for the supply of food or refreshments, 
books, writing materials, uniforms or other necessary amenities, to children while attending school;  
(c) the manner in which lists of children may be prepared in any specified area under section 6,  
the intervals at which the lists shall be kept revised and persons with whose assistance such lists shall 
be prepared;  
(d) the functions to be performed, and the manner in which such functions may be performed, by 
attendance authorities;  
(e) the distance beyond which a child may not be compelled to attend an approved school;  7 (f) the circumstances which may be regarded as reasonable excuses for the non -attendance of a 
child within the meaning of section 10;  
(g) the manner in which any inquiry under this Act  may be held;  
(h) the form in which an attendance order under this Act may be passed;  
(i) the registers, statements and other information to be maintained or furnished by approved 
schools for the purposes of this Act;  
(j) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however , that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
26. Repeal of Punjab Pri mary Education Act .—On the date on which primary education becomes 
compulsory in any specified area, the Punjab Primary Education Act, 1940  (Punjab Act XVIII of 1940) as 
in force in the Union territory of Delhi shall stand repealed in such area.  
--------------------------The Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Amendment Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION AND REHABILITATION) 
AMENDMENT  ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 2 OF 1960  
[27th February,  1960 .] 
An Act further to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) 
Amendment Act, 1960.  
1*                               *                              *                                 *                             *                         *  
11. Validation of certain action taken .—(1) Any fees in respect of appeals, revisions or other 
applications which, before the commencement of this Act, hav e been levied under the Displaced Persons 
(Compensation  and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954  (44 of 1954) , shall be deemed to have been validly levied, 
as if this Act and the amendments made thereby were in force when such fees had been levied.  
(2)  No order made, no action taken and nothing done before the commencement of this Act by any 
persons exercising the powers of a Deputy Chief Settlement Commissioner shall be invalid or shall be 
deemed ever to have been invalid merely by reason of any defect in, or in validity of, the appointment of 
such person and such appointment shall be deemed to have been validly made, as if this Act and the 
amendments made thereby were in force on the date of such appointment.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 10 rep. by Act, 52  of 19 64, s. 2 and the First Schedule, (w.e.f. 2 9-12-1964).  
 
--------------------------The Geneva Conventions Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 GENEVA CONVENTIONS ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 6 OF 1960  
[12th March, 1960 .] 
An Act to enable effect to be given to certain international Conventions done at Geneva on the 
twelfth day of August, 1949, to which India is a party, and for purposes connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Geneva Conventions      
Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Conventions ” means the Conventions set out in the Schedules ; and the First Convention, the 
Second Convention, the Third Convention and the Fourth Convention mean the Conventions set out 
in the First, Second, Third and Fourth Schedules, respectively;  
(b) “court” does not include a court -martial or military court;  
(c) “protected internee ” means a person protected by the Fourth Convention and interned in India;  
(d) “protecting power ”, in relation to a protected internee or a protected prisoner of war, means 
the power or organisation which is carrying out, in the interests of the power of which he is a national 
or of whose forces he is or was at any material time a member, the duties assigned to protecting 
powers under the Third Convention or, as the case may be, the Fourth Convention;  
(e) “protected prisoner of wa r” means a person protected by the Third Convention.  
CHAPTER II  
PUNISHMENT OF OFFENDERS AGAINST CONVENTIONS  
3. Punishment of grave breaches of conventions .—(1) If any person within or without India 
commits or attempts to commit, or abets or procures the commission by any other person of, a grave 
breach of any of the Conventions he shall be punished, — 
(a) Where the offence involves the wilful killing of a person protected by any of the Conventions, 
with death or with imprisonment for life; and  
(b) in any o ther case, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years.  
(2) Sub -section ( 1) applies to persons regardless of their nationality or citizenship.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) a grave breach of the First Convention is a breach  of that Convention involving an act referred 
to in article  50 of that Convention committed against p ersons or property protected by                              
that Convention;  
                                                           
1. 14th August , 1961, vide notification No. S .R.O. 222(E), dated 2nd August, 1961, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 4( ii). 
 
 2 
 (b) a grave breach of the Second Convention is a breach of that Convention in volving an act 
referred to in article  51 of that Convention committed against persons or property protected by                 
that Convention;  
(c) a grave breach of the Third Convention is a breach of that Convention involving an act 
referred to in article  130 of that Convention committed against persons or property protected by that 
Convention; and  
(d) a grave breach of the Fourth Convention is a breach of that Convention involving an act 
referred to in article  147 of that Convention committed agains t persons or property protected by that 
Convention.  
4. Liability of persons for offences committed outside India. —When an offence under this Chapter 
is committed by any person outside India, he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been  
committed at any place within India at which he may be found.  
5. Jurisdiction of court. —No court inferior to that of a chief presidency magistrate or a Court of 
Session shall try any offence punishable under this Chapter.  
6. Proof of application of Conve ntion. —If in any proceeding under this Chapter in respect of a 
grave breach of any of the Conventions a question arises under Article 2 of that Convention                     
(which relates to the circumstances in which the Convention applies), a certificat e under the hand of a 
Secretary to the Government of India certifying to any matter relevant to that question shall be conclusive 
evidence of the matter so certified.  
7. Jurisdiction of courts  martial. —The Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Air Force                             
Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), relating to trial by court -martial of persons 
who commit civil offences shall have effect for the purposes of the jurisdiction of courts -martial as if this 
Chapter had not bee n passed.  
CHAPTER III  
LEGAL  PROCEEDINGS IN RESPECT OF PROTECTED PERSONS  
8. Notice of trial of protected persons to be served on protecting power, etc. —(1) The court                 
before wh ich— 
(a) a protected prisoner of war is brought up for trial for any offence; or  
(b) a protected internee is brought up for trial for an offence for which that court has power to 
sentence him to death or to imprisonment for a term of two years or more,  
shall no t proceed with the trial until it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that a notice containing 
the particulars mentioned in the next following sub -section, so far as they are known to the prosecutor, 
has been served not less than three weeks previou sly on the protecting power                                                    
(if there is a protecting power) and, if the accused is a protected prisoner of war on the accused and the 
prisoners’ representative.  
(2) The particulars referred to in the for egoing sub -section are — 
(a) the full name and description of the accused, including the date of his birth and his profession 
or trade, if any, and if the accused is a protected prisoner of war, his rank and arm, regimental, 
personal or serial number;  
(b) his place of detention, internment or residence;  
(c) the offence with which he is charged; and  
(d) the court before which the trial is to take place and the time and place appointed for the trial.  
(3) For the purposes of this section a document purporting — 
(a) to be signed on behalf of the protecting power or by the prisoners ’ representative or by the 
person accused, as the case may be; and  
(b) to be an acknowledgment of the receipt by that power, representative or person on a specified 
day of a  notice described therein as a notice under this section,  3 
 shall, unless the contrary is shown, be sufficient evidence that the notice required by sub -section ( 1) 
was served on that power, representative or person on that day.  
(4) In this section, the exp ression “prisoners’ representative ” in relation to a particular protected 
prisoner of war at a particular time means the person by whom the functions of prisoners ’ representative 
within the meaning of article 79 of the Third Convention were exercisable in relation to that prisoner at 
the camp or place at which that prisoner was, at or last before that time, detained as a protected prisoner 
of war.  
(5) Any court which adjourns a trial for the purpose of enabling the requirements of this section to be 
compli ed with may, notwithstanding anything in any other law, authorise the detention of the accused in 
such custody as it may think fit for the period of the adjournment.  
9. Legal re -presentation of certain persons .—(1) The court before which — 
(a) any person is  brought up for trial for an offence under section 3 of this Act; or  
(b) a protected prisoner of war is brought up for trial for any offence,  
shall not proceed with the trial unless — 
(i) the accused is represented by a legal practitioner; and  
(ii) it is pr oved to the satisfaction of the court that a period of not less than fourteen days has 
elapsed since instructions for the representation of the accused at the trial were first given to the 
legal practitioner,  
and if the court adjourns the trial for the pur pose of enabling the requirements of this sub -section to be 
complied with, then, notwithstanding anything in any other law, the Court may authorise the detention of 
the accused in such custody as it may think fit for the period of the adjournment.  
(2) Wher e the accused is a protected prisoner of war, in the absence of a legal practitioner accepted by 
the accused as representing him, the legal practitioner instructed for the purpose on behalf of the 
protecting power shall, without prejudice to the requiremen ts of clause ( ii) of the foregoing sub -section, 
be regarded for the purposes of that sub -section as representing the accused.  
(3) If the court adjourns the trial in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) by reason that the accused is not 
represented by a legal practitioner, the court shall direct that a legal practitioner be assigned to watch over 
the interest s of the accused at any further proceedings in connection with the offence, and at any such 
further proceedings, in the absence of a legal practitioner eit her accepted by the accused as representing 
him or instructed as mentioned in the last foregoing sub -section, the legal practitioner assigned in 
pursuance of this sub -section shall, without prejudice to the requirements of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), 
be regarded for the purposes of that sub -section as representing the accused.  
(4) A legal practitioner shall be assigned in pursuance of sub -section ( 3) in such manner as may be 
provided in the rules made under this Act or, in the absence of provisions in t he rules, as the court directs, 
and the legal practitioner so assigned shall be entitled to such fees as may be provided i n the rules made 
under this Act.  
10. Appeals by protected prisoners of war and internees .—(1) Where a protected prisoner of war 
or a protected internee has been sentenced by a court to death or to imprisonment for a term of two years 
or more, any time allowed in relation to the institution of an appeal against the conviction or sentence 
shall be deemed to continue to run until the day o n which the convicted person receives a notice given, — 
(a) in the case of a protected prisoner of war —by an officer in the Armed Forces; or  
(b) in the case of a protected internee —by or on behalf of the governor or other person in charge 
of the prison or p lace in which he is confined,  
that the protecting power has been notified of his conviction and sentence, and for such further time as 
would have been within the time allowed if the conviction or sentenc e had taken place or been 
pronounced on that day.  
(2) Where, after an appeal against the conviction or sentence by a court of a protected prisoner of war 
or a protected internee has been decided, the sentence remains a sentence of death, or remains or has 4 
 become a sentence of imprisonment for a term of two y ears or more, any time allowed in relation to a 
further appeal in respect of the conviction or sentence as confirmed or varied upon the previous appeal  
shall be deemed to continue to run until the day on which the convicted person receives a notice given b y 
a person referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of the last preceding sub -section, as the case may require, 
that the protecting power has been notified of the decision of the court upon the previous appeal,  and for 
such further time as would have been w ithin the time allowed if that decision had been pronounced on 
that day.  
(3) Where sub -section ( 1) applies in relation to a convicted person, then, unless the court otherwise 
orders, an order of the court relating to the restitution of property or the paym ent of compensation to an 
aggrieved person shall not take effect, and a provision of any law relating to the revesting of property on 
conviction shall not take effect in relation to the conviction, while an appeal by the convicted person 
against his convic tion or sentence is possible without an extension of time other than the extension 
provided by the last preceding sub -section.  
(4) Sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall not apply in relation to an appeal against a conviction or 
sentence, or against the decis ion of  a court upon a previous appeal , if, at the time of the conviction or 
sentence, or of the decision of the court upon the previous appeal, as the case may be, there is no 
protecting power.  
11. Reduction of sentence and custody of protected prisoners of war and internees .—(1) When a 
protected prisoner of war or a protected internee is convicted of an offence, the court shall, — 
(a) in fixing a term of imprisonment in respect of the offence, deduct from the term which it 
would otherwise have fixed any period during which the convicted person has been in custody in 
connection with that offence before the trial ; and 
(b) in fixing any penalty other than imprisonment in respect of the offence, take that period of 
custody into account.  
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that a protected prisoner of war accused of an offence 
has been in custody in connection with that offence, while awaiting trial, in a place other than a camp or 
place in which protected prisoners of war are detained, for an aggregate period of not less than three 
months, the Central Government may direct that the prisoner shall be transferred from that custody to the 
custody of an officer of the Armed Forces of the Union and thereafter remain in military custody at a 
camp or place in which protected prisoners of war are detained , and be brought before the court at the 
time appointed for his trial.  
CHAPTER IV  
ABUSE OF THE RED CROSS AND OTHER EMBLEMS  
12. Prohibition of use of Red Cross and other emblems .—No person shall, withou t the approval of 
the Central Government, use for any purpose whatsoever — 
(a) the emblem of a red cross with vertical and horizontal arms of the same length on, and 
completely surrounded by, a white ground, or the designation “Red Cross ” or “Geneva Cross ”; 
(b) the emblem of a red crescent moon on , and completely surrounded by, a white ground, or the 
designation “Red Crescent ”; 
(c) the following emblem in red on, and completely surrounded by, a white ground, that is to say, 
a lion passing from right to left  of, and with its face turned towards, the observer, holding erect in its 
raised right forepaw a scimitar, with, appearing above the lion ’s back, the upper half of the sun 
shooting forth rays, or the designation “Red Lion and Sun ”; 
(d) the emblem of a whit e or silver cross with vertical and horizontal arms of the same length on, 
and completely surrounded by, a red ground, being the heraldic emblem of the Swiss          
Confederation; or  5 
 (e) any design or wording so nearly resembling any of the emblems or de signation s specified in 
the preceding clauses of this section as to be capable of being mistaken for, or, as the case may be, 
understood as referring to, one of those emblems.  
13. Penalty .—If any person contravenes any of the provisions of section 12, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and be liable to forfeit any goods upon or in 
connection with which the emblem, designation, design or wording was used by that person.  
14. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person comm itting an offence under this Chapter is a 
company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the 
conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence an d shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that, nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exer cised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithst anding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Chapter has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other  
officer shall also be deemed to be g uilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of         
individuals, and  
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
15. Saving .—In the case of a trade mark registered before the coming into force of this Act, the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply by reason only of its consisting of or containing a 
design or wording which reproduces or resembles an emblem or designation specified in clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of section 12; and where a person is charged with using such a design or wording for any 
purpose and it is proved that he used it ot herwise than as, or as part of, a trade mark so registered, it shall 
be a defence for him to prove — 
(a) that he lawfully used that design or wording for that purpose before the coming into force of 
this Act; or  
(b) in a case where he is charged with using the design or wording upon goods, that the design or 
wording had been applied to the goods before he acquired them by some other person who had 
manufactured or dealt with the goods in the course of trade and who lawfully used the design or 
wording upon sim ilar goods before the coming into force of this Act.  
16. Use of „Red Cross ‟ and other emblems on Indian ship or aircraft .—The provisions of this 
Chapter extend to the use in or outside India of any emblem, designation, design or wording as is referred 
to in section 12 on any Indian ship or aircraft.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
complaint by the Government or of such officer of the Government as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.  
18. Power to make rule s.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  
19. Rules to be l aid before Parliamen t.—Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued before each House of Parliament while it is 6 
 in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in on e session or in two successive 
sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, th e rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
20. Repeal .—(1) The Geneva Convention Implementing Act, 1936 (14 of 1936), is hereby repealed.  
(2) The Geneva Convention Act, 1911  (1 and 2 Geo.  5, C.  20), shall cease to have effect as part of the 
law of India.  
  7 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section  2) 
GENEVA  CONVENTION  FOR THE AMELIORATION OF THE CONDITION OF THE WOUNDED  AND SICK IN 
ARMED FORCES IN THE FIELD  AUGUST  12, 1949 . 
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Governments represented at the Diplomatic Conference held 
at Geneva from April 21 to August  12, 1949, for the purpose of revising the Geneva Convention for the 
Relief of the Wounded and Sick in Armies in the Field of July 27, 1929, have agreed as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
GENREAL  PROVISIONS  
Article  1 
Respect for the Convention. —The High Contracting Parties undertake  to respect and to ensure 
respect for the present Convention in all circumstances.   
Article  2 
Application of the Convention. —In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in 
peacetime, the present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict 
which may arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if the state of war is not 
recognized by one of them.  
The Convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of a High 
Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets with no armed resistance.  
Although one of the Powers in conflict may not be a party to the present Convention, the Powers who 
are parties thereto shall remain bound by it in their mutual relati ons. They shall furthermore  be bound by 
the Convention in relation to the said Power, if the latter accepts and applies the provisions thereof.  
Article  3 
Conflicts not of an international character. —In the case of armed conflict not of an international 
character occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each party to the conflict shall 
be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: — 
(1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed force s who have laid 
down their arms and those place  hors de  combat  by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause, shall 
in all circumstances be treated humanely, without any adverse distinction founded on race, colour, 
religion or faith, sex, birth or wea lth, or any other similar criteria.  
To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place 
whatsoever with respect to the above -mentioned persons: — 
(a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mu tilation, cruel treatment      
and torture;  
(b) taking of hostages;  
(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment ; 
(d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment 
pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are 
recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.  
(2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for. An impartial humanitarian body, such as 
the International Committ ee of the Red Cross, may offer its services to the Parties to the conflict.  
The Parties to the conflict should further endeavour to bring into force, by means of special 
agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the present Convention.  
The applica tion of the preceding provisions shall not affect  the legal status of the Parties                    
to the conflict.  8 
 Article  4 
Application by neutral Powers. —Neutral Powers shall apply by analogy the provisions of the 
present Convention to the wounded and sick, and to members of the medical personnel and to chaplains 
of the armed forces of the Parties to the conflict, received or interned in their territory, as  well as to dead  
persons found.  
Article  5 
Duration  of application. —For the protected persons who have fallen into the hands of the enemy, 
the present Convention shall apply until their final repatriation.  
Article  6 
Special agreements. —In addition to the agreements expressly provided for in                             
Article s 10, 15, 23, 28, 31, 36, 37 and 52, the High Contracting Parties may conclude other special 
agreements for all matters concerning which they may deem it suitable to  make separate provision. No 
special agreement shall adversely affect the situation of the wounded and sick, of members of the medical 
personnel or of chaplains, as defined by the present Convention, nor restrict the rights which it confers 
upon them.  
Woun ded and sick, as well as medical personnel and chaplains, shall continue to have the benefit of 
such agreements as long as the Convention is applicable to them, except where express provisions to the 
contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in subsequent  agreements, or where more favorable measures 
have been taken with regard to them by one or other of the Parties to the conflict.  
Article  7 
Non-renunciation of rights .—Wounded and sick, as well as members of the medical personnel and 
chaplains, may in no c ircumstances renounce in part or in entirety the rights secured to them by the 
present Convention, and by the special agreements referred to in the foregoing Article , if such there be.  
Article  8 
Protesting Powers. —The present Convention shall be applied wi th the co -operation and under the 
scrutiny of the Protecting powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests of the Parties to the conflict. 
For this purpose, the Protecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, 
delegates from amongst their own nationals or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates 
shall be subject to the approval of the Power with which they are to carry out their d uties.  
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate to the greatest extent possible, the task of the representatives 
or delegates of the Protecting Powers.  
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not in any case exceed their mission  
under the present Convention. They shall, in particular, take account of the imperative necessities of 
security of the State wherein they carry out their duties. Their activities shall only be restricted as an 
exceptional and temporary measure when this i s rendered necessary by imperative military necessities.  
Article  9 
Activities of the International committee of the Red Cross. —The provisions of the present 
Convention constitute no obstacle to the humanitarian activities which the International Committee of the 
Red Cross or any other impartial humanitarian organization may, subject to the consent of the Parties to 
the conflict concerned, undertake for the protection of wounded and sick, medical personnel and 
chaplains, and for their relief.  
Article  10 
Substitutes for Protecting Powers. —The High Contracting Parties may at any  time agree to entrust 
to an organization which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the duties incumbent on the 
Protecting Powers by virtue of the present Convention.  9 
 When wounded and sick, or medical personnel and chaplains do not benefit or cease to benefit, no 
matter for what reason, by the activities of a Protecting P ower or of an organization provided for in the  
first paragraph above, the Detaining Power shall requ est a neutral State, or such an organization, to 
undertake the functions performed under the present Convention by a Protecting Power designated by the 
Parties to a conflict.  
If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request o r shall accept, 
subject to the provisions of this Article, the offer of the services of a humanitarian organization , such as 
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to assume the humanitarian functions performed by 
Protecting Powers under the present  Convention.  
Any neutral power, or any organization invited by the Power concerned or offering itself for these 
purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibility towards the Party to the conflict on which 
persons protected by the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient assurances 
that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and to discharge them impartially.  
No derogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between Powers 
one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its alli es 
by reason of military events , more particularly wher e the whole, or a substantial part, of the territory of 
the said Power is occupied.  
Whenever in the present Convention mention is made of a Protecting Power, such mention also 
applies to substitute organization s in the sense of present Article.  
Article  11 
Conciliation procedure. —In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons, 
particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to the application or 
interpretation of the provisions of the present Conventio n, the protecting powers shall lend their good 
offices with a view to setting the disagreement.  
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation of one Party or  on its own 
initiative, propose to the Parties to the conflict a me eting of their representatives, in particular of the 
authorities responsible for the wounded and sick members of medical personnel and chaplains, possibly 
on neutral territory suitably chosen. The parties to the conflict shall be bound to give effect to th e 
proposals made to them for this purpose. The Protecting Powers may, if necessary, propose for approval 
by the Parties to the conflict a person belonging to a neutral Power or delegated by the International 
Committee of the Red Cross who shall be invited to take part in such a meeting.  
CHAPTER II  
WOUNDED AND SICK  
Article  12 
Protection and care. —Members of the armed forces and other persons mentioned in the following 
Article, who are wounded or sick, shall be respected and protected in all circumstances.  
They shall be treated humanely and cared for by the Party to the conflict in whose power they may 
be, without any adverse distinction founded on sex, race, nationality, religion, political opinions, or any 
other similar criteria. Any attempts upon their li ves, or violence to their persons, shall be strictly 
prohibited; in particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated, subjected to torture or to biological 
experiments; they shall not wilfully be left without medical assistance and care, nor shall co nditions 
exposing them to contagion or infection be created.  
Only urgent medical reasons will authorize priority in the order of treatment to be administered.  
Women shall be treated with all consideration due to their sex.  
The Party to the conflict which i s compelled to a bandon wounded or sick to the enem y shall, as far as 
military consideration permits, leave with them a part of its medical personnel and material to assist in 
their care.  10 
  
Article  13 
Protected persons. —The present Convention shall apply to the wounded and sick belongi ng to the 
following categories: — 
(1) Members of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict as well as members of militias or volunteer 
corps forming part of such armed forces;  
(2) Members of other militias and members of other volunteer corps, including those of organized 
resistance movements, belonging to a Party to the conflict and operating in or outside their own territory, 
even if this territory is occupied, provided that suc h militias or volunteer corps, including such organized 
resistance movements, fulfil the following conditions: — 
(a) that of being commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates;  
(b) that of having a fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance ; 
(c) that of carrying arms openly;  
(d) that of conducting their operations in accordance with the laws and customs of war.  
(3) Members of regular armed forces who profess allegiance to a Government or an authority not 
recognized by the Detaining Power;  
(4) Persons who accompany the armed forces without actually being members thereof, such as civil 
members of military aircraft crews, war correspondents, supply contractors, members of labour units or of 
services responsible for the welfare of the armed force s, provided that they have received authorization 
from the armed forces which they accompany;  
(5) Members of crews, including masters, pilots and apprentices, of the merchant marine and the 
crews of civil aircraft of the Parties to the conflict, who do not  benefit by more favorable treatment under 
any other provisions in international law;  
(6) Inhabitants of a non -occupied territory who on the approach of the enemy spontaneously take up 
arms to resist the invading forces, without having had time to form the mselves into regular armed units, 
provided they carry arms openly and respect the laws and customs of war.  
Article  14 
Status. —Subject to the provisions of Article  12, the wounded and sick of a belligerent who fall into 
enemy hands shall be prisoners of war , and the provisions of international law concerning prisoners of 
war shall apply to them.  
Article  15 
Search for casualties. Evacuation. —At all times, and particularly after an engagement, Parties to 
the conflict shall, without delay, take all possible measures to search for and collect the wounded and 
sick, to protect them against pillage and ill -treatment, to ensure their adequate care, and to search for the 
dead and prevent their being despoiled . 
Whenever circumstances permit, an armistice or a suspen sion of fire shall be arranged, or local 
arrangements made, to permit the removal, exchange and transport of the wounded left on the battlefield.  
Likewise, local arrangements may be concluded between Parties to the conflict for the removal or 
exchange of w ounded and sick from a besieged or encircled area, and for the passage of medical and 
religious personnel and equipment on their way to that area.  
Article  16 
Recording and forwarding of information. —Parties to the conflict shall record as soon as possible,  
in respect of each wounded, sick or dead person of the adverse Party falling into their hands, any 
particulars which may assist in his identification.  
 11 
 These records should if possible incl ude— 
(a) designation of the Power on which he depends;  
(b) army, regimental, person al or serial number;  
(c) surname;  
(d) first name or names;  
(e) date of birth;  
(f) any other particulars shown on his identity card or disc;  
(g) date and place of capture or death;  
(h) particulars concerning wounds or illness, or cause of death.  
As soon as possible the above -mentioned information shall be forwarded to the Information Bureau 
described in Article 122 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 
August 12, 1949, which shall transmit this informatio n to the Power on which these persons depend 
through the intermediary of the Protecting Power and of the Central Prisoners of War Agency.  
Parties to the conflict shall prepare and forward to each other through the same bureau, certificates of 
death or duly  authenticated lists of dead. They shall likewise collect and forward through the same bureau 
one-half of a double identity disc, last wills or other documents of importance to the next of kin, money 
and in general all articles of an intrinsic or sentiment al value, which are found on the dead. These articles, 
together with unidentified articles, shall be sent in sealed packets, accompanied by statements giving all 
particulars necessary for the identification of the deceased owners, as well as by a complete list of the 
contents of the parcel.  
Article  17 
Prescriptions regarding the dead. Graves Registration Service. —Parties to the conflict shall 
ensure that burial or cremation of the dead, carried out individually as far as circumstances permit , is 
preceded by  a careful examination, if possible by a medical examination, of the bodies, with a view to 
confirming death, establishing identity and enabling a report to be made. One -half of the double identity 
disc, or the identity disc itself if it is a single disc, should remain on the body.  
Bodies shall not be cremated except for imperative reasons of hygiene or for motives based on the 
religion of the deceased. In case  of cremation, the circumstances and reasons for cremation shall be stated 
in detail in the death certificate or on the authenticated list of the dead.  
They shall further ensure that the dead are honourably interred, if possible according to the rites of the 
religion to which they belonged, that their graves are respected, grouped if possible according  to the 
nationality of the deceased, properly maintained and marked so that they may always be found. For this 
purpose, they shall organi se at the commencement of hostilities an Official Graves Registration Service, 
to allow subsequent exhumations and to ensure the identification of bodies, whatever the site of the 
graves, and the possible transportation to the home country. These provisions shall likewise apply to the 
ashes, whi ch shall be kept by the Graves Registration Services until proper disposal thereof in accordance 
with the wishes of the home country.  
As soon as circumstances permit, and at latest at the end of hostilities, these Services shall exchange, 
through the Infor mation Bureau mentioned in the second paragraph of Article 16, lists showing the exact 
location and markings of the graves together with particulars of the dead interred therein.  
Article  18 
Role of the population. —The military authorities may appeal to the  charity of the inhabitants 
voluntarily to collect and care for, under their direction, the wounded and sick, granting persons who have 
responded to this appeal the necessary protection and facilities. Should the adverse party take or retake 
control of the  area, he shall likewise grant these persons the same protection and the same facilities.  12 
 The military authorities shall permit the inhabitants and relief societies, even in invaded or occupied 
areas, spontaneously to collect and care for wounded or sick o f whatever nationality. The civilian 
population shall respect these wounded and sick, and in particular abstain from offering them violence.  
No one may ever be molested or convicted for having nursed the wounded or sick.  
The provisions of the present Artic le do not relieve the occupying Power of its obligation to give both 
physical and moral care to the wounded and sick.  
CHAPTER III  
MEDICAL  UNITS AND ESTABLISHMENTS  
Article  19 
Protection. —Fixed establishments and mobile medical units of the Medical Service may in no 
circumstances be attacked, but shall at all times be respected and protected by the Parties to the conflict. 
Should they fall into the hands of the adverse Party, their personne l shall be free to pursue their duties, as 
long as the capturing Power has not itself ensured the necessary care of the wounded and sick found in 
such establishment and units.  
The responsible authorities shall ensure that the said medical establishment s and units are, as far as 
possible, situated in such a manner that attacks against military objectives cannot imperil their safety.  
Article  20 
Protection of hospital ships. —Hospital ships entitled to the protection of the Geneva Convention for 
the Amelioratio n of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea 
of August 12, 1949, shall not be attacked from the land.  
Article  21 
Discontinuance of protection of medical establishments and units. —The protection to which fixed 
establish ments and mobile medical units of the Medical Service are entitled shall not cease unless they are 
used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts harmful to the enemy. Protection may, however, 
cease, only after a due warning has been given, naming , in all appropriate cases, a reasonable time limit 
and after such warning has remained unheeded.  
Article  22 
Conditions not depriving medical units and establishments of protection. —The following 
conditions shall not be considered as depriving a medical un it or establishment of the protection 
guaranteed by Article  19:— 
(1) That the personnel of the unit or establishment a re rearmed, and that they use the arms in their 
own defence, or in that of the wounded and sick in their charge.  
(2) That in the absence of armed orderlies, the unit or establishment is protected by a picket or by 
sentries or by an escort.  
(3) That small arms and ammunition taken from the wounded and sick and not yet handed to the 
proper service, are found in the unit or establishment.  
(4) That personnel and material of the veterinary service are found in the unit or establishment, 
without forming an integral part thereof.  
(5) That the humanitarian activities of medical units and establishments or of their personnel extend 
to the care of civilian wounded or sick.  
Article  23 
Hospital zones and localities. —In time of peace, the High Contracting Parties and, after the outbreak 
of hostilities, the Parties to the conflict, may establish in their own territory and, if the need arises, in 
occupie d areas, hospital zones and localities so organized as to protect the wounded and sick from the 13 
 effects of war, as well as the personnel entrusted with the organi sation and administration of these zones 
and localities and with the care of the persons there in assembled.  
Upon the outbreak and during the course of hostilities, the Parties concerned may conclude 
agreements on mutual recognition of the hospital zones and localities they have created. They may for 
this purpose implement the provisions of the Draf t Agreement annexed to the present Convention, with 
such amendments as they may consider necessary.  
The Protecting Powers and the International Committee of the Red Cross are invited to lend their 
good offices in order to facilitate the institution and rec ognition of these hospital zones and localities.  
CHAPTER IV  
PERSONNEL  
Article  24 
Protection of permanent personnel. —Medical personnel exclusively engaged in the search for, or 
the collec tion, transport or treatment of , the wounded or sick, or in the preven tion of disease, staff 
exclusively engaged in the administration of medical units and establishments, as well as chaplains 
attached to the armed forces, shall be respected and protected in all circumstances.  
Article  25 
Protection of auxiliary personnel. —Members of the armed forces specially trained for employment, 
should the need arise, as hospital orderlies, nurses or auxiliary stretcher -bearers, in the search for or the 
collection, transport or treatment of the wounded and sick shall likewise be respect ed and protected if 
they are carrying out these duties at the time when they come into contact with the enemy or fall into      
his hands.  
Article  26 
Personnel of aid societies. —The staff of National Red Cross Societies and that of other Voluntary 
Aid Socie ties, duly recogni sed and authori sed by their Governments, who may be employed on the same 
duties as the personnel named in Article  24, are placed on the same footing as the personnel named in the 
said Article , provided that the staff of such societies are  subject to military laws and regulations.  
Each High Contracting Party shall notify to the other, either in time of peace or at the commencement 
of or during hostilities, but in any case before actually employing them, the names of the societies which 
it has authori sed, under its responsibility, to render assistance to the regular medical service of its               
armed forces.  
Article  27 
Societies of neutral countries. —A recognized Society of a neutral country can only lend the 
assistance of its medical  personnel and units to a Party to the conflict with the previous consent of its own 
Government and the authori sation of the Party to the conflict concerned. That personnel and those units 
shall be placed under the control of that Party to the conflict.  
The neutral Government shall notify this consent to the adversary of the State which accepts such 
assistance. The Party to the conflict who accepts such assistance is bound to notify the adverse Party 
thereof before making any use of it.  
In no circumstances shall this assistance be considered as interference in the conflict.  
The members of the personnel named in the first paragraph shall be duly furnished with the identify 
cards provided for in Article  40 before leaving the neutral country to which they belon g. 
Article  28 
Retained personnel. —Personnel designated in Article s 24 and 26 who fall into the hands of the 
adverse Party, shall be retained only in so far as the state of health, the spiritual needs and the number of 
prisoners of war require.  14 
 Personnel th us retained shall not be deemed prisoners of war. Nevertheless they shall at least benefit 
by all the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of        
August 12, 1949.  Within the framework of the military laws and  regulations of the Detaining Power, and 
under the authority of its competent service, they shall continue to carry out, in according with their 
professional ethics, their medical and spiritual duties on behalf of prisoners of war, preferably those of the 
armed forces to which they themselves belong. They shall further enjoy the following facilities for 
carrying out their medical or spiritual duties: — 
(a) They shall be authori sed to visit periodically the prisoners of war in labour units or hospitals 
outsid e the camp. The Detaining Power shall put at their disposal the means of transport required.  
(b) In each camp the senior medical officer of the highest rank shall be responsible to the military 
authorities of the camp for the professional activity of the retained medical personnel. For this 
purpose, from the outbreak of hostilities, the Parties to t he conflict shall agree regarding the 
corresponding seniority of the ranks of their medical personnel, including those of the societies 
designated in Article  26. In all question s arising out of their duties, this medical officer, and the 
chaplains, shall h ave direct access to the military and medical authorities of the camp who shall grant 
them the facilities they may require for correspondence relating to these questions.  
(c) Although retained personnel in a camp shall be subject to its internal discipline , they shall not, 
however, be required to  perform any work outside their medical or religious duties.  
During hostilities the parties to the conflict shall make arrangements for relieving where possible 
retained personnel, and shall settle the procedure of such relief.  
None of the preceding provisions shall relieve the Detaining Power of the obligations imposed upon it 
with regard to the medical and spiritual welfare of the prisoners of war.  
Article  29 
Status of auxiliary personnel. —Members of the personnel designated in Article 25 who have fallen 
into the hands of the enemy, shall be prisoners of war, but shall be employed on their medical duties in so 
far as the need arises.  
Article  30 
Return of medical and religious personnel. —Personnel whose retention is not indispensable by 
virtue of the provisions of Article 28 shall be returned to the Party to the conflict to whom they belong, as 
soon as a road is open for their return and military requirements permit.  
Pending their return, they shall not be deemed pris oners of war. Nevertheless they shall at least 
benefit by all the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 
August 12, 1949.They  shall continue to fulfil their duties under the orders of the adverse Party and shal l 
preferably be engaged in the care of the wounded and sick of the Party to the conflict to which they 
themselves belong.  
On their departure, they shall take with them the effects, personal belongings, valuables and 
instruments belonging to them.  
Article  31 
Selection of personnel for return. —The selection of personnel for return under Article 30  shall be 
made irrespective of any consideration of race, religion or political opinion, but preferably according to 
the chronological order of their capture and the ir state of health.  
As from the outbreak of hostilities, parties to the conflict may determine by special agreement the 
percentage of personnel to be retained , in proportion to the number of prisoners and the distribution of the 
said personnel in the camps . 
Article  32 
Return of personnel belonging to neutral countries. —Persons designated in Article 27 who have 
fallen into the hands of the adverse Party may not be detained.  15 
 Unless otherwise agreed, they shall have permission to return to their country, or if  this is not 
possible, to the territory of the Party to the conflict in whose service they were, as soon as a route for their 
return is open and military considerations permit.  
Pending their release, they shall continue their work under the direction of th e adverse Party; they 
shall preferably be engaged in the care of the wounded and sick of the Party to the conflict in whose 
service they were.  
On their departure, they shall take with them their effects, personal articles and valuable and the 
instruments, arms and if possible the means of transport belonging to them.  
The Parties to the conflict shall secure to these personnel, while in their power, the same food, 
lodging, allowances and pay as are granted to the corresponding personnel of their armed forces. The food 
shall in any case be sufficient as regards quantity, quality and variety to keep the said personnel in a 
normal state of health.  
 
CHAPTER V  
BUILDINGS  AND MATERIAL  
Article  33 
Buildings and stores. —The material of mobile medical units of the  armed forces which fall into the 
hands of the enemy, shall be reserved for the care of wounded and sick.  
The buildings, material and stores of fixed medical establishments of the armed forces shall remain 
subject to the laws of war, but may not be diverte d from that purpose as long as they are required for the 
care of wounded and sick. Nevertheless, the commanders of forces in the field may make use of them, in 
case of urgent military necessity, provided that they make previous arrangements for the welfare  of the 
wounded and sick who are nursed in them.  
The material and stores defined in the present Article  shall not be intentionally destroyed.  
Article  34 
Property of aid societies. —The real and personal property of aid societies which are admitted to the 
privileges of the Convention shall be regarded as private property.  
The right of requisition recogni sed for belligerents by the laws and customs of war shall not be 
exercised except in case of urgent necessity, and only after the welfare of the wounded and s ick has            
been ensured.  
CHAPTER VI  
MEDICAL TRANSPORTS  
Article  35 
Protection. —Transports of wounded and sick or of medical equipment shall be respected and 
protected in the same way as mobile medical units.  
Should such transport or vehicles fall into the hands of the adverse Party, they shall be subject to the 
laws of war, on condition that the Party to the conflict who captures them shall in all cases ensure the care 
of the wounded and sick they contain.  
The civilian personnel and all means of transport obtained by requisition shall be subject to the 
general rules of international law.  
Article  36 
Medical aircraft. —Medical aircraft, that is to say, aircraft exclusively employed for the removal of 
wounded and s ick and for the transport of medical personnel and equipment, shall not be attacked, but 
shall be respected by the belligerents, while flying at heights, time s and on routes specifically agreed upon 
between the belligerents concerned.  16 
 They shall bear, clea rly marked, the distinctive emblem prescribed in Article  38, together with their 
national colours, on their lower, upper and lateral surfaces. They shall be provided with any other 
markings or means of identification that may be agreed upon between the bel ligerents upon the outbreak 
or during the course of hostilities.  
Unless agreed otherwise, flights over enemy or enemy -occupied territory are prohibited.  
Medical aircraft shall obey every summons to land. In the event of a landing thus imposed, the 
aircraft  with its occupants may continue its flight after examination, if any.  
In the event of an involuntary landing in enemy or enemy -occupied territory, the wounded and sick , 
as well as the crew of the aircraft shall be prisoners of war. The medical personnel shall be treated 
according to Article  24 and the Article s following.  
Article  37 
Flight over neutral countries. Landing of wounded. —Subject to the provisions of the second 
paragraph, medical aircraft of Parties to the conflict may fly over the territory of neutral Powers, land on 
it in case of necessity, or use it as a port of call. They shall give the neutral Powers previous notice of 
their passage over the said territory and obey all summons to alight, on land or water. They will be 
immune from attack only when flying on routes, at heights and at times specifically agreed upon between 
the Parties to the conflic t and the neutral Power concerned.  
The neutral Powers may, however, place conditions or restrictions on the passage or landing of 
medical aircraft on their territory. Such possible conditions or restrictions shall be applied equally to all 
Parties to the c onflict.  
Unless agreed otherwise between neutral Power and the Parties to the conflict, the wounded and sick 
who are disembarked, with the consent of the local authorities, on neutral territory by medical aircraft, 
shall be detained by the neutral Power, w here so required by international law, in such a manner that they 
cannot again take part in operations of war. The cost of their accommodation and internment shall be 
borne by the Power on which they depend.  
CHAPTER VII  
THE DISTINCTIVE EMBLEM  
Article  38 
Emblem of the Convention. —As a compliment to Switzerland, the heraldic emblem of the red cross 
on a white ground, formed by reversing the Federal colours, is retained as the emblem and distinctive sign 
of the Medical Service of armed forces.  
Nevertheless, in  the case of countries which already use as emblem, in place of the red cross, the red 
crescent or the red lion and sun on a white ground, those emblems are also recognized by the terms of the 
present Convention.  
Article  39 
Use of the emblem. —Under the dir ection of the competent military authority, the emblem shall be 
displayed on the flags, armlets and on all equipment employed in the Medical Service.  
Article  40 
Identification of medical and religious personnel. —The personnel designated in Article  24 and i n 
Article s 26 and 27 shall wear, affixed to the left arm, a water -resistant armlet bearing the distinctive 
emblem, issued and stamped by the military authority.  
Such personnel, in addition to wearing the identity disc mentioned in Article  16, shall also carry a 
special identity card bearing the distinctive emblem. This card shall be water -resistant and of such size 
that it can be carried in the pocket. It shall be worded in the national language, shall mention at least the 
surname and firs t names, the date of birth, the rank and the service number of the bearer, and shall state in 
what capacity he is entitled to the protection of the present Convention. The card shall bear the 
photograph on the owner and also either his signature or his fin ger-prints or both. It shall be embossed 
with the stamp of the military authority.  17 
 The identity card shall be uniform throughout the same armed forces and, as far as possible, of a 
similar type in the armed forces of the High Contracting Parties. The Parties to the conflict may be guided 
by the model which is annexed, by way of example, to the present Convention. They shall inform each 
other, at the outbreak of hostilities, of the model they are using. Identity cards should be made out, if 
possible, at leas t in duplicate, one copy being kept by the home country.  
In no circumstances may the said personnel be deprived of their insignia or identity cards nor of the 
right to wear the armlet. In  case of loss, they shall be entitled to receive duplicates of the ca rds and to 
have the insignia replaced.  
Article  41 
Identification of auxiliary personnel. —The personnel designated in Article  25 shall wear, but only 
while carrying out medical duties, a white armlet bearing in its centr e the distinctive sign in miniature; the 
armlet shall be issued and stamped by the military authority.  
Military identity documents to be carried by this type of personnel shall specify what special training 
they have received, the temporary character of the duties they are engaged upon, and their authority for 
wearing the armlet.  
Article  42 
Marking of medical units and establishments. —The distinctive flag of the Convention shall be 
hoisted only over such medical units and establishments as are entitled to be respected under the 
Convention, an d only with the consent of the military authorities.  
In mobile units, as in fixed establishments, it may be accompanied by the national flag of the Party to 
the conflict to which the unit or establishment belongs.  
Nevertheless, medical units which have fal len into the hands of the enemy shall not fly any flag other 
than that of the Convention.  
Parties to the conflict shall take the necessary steps, in so far as military considerations permit, to 
make the distinctive emblems indicating medical units and esta blishments clearly visible to the enemy 
land, air or naval forces, in order to obviate the possibility of any hostile action.  
Article  43 
Marking of units of neutral countries. —The medical units belonging to neutral countries, which 
may have been authorized to lend their services to a belligerent under the conditions laid down in             
Article  27, shall fly, along with the flag of the Convention, the national flag of that b ellige rent, wherever 
the latter makes use of the faculty conferred on him by  Article  42. 
Subject to orders to the contrary by the responsible military authorities, they may on all occasions, fly 
their national flag, even if they fall into the hands of the adverse Party. 
Article  44 
Restrictions in the use of the emblem. Exceptions. —With the exception of the cases mentioned in 
the following paragraphs of the present Article , the emblem of the Red Cross on a white ground and the 
words “Red Cross ”, or “Geneva Cross” may not be employed, either in time of peace or in time of war, 
except to indicate or to protect the medical units and establishments, the personnel and material protected 
by the present Convention and other Conventions dealing with similar matters.  The same shall apply to 
the emblems mentioned in Article  38 second paragraph, in respect of the countries which use them. The 
National Red Cross Societies and other Societies designated in Article  26 shall have the right to use the 
distinctive emblem conf erring the protection of the Convention only within the frame work of the     
present paragraph.  
Furthermore, National Red Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) Societies may, in time of peace, 
in accordance with their national legislation, make use of th e name and emblem of the Red Cross for their 
other activities which are in conformity with the principles laid down by the International Red Cross 
Conferences. When those activities are carried out in time of war, the conditions for the use of the 18 
 emblem s hall be such that it cannot be considered as conferring the protection of the Convention; the 
emblem shall be comparatively small in size and may not be placed on armlets or on the roofs                            
of buildings.  
The international Red Cross organizations and their duly authorized personnel shall be permitted to 
make use, at all times, of the emblem of the Red Cross on a white ground.  
As an exceptional measure, in conformity with national legislation and with the express permission of 
one of t he National Red Cross  (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) Societies, the emblem of the 
Convention may be employed in time of peace to identify vehicles used as ambulances and to mark the 
position of aid stations exclusively assigned to the purpose of giving f ree treatment to the wounded                   
or sick.  
CHAPTER VIII  
EXECUTION OF THE CONVENTION  
Article  45 
Detail ed execution. Unforeseen cases. —Each Party to the conflict, acting through its        
commanders -in-chief,  shall ensure the detailed execution of the preceding Article s, and provide for 
unforeseen cases, in conformity with the general principles of the present Convention.  
Article  46 
Prohibition of reprisals. —Reprisals against the wounded, sick, personnel, build ings or equipment 
protected by the Convention are prohibited.  
Article  47 
Dissemination of the Convention. —The High Contracting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in 
time of war, to disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in  their respective 
countries, and in particular, to include the study thereof in their programmes of military and, if possible, 
civil instruction, so that the principles thereof may become known to the entire population, in particular to 
the armed fighting forces, the medical personnel and the chaplains.  
Article  48 
Translations Rules of application. —The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one another 
through the Swiss Federal Council and , during hostilities, through the Protecting Powers, the official 
translations of the present convention, as well as the laws and regulations which they may adopt to ensure 
the application thereof.  
CHAPTER IX  
REPRESSION OF ABUSES AND INFRACTIONS  
Article  49 
Penal sanc tions. I. General observations. —The High Contracting Parties undertake to enact any 
legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be 
committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in the following Article . 
Each High contractin g Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have 
committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, 
regardless of their nationality, before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers , and in accordance with the 
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another High Contracting Party 
concerned. Provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie  case.  
Each High Contracting Party shall take measures necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to 
the provisions of the present Convention other than the grave breaches defined in the following Article . 19 
 In all circumstances, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of  proper trial and defence, 
which shall not be less favorable than those provided by Article  105 and those following of the Geneva 
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.  
Article  50 
II. Grave breaches. —Grave breaches to which the preceding Article  relates shall be those involving 
any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protected by the convention: wilful 
killing, torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, wilfully causing g reat suffering or 
serious injury to body or health, and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by 
military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly.  
Article  51 
III. Responsibilities of the Contracting parties. —No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to 
absolve itself or any other High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself or by another High 
Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article . 
Article  52 
Enquiry procedure. —At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry  shall be instituted, in a 
manner to be decided between the interested Parties, concerning any alleged violation of the Convention.  
If agreement ha s not been reached concerning the procedure for the enqu iry, the Parties should agree 
on the choice of an umpire who will decide upon the procedure to be followed.  
Once the violation has been established, the Parties to the conflict shall put an end to it and shall 
repress it with the least possible delay.  
Article 53 
Misuse of the emblem. —The use by individuals, societies, firms or companies either public or 
private, other than those entitled thereto under the present Convention, of the emblem or the designation 
“Red Cross ” or “Geneva Cross ”, or any sign or desi gnation constituting an imitation thereof, whatever the 
object of such use, and irrespective of the date of its adoption, shall be prohibited at all times.  
By reason of the tribute paid to Switzerland by the adoption of the reversed Federal colours, and of  
the confusion which may arise between the arms of Switzerland and the distinctive emblem of the 
Convention, the use by private individuals, societies or firms, of the arms of the Swiss Confederation, or 
of marks constituting an imitation thereof, whether as trade  marks or commercial marks, or as parts of 
such marks, or for a purpose contrary to commercial honesty, or in circumstances capable of wounding 
Swiss national sentiment, shall be prohibited at all times.  
Nevertheless, such High Contracting Parties as were not party to the Geneva Convention of                      
July 27, 1929, may grant to prior users of the emblems, designations, signs or marks designated in the 
first paragraph, a time limit not to exceed three years from the coming into fo rce of the present 
Convention to discontinue such use, provided that the said use shall not be such as would appear, in time 
of war, to confer the protection of the Convention.  
The prohibition laid down in the first paragraph of the present Article  shall a lso apply, without effect 
on any rights acquired through prior use, to the emblems and marks mentioned in the second paragraph of 
Article  38. 
Article  54 
Prevention of misuse. —The High Contracting Parties shall, if their legislation is not already 
adequate,  take measures necessary for the prevention and repression, at all times, of the abuses referred to 
under Article  53. 
FINAL PROVISIONS  
Article  55 
Languages. —The present convention is established in English and in French. Both texts are      
equally authent ic. 
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the Convention to be made in the 
Russian and Spanish languages.  20 
 Article  56 
Signature. —The present Convention, which bears the date of this day, is open to signature until 
February 12, 1950, in the name of the powers represented at the Conference which opened at Geneva on 
April 21, 1949;  furthermore, by Powers not represented at that conference but which  are parties to the 
Geneva Conventions of 1864, 1906 or 1929 for the Relief of the Wounded and sick in Armies in                      
the Field.  
Article  57 
Ratification. —The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratifications sha ll 
be deposited at Berne.  
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification and certified copies of this 
record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal Council to all the Powers in whose name the Convention 
has been signed, or whose accession has been notified.  
Article  58 
Coming into force. —The present Convention shall come into force six months after not less than 
two instruments of ratification have been deposited.  
Thereafter, it shall come into force for each High Contracting Party six months after the deposit of the 
instrument of ratification.  
Article  59 
Relation to previous conventions. —The present Convention replaces the Conventions of                     
August 22, 1864, July 6, 1906 and July 27, 1929, in relatio ns between the High Contracting Parties.  
Article  60 
Accession. —From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power in whose name the  
present Convention has not been signed, to accede to this Convention.  
Article  61 
Notification of accessions. —Accessions shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, 
and shall take effect six months after the date on which they are received.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate the accessions to all the Powers in whose name the 
Convention has been signed, or whose accession has been notified.  
Article  62 
Immediate effect. —The situations provided for in Article s 2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to 
ratifications deposited and accessions notified by the Parties to the conflict before  or after the beginning 
of hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate by the quickest method any 
ratifications or accessions received from Parties to the conflict.  
Article  63 
Denunciation. —Each of the High Contracting Parties sh all be at liberty to denounce the                     
present Convention.  
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, which shall transmit it to 
the Governments of all the High Contracting Parties.  
The denunciation shall tak e effect one year after the notification thereof has been made to the Swiss 
Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which notification has been made at a time when the 
denouncing Power is involved in a conflict shall not take effect until peace has bee n concluded, until after 
operations connected with release and repatriation of the persons protected by the present Convention 
have been terminated.  
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncing Power. It shall in no way impair 
the o bligations which the parties to the conflict shall remain bound to fulfill by virtue of the principles of 21 
 the law of nations, as they result from the usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of 
humanity and the dictates of the public consc ience.  
Article  64 
Registration with the United Nations. —The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present 
Convention with the Secretariat of the United Nations. The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform the 
Secretariat of the United Nations of all rat ifications, accessions and denunciations received by it with 
respect to the present Convention.  
It witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective full powers, have signed the 
present Convention.  
Done at Geneva this twelfth day of August 1949 in the English and French languages. The original 
shall be deposited in the archives of the Swiss Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit 
certified copies thereof to each of the signatory and a cceding States.  22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
GENEVA  CONVENTION  FOR THE AMELIORATION OF THE CONDITION  OF WOUNDED,  SICK AND 
SHIPWRECKED MEMBERS OF ARMED FORCES  AT SEA OF  AUGUST  12, 1949  
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Governments represented  at the Diplomatic Conference held 
at Geneva from April 21 to August  12, 1949, for the purpose of revising the Xth Hague Convention of 
October 18,1907 for the Adaptation to Maritime Warfare of the Principles of the Geneva Convention of 
1906, have agreed as  follows:— 
CHAPTER I  
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article  1 
The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in 
all circumstances.  
Article  2 
Application of the Convention. —In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peace 
time, the present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which 
may arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if the state of  war is not recogni sed 
by one of them.  
The convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of a High 
Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets with no armed resistance.  
Although one of the Powers in confl ict may not be a party to the present Convention, the  Powers who 
are parties thereto shall remain bound by the Convention in relation to the said Power, if the latter accepts 
and applies the provisions thereof.  
Article  3 
Conflict s not of an international c haracter .—In the case of armed conflict not of an international 
character occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each Party to the conflict shall 
be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: — 
 (1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid 
down their arms and those placed, hors de  combat  by sickness, wounds , detention, or any other cause, 
shall in all circumstances be treated humanely, without  any adverse distinction founded on race, color, 
religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria.  
To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place 
whatsoever with respect to the above -menti oned persons: — 
(a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and 
torture;  
(b) taking of hostages;  
(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading treatment;  
(d) the passing of s entences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgement 
pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are 
recogni sed as indispensable by civilized peoples.  
(2) The wounded, sick and shipwrecked shal l be collected and cared for.  
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, may offer its 
services to the Parties to the conflict.  23 
 The Parties to the conflict should further endeavor to bring into force, by means of special 
agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the present Convention.  
The application of the proceeding provision shall not affect the legal status of the Parties                              
to the conflict.  
Article  4 
Field of application. —In case of hostilities between land and naval forces of Parties to the conflict, 
the provisions of the present Convention shall apply only to forces on board ship.  
Forces put ashore shall immediately become subject to the provisions of the Geneva Conventio n for 
the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of               
August 12, 1949.  
Article  5 
Application by neutral powers. —Neutral Powers shall apply by analogy the provisions of the 
present Convention to the wo unded, sick and shipwrecked, and to members of the medical personnel and 
to chaplains of the armed forces of the Parties to the conflict received or interned in their territory, as well 
as to dead persons found.  
Article  6 
Special agreements. —In addition to  the agreements expressly provided for in                                   
Article s 10,  18, 31, 38, 39, 40, 43 and 53, the High Contracting Parties may conclude other special 
agreements for all matters concerning which they may deem it suitable to make se parate provision, No 
special agreement shall adversely affect the situation of wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, of 
members of the medical personnel or of chaplains, as defined by the present Convention, nor restrict the 
rights which it confers upon t hem.  
Wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, as well as medical personnel and chaplains, shall continue 
to have the benefit of such agreements as long as the Convention is applicable to them, except where 
express provisions to the contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in subsequent agreements, or where 
more favorable measures have been taken with regard to them by one or other of the Parties                         
to the conflict.  
Article  7 
Non-renunciation of rights. —Wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, as well as members of the 
medical personnel and chaplains, may in no circumstances renounce in part or in entirety the rights 
secured to them by the present Convention, and by the special agreements referred to in the  foregoing 
Article , if such there be.  
Article  8 
Protecting powers. —The present convention shall be applied with the co -operation and under the 
scrutiny of the Protecting Powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests of the Parties to the conflict. 
For this purpose, the Protecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, 
delegates from amongst their own nationals, or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates 
shall be subject to the approval of the Power with whi ch they are to carry out their duties.  
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate to the greatest extent possible the task of the representatives 
or delegates of the Protecting Powers.  
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not i n any case exceed their missi on 
under the present Convention . They shall, in particular, take account of the imperative necessities of 
security of the State wherein they carry out their duties. Their activities shall only be restricted as an 
exceptional and temporary measure when this is rendered necessary by imperative military necessities.  
 
 24 
  
Article  9 
Activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross. —The provisions of the present 
Convention constitute no obstacle to the humanitarian activities which the International Committee of the 
Red Cross or any other impartial humanitarian organi sation may, subject to the consent of the Parties to 
the conflict concerned, undertake for the protection of wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, medi cal 
personnel and chaplains, and for their relief.  
Article  10 
Substitutes for Protecting Powers. —The High Contracting Parties may at any time agree to entrust 
to an organization which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the duties incumbent on the 
Protecting Powers by virtue of the present Convention.  
When wounded, sick and shipwrecked, or medical personnel and chaplains do not benefit or cease to 
benefit, no matter for what reason, by the activities of a Protecting Power or of an organi sation provided 
for in the first paragraph above, the Detaining Power shall request a neutral state, or such an organi sation, 
to undertake the functions performed under present Convention by a Protecting Power designated by the 
Parties to a conflict.  
If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request or shall accept, 
subject to the provisions of this Article , the offer of the services of a humanitarian organi sation, such as 
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to a ssume the humanitarian functions performed by 
protecting powers under the present Convention.  
Any neutral Power, or any organi sation invited by the Power concerned or offering itself for these 
purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibili ty towards the Party to the conflict on which 
persons protected by the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient assurances 
that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and to discharge them impartially.  
No d erogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between Powers 
one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its allies 
by reason of military events, more particularly where th e whole, or a substantial Part, of the territory of 
the said Power is occupied.  
Whenever, in the present Convention, mention is made of a Protecting Power, such mention also 
applies to substitute organi sations in the sense of the present Article . 
Article  11 
Conciliation procedure. —In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons, 
particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to the application or 
interpretation of the provisions of the present Convent ion, the Protecting Powers shall lend their good 
offices with a view to setting the disagreement.  
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation of one party or on its own 
initiative, propose to the parties to the conflict a meeting of their representatives, in particular of the 
authorities responsible for the wounded, sick and shipwrecked, medical personnel and chaplains, possibly 
on neutral territory suitable chosen. The Parties to the conflict shall be bound to give effect to the 
proposals made to them for this purpose. The Protecting powers may, if necessary, propose for approval 
by the Parties to the conflict, a person belonging to a neutral Power or delegated by the Int ernational 
Committee of the Red Cross, who shall be invited to take part in such a meeting.  
CHAPTER  II 
WOUNDED, SICK AND SHIPWRECKED  
Article  12 
Protection and care. —Members of the armed forces and other persons mentioned in the following 
Article , who are a t sea and who are wounded, sick or shipwrecked, shall be respected and protected in all 
circumstances, it being understood that the term “shipwreck ” means shipwreck from any cause and 
includes forced landings at sea by or from air -craft.  25 
 Such persons shall  be treated humanely and cared for by the Parties to the conflict in whose power 
they may be, without any adverse distinction founded on sex,  race, nationality, religion, political 
opinions, or any other similar criteria. Any attempts upon their lives, or violence to their persons, shall be 
strictly prohibited; in particular, they shall not be murdered or exterminated, subjected to torture or to 
biological experiments; they shall not wilfully be left without medical assistance and care, nor shall 
conditions  exposing them to contagion or infection be created.  
Only urgent medical reasons will authorize priority in the order of treatment to be  administered.  
Women shall be treated with all consideration due to their sex.  
Article  13 
Protected persons. —The present Convention shall apply to the wounded, sick and shipwrecked at 
sea belonging to the following categories: — 
(1) Members of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict, as well as members of militias or volunteer 
corps forming part of such armed forces;  
(2) Members of other militias and members of other volunteer corps, including those of organized 
resistance movements, belonging to a Party to the conflict and operating in or outside their own territory, 
even if this territory is occupied, provided that such militaries or volunteer corps, including such 
organized resistance movements, fulfill the following conditions: — 
(a) that of being commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates;  
(b) that of having a fixed distinctive sign recogn isable at a distance.  
(c) that of carrying arms openly;  
(d) that of conducting their operations in accordance with the laws and customs of war;  
(3) Members of regular armed forces who profess allegiance to a Government or an authority not 
recogni sed by the  Detaining Power;  
(4) Persons who accompany the armed force s without actually being member  thereof, such as civil 
members of military aircraft crews, war correspondents, sup ply contractors, members of lab our units or of 
services responsible for the welfare  of the armed forces, provided that they have received authorization 
from the armed forces which they accompany;  
(5) Members of crews, including masters, pilots and apprentices, of the merchants marine and the 
crews of civil aircraft of the parties to the conflict who do not benefit by more favorable treatment under 
any other provisions of international law;  
(6) Inhabitants of a non -occupied territory who, on the approach of the enemy, spontaneously take up 
arms to resist the invading forces, without having  had time to form themselves into regular armed units, 
provided they carry arms openly and respect the laws and customs of war.  
Article  14 
Handing over to a belligerent. —All warships of a belligerent Party shall have the right to demand 
that the wounded, s ick or shipwrecked on board military hospital ships, and hospital ships belonging to 
relief societies or to private individuals, as well as merchant vessels, yachts and other craft shall be 
surrendered, whatever their nationality, provided that the wounded  and sick are in a fit state to be moved 
and that the warship can provide adequate facilities for necessary medical treatment.  
Article  15 
Wounded taken on board a neutral warship. —If wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons are taken 
on board a neutral warship  or a neutral military aircraft, it shall be ensured, where so required by 
international law, that they can take no further part in operations of war.  
 
 26 
 Article  16 
Wounded falling into enemy hands. —Subject to the provisions of Article  12, the wounded, sick and 
shipwrecked of a belligerent who fall into enemy hands shall be prisoners of war, and the provisions of 
international law concerning prisoners of war shall apply to them. The captor may decide, according to 
circumstances, whether  it is expedient to hold them, or to convey them to a port in the captor ’s own 
country, to a neutral port or even to a port in enemy territory. In the last case, prisoners of war thus 
returned to their home country may not serve for the duration of the war . 
Article  17 
Wounded landed in a neutral port. —Wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons who are landed in 
neutral ports with the consent of the local authorities, shall, failing arrangements to the contrary between 
the neutral and the belligerent Powers, be so  guarded by the neutral Power, where so required by 
international law, that the said persons cannot again take part in operations of war.  
The costs of hospital accommodation and internment shall be borne by the Power on whom the 
wounded, sick or shipwrecke d persons depend.  
Article  18 
Search for causalities after an engagement. —After each engagement, Parties to the conflict shall 
without delay take all possible measures to search for and collect the shipwrecked, wounded and sick, to 
protect them against pillage and ill —treatment, to ensure their adequate care, and to search for the dead 
and prevent their being despoiled.  
Whenever circumstances permit, the Parties to the conflict shall conclude local arrangements for the 
removal of the wounded and sick by sea from a besieged or encircled area and for the passage of medical 
and religious personnel and equipment on their way to that area.  
Article  19 
Recording and forwarding of information. —The Parties to the conflict shall record as soon as 
possible in respec t of each shipwrecked, wounded sick or dead person of the adverse Party falling into 
their hands, any particulars which may assist in his identification. These records should if                     
possible include: — 
(a) designation of the Power on which h e depends;  
(b) army, regimental, personnel or serial number;  
(c) surname;  
(d) first name or names;  
(e) date of birth;  
(f) any other particulars shown on his identity card or disc;  
(g) date and place of capture or death;  
(h) particulars concerning wounds or  illness, or cause of death.  
As soon as possible the above mentioned information shall be forwarded to the Information Bureau 
described in Article  122 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of 
August 12, 1949, which shall tr ansmit this information to the Power on which these persons depend 
through the intermediary of the protecting Power and of the Central Prisoners of War Agency.  
Parties to the conflict shall prepare and forward to each other through the same Bureau, certifi cates of 
death or duly authenticated lists of dead. They shall likewise collect and forward through the same Bureau 
one-half of the double identity disc, or the identity disc itself if it is a single disc, last wills or other 
documents of importance to the  next of kin, money and in general all article s of an intrinsic or sentimental 
value , which are found on the dead. These article s, together with unidentified article s, shall be sent in 
sealed packets, accompanied by statements giving all particulars neces sary for the identification of the 
deceased owners as well as by a complete list of the contents of the parcel.  27 
 Article  20 
Prescriptions regarding the dead. —Parties to the conflict shall ensure that burial at sea of the dead, 
carried out individually as fa r as circumstances permit, is preceded by a careful examination, if possible 
by a medical examination, of the bodies, with a view to confirming death, establishing identity and 
enabling a report to be made. Where  a double identity disc is used, one -half of  the disc should remain on 
the body.  
If dead persons are landed, the provisions of the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the 
Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field  of August 12, 1949, shall be applicable.  
Article  21 
Appeals to neutral vessels. —The Parties to the conflict may appeal to the charity of commanders of 
neutral merchant vessels, yachts or other craft to take on board and care for wounded, sick or shipwrecked 
persons, and to collect the dead.  
Vessels of any kind resp onding to this appeal, and those having of their own accord collected 
wounded, sick or shipwrecked persons, shall enjoy special protection and facilities to carry out             
such assistance.  
They may, in no case, be captured on account of any such tra nsport; but , in the absence of any 
promise to the contrary, they shall remain liable to capture for any violations of neutrality they may                   
have committed.  
CHAPTER  III 
HOSPITAL SHIPS  
Article  22 
Notification and protection of military hospit al ships. —Military hospital ships, that is to say, ships 
built or equipped by the Powers specially and solely with a view to assisting the wounded, sick and 
shipwrecked, to treating them and to transporting them, may in no circumstances be attacked or capt ured, 
but shall at all times be respected and protected, on condition that their names and descriptions have been 
notified to the Parties to the conflict ten days before those ships are employed.  
The characteristics which must appear in the notification sh all include registered gross tonnage, the 
length from stem to stern and the number of masts and funnels.  
Article  23 
Protection of medical establishments ashore. —Establishments ashore entitled to the protection of 
the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces 
in the field of August  12, 1949, shall be protected from bombardment or attack from the sea.  
Article  24 
Hospital ships utilized by relief socie ties and private individuals of I . Parties to the            
conflict. —Hospital ships utilized by National Red Cross Societies, by officially recognized relief 
societies or by private persons shall have the same protection as military hospital ships and shall be 
exempt from capture, if the Party to the co nflict on which they depend has given them an official 
commission and in so far as the provisions of Article  22 concerning notification have been complied with.  
These ships must be provided with certificates of the responsible authorities, stating that the  vessels 
have been under their control while fitting out and on departure.  
Article  25 
II Neutral countries. —Hospital ships utilized by National Red Cross Societies, officially recognized 
relief societies, or private persons of neutral countries shall have the same protection as military hospital 
ships and shall be exempt from capture, on condition that they have placed themselves under the control 
of one of the Parties to the conflict, with the previous consent of their own governments and with the 
authori sation of the Party to the conflict concerned, in so far as the provisions of Article  22 concerning 
notification have been compiled with.  28 
 Article  26 
Tonnage. —The protection mentioned in Article s 22, 24 and 25 shall apply to hospital ships of any 
tonnage and  to their lifeboats, wherever they are operating. Nevertheless, to ensure the maximum comfort 
and security, the Parties to the conflict shall endeav our to utilize, for the transport of wounded, sick and 
ship wrecked over long  distances and on the high seas, only hospital ships of over 2,000 tons gross.  
Article  27 
Coastal rescue craft. —Under the same conditions as those provided for in Article s 22 and 24 , small 
craft employed by the State or by the officially recogni sed lifeboa t institutions for coastal rescue 
operations, shall also be respected and protected, so far as operational requirements permit.  
The same shall apply so far as possible to fixed coastal installation s used exclusively by these crafts 
for their humanitarian m issions.  
Article  28 
Protection of sick -bays. —Should fighting occur on board a warship, the sick -bays shall be respected 
and spared as far as possible. Sick -bays and their equipment shall remain subject to the laws of welfare, 
but may not be diverted from their purpose so long as they are required for the wounded and sick.  
Nevertheless,  the commander into whose power they have fallen may, after ensuring the proper care of 
the wounded and sick who are accommodated therein, apply them to other purposes in cas e of urgent 
military necessity.  
Article  29 
Hospital ships in occupied ports. —Any hospital ship in a port which falls into the hands of the 
enemy shall be authori sed to leave the said port.  
Article  30 
Employment of Hospital ships and small craft. —The vessels described in Article  22, 24 , 25 and 27 
shall afford relief and assistance to the wounded, sick and shipwrecked without distinction of nationality.  
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to use these vessels for any military purpose.  
Such ve ssels shall in no wise hamper the movements of the combatants.  
During and after an engagement, they will act at their own risk.  
Article  31 
Right of control and search. —The Parties to the conflict shall have the right to control and search 
the vessels menti oned in Article s 22, 24, 25 and 27.  They  can refuse assistance from these vessels, order 
them off, make them take a certain course, control the use of their wireless and other means of 
communication, and even detain them for a period not exceeding seven da ys from the time of 
interception, if the gravity of the circumstances so requires.  
They may put a commissioner temporarily on board whose sole task shall be to see that orders given 
in virtue of the provisions of the preceding paragraph are carried out.  
As far as possible, the Parties to the conflict shall enter in the log of the hospital ship, in a language he 
can understand, the orders they have given to the captain of the vessel.  
Parties to the conflict may, either unilaterally or by particular agreement s, put on  board their ships 
neutral observers who shall verify the strict observation of the provisions contained in the                          
present Convention.  
Article  32 
Stay in a neutral port. —Vessels described in Article s 22, 24, 25 and 27 are not  classed as warships 
as regards their stay in a neutral port.  
Article  33 
Converted merchant vessels. —Merchant vessels which have been transformed into hospital ships 
cannot be put to any other use throughout the duration of hostilities.  29 
 Article  34 
Discontinuance of protection. —The protection to which hospital ships and sick -bays are entitled 
shall not cease unless they are used to commit, outside their humanitarian duties, acts harmful to the 
enemy. Protection may, however, cease only after due warn ing has been given, naming in all appropriate 
cease a reasonable time limit, and after such warning has remained unheeded.  
In particular, hospital ships may not possess or use a secret code for their wireless or other means         
of communication.  
Article  35 
Conditions not deprivin g hospital ships of protection. —The following conditions shall not be 
considered as depriving hospital ships or sick -bays of vessels of the protection due to them: — 
(1) The fact that the crews of ships or sick -bays are armed for the maintenance of order, for their 
own defense or that of the sick and wounded.  
(2) The presence on board of apparatus exclusively intended to facilitate navigation                           
or communication.  
(3) The discovery on board hospital ships or in sick -bays of portable arms and ammunition taken 
from the wounded, sick and shipwrecked and not yet handed to the proper service.  
(4) The fact that the humanitarian activities of hospital ships and sick -bays of vessels or of the 
crews extend to the care of wounded, sick or shipwrecked civilians.  
(5) The transport of equipment and of personnel intended exclusively for medical duties, over and 
above the normal requirements.  
CHAPTER  IV 
PERSONNEL  
Article  36 
Protection of t he personnel of hospital ships. —The r eligious, medical and hospital personnel or 
hospital ships and their crews shall be respected and protected; they may not be captured during the time 
they are in the service of the hospital ship, whether or not there are wounded and sick on board.  
Article  37 
Medical and reli gious personnel of other ships. —The religious, medical and hospital personnel 
assigned to the medical or spiritual care of the persons designated in Article  12 and 13 shall, if they fall 
into the hands of the enemy, be respected and prot ected; they may continue to carry out their duties as 
long as this is necessary for the care of the wounded and sick.  They  shall afterwards be sent back as soon 
as the commander -in-Chief, under whose authority they are, considers it practicable. They may take with 
them, on leaving the ships, their personal property.  
If, however, it prove necessary to retain some of this personnel owing to the medical or spiritual 
needs of prisoners of war, every -thing possible shall be done for their earliest possible land ing. 
Retain ed personnel shall be subject on landing, to the provisions of the Geneva Convention for the 
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of                            
August 12, 1949.  
CHAPTER  V 
MEDICAL TRAN SPORTS  
Article  38 
Ships used for the c onveyance of medical equipment. —Ships chartered for that purpose shall be 
authori sed to transport equipment exclusively intended for the treatment of wounded and sick members of 
armed forces or for the prevention of di sease, provided that the particulars regarding their voyage have 
been notified to the adverse Power and approved by the latter.  The adverse  Power shall preserve the right 
to board the carrier ships, but not to capture them or seize the equipment carried.  30 
 By agreement amongst the Parties to the conflict, neutral observers may be placed on board such 
ships to verify the equipment carried. For this purpose, free access to the equipment shall be given.  
Article  39 
Medical aircrafts. —Medical aircraft, that is to  say, aircraft exclusively employed for the removal of 
wounded, sick and shipwrecked, and for the transport of medical personnel and equipment, may not be 
the object of attack, but shall be respected by the Parties to the conflict, while flying at heights,  at times 
and on routes specially agreed upon between the Parties to the conflict concerned.  
They shall be clearly marked with the distinctive emblem prescribed in Article  41, together with their 
national colo urs, on their lower, upper and lateral surfaces . They shall be provided with any other 
markings or means of identification which may  be agreed upon between the Parties to the conflict upon 
the outbreak or during the course of hostilities.  
Unless agreed otherwise, flights over enemy or enemy -occupied te rritory are prohibited.  
Medical aircraft shall obey every summons to alight on land or water. In the event of having thus to 
alight, the aircraft with its occupants may continue its flight after examination, if any.  
In the event of alighting involuntarily on land or water in enemy or enemy -occupied territory, the 
wounded, sick and shipwrecked, as well as the crew of the aircraft shall be prisoners of war. The medical 
personnel shall be treated according to Article s 36 and 37.  
Article  40 
Flight over neutral countries. Landing of wo unded. —Subject to the provisions of the second 
paragraph, medical air -craft of Parties to the conflict may fly over the territory of neutral Powers, land 
thereon in case of necessity, or use it as a port of call. They shall give neu tral Power s prior notice of their 
passage over the said territory, and obey every summons to alight, on land or water. They will be immune 
from attack only when flying on routes, at heights and at times specifically agreed upon between the 
Parties to the c onflict and the neutral Power concerned.  
The neutral Powers may, however, place conditions or restrictions on the passage or landing of 
medical aircraft on their territory. Such possible conditions or restrictions shall be applied equally to all 
Parties to  the conflict.  
Unless otherwise agreed between the neutral Powers and the Parties to the conflict, the wounded, sick 
or shipwrecked who are disembarked with the consent of the local authorities on neutral territory by 
medical aircraft shall be detained by the neutral Power, where so required by international law, in such a 
manner that they cannot again take part in operations of war. The cost of their accommodation and 
interment shall be borne by the Power on which they depend.  
CHAPTER  VI 
THE DISTINCTIVE EM BLEM  
Article  41 
Use of the emblem. —Under the direction of the competent military authority, the emblem of the red 
cross on a white ground shall be displayed on the flags, armlets and on all equipment employed in the 
Medical Service.  
Nevertheless, in the case of countries which already use  as emblem, in place of the red cross , the red 
crescent or the red lion and sun on a white ground, these emblems are also recognized by the terms of the 
present Convention.  
Article  42 
 Identification of m edical and religi ous personnel. —The personnel designated in                            
Article s 36 and 37 shall wear, affixed to the left arm, a water -resistant armlet bearing the distinctive 
emblem, issued and stamped by the military authority.  31 
 Such personnel, in addition  to wearing the identity disc mentioned in Article  19, shall also carry a 
special identity card bearing the distinctive emblem. This card shall be water -resistant and of such size 
that it can be carried in the pocket. It shall be worded in the national lan guage, shall mention at least the 
surname and first names, the date of birth, the rank and the service number of the bearer, and shall state in 
what capacity he is entitled to the protection of the present Convention. The card shall bear the 
photograph of the owner and also either his signature or his finger -prints or both. It shall be embossed 
with the stamp of the military authority.  
The identity card shall be uniform throughout the same armed forces and , as far as possible, of a 
similar type in the armed  forces of the High Contracting Parties. The Parties to the conflict may be guided 
by the model which is annexed, by way of example, to the present Convention. They shall inform each 
other, at the outbreak of hostilities, of the model they are using. Identity cards should be made out, if 
possible, at least in duplicate, one copy being kept by the home country.  
In no circumstances may the said personnel be deprived of their insignia or identity cards nor of the 
right to wear the armlet. In  cases of loss they shall be entitled to receive duplicates of the cards and to 
have the insignia replaced.  
Article  43 
Marking of  hospital ships and small craft. —The ships designated in Article s 22, 24, 25 and 27 
shall be di stinctively marked as follows: — 
(a) All exterior surfaces shall be white.  
(b) One or more dark red crosses, as large as possible , shall be painted and displayed on each side 
of the hull and on the horizontal surfaces, so placed as to afford the greatest possible visibility from 
the sea and from the air.  
All hospital ships shall make themselves known by hoisting their national flag a nd further , if they 
belong to a neutral State, the flag of the Party to the conflict whose direction they have accepted . A white 
flag with a red cross shall be flown at the main mast as high  as possible.  
Lifeboats of hospital ships, coastal lifeboats and a ll small crafts used by the Medical Service shall be 
painted white with dark red crosses prominently displayed and shall, in general, comply with the 
identification system prescribed above for hospital ships.  
The above -mentioned ships and crafts, which may  wish to ensure by night and in times of reduced 
visibility the protection to which they are entitled, must subject to the assent of the Party to the conflict 
under whose power they are, take the necessary measures to render their painting and distinctive emblems 
sufficiently apparent.  
Hospital ships which, in accordance with Article  31 are provisionally detained by the enemy, must 
haul down the flag of the Party to the conflict in whose service they are or whose direction they                      
have acc epted.  
Coastal life boats, if they continue to operate with consent of the Occupying Power from a base which 
is occupied, may be allowed, when a away from their base, to continue to fly their own national colors 
along with a flag carrying a red cross on a w hite ground, subject to prior notification to all the Parties to 
the conflict concerned.  
All the provisions in this Article  relating to the red cross shall apply equally to the other emblems 
mentioned in Article  41. 
Parties to the conflict shall at all tim es endeavo ur to conclude mutual agreements in order to use the 
most modern methods available to facilitate the identification of hospital ships.  
Article  44 
Limitation in the use of markings. —The distinguishing signs referred to in Article  43 can only be 
used, whether in time of peace or war, for indicating or protecting the ships therein mentioned, except as 
may be provided in any other International Convention or by agreement between all the Parties to the 
conflict concerned.  32 
 Article  45 
Prevention of misuse. —The High Contracting Parties shall, if their legislation is not already 
adequate, take the measures necessary for the prevention and repression, at all times, of any abuse of the 
distinctive signs provided for under Article  43. 
CHAPTER  VII 
EXECUTION OF THE CONVENTION  
Article  46 
Detailed exe cution. Unforeseen cases. —Each Party to the conflict, acting through its           
Commanders -in-Chief shall ensure the detailed execution of the preceding Article s and provide for 
unforeseen cases, in conformity with the general principles of the present Convention.  
Article  47 
Prohibition of reprisals. —Reprisals against the wounded, sick and shipwrecked persons, the 
personnel, the vessels or the equipment protected by the Convention are prohibited.  
Article  48 
Dissemination of the Convention. —The High Contracting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in 
time of war, to disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in their respective 
countries, and, in particular, to include th e study thereof in their programmes of military and, if possible, 
civil instruction, so that the principles thereof may become known to the entire population, in particular to 
the armed fighting forces, the medical personnel and the chaplains.  
Article  49 
Translations. Rules of application. —The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one 
another through the Swiss Federal Council and, during hostilities, through the Protecting Powers, the 
official translations of the present Convention, as well as the l aws and regulations which they may adopt 
to ensure the application thereof.  
CHAPTER  VIII 
REPRESSION OF ABUSES AND INFRACTIONS  
Article  50 
Penal sanctions. I. General observation s.—The High Contracting Parties undertake to enact any 
legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons committing, or ordering to be 
committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in the following Article . 
Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have 
committed, or to have ordered to be committed, such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, 
regardless of their nationality, before its own courts. It may  also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the 
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another High Contracting Party 
concerned, provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie  case.  
Each High Contracting Pa rty shall take measures necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to 
the provisions of the present Convention other than the grave breaches defined in the following Article . 
In all circumstances, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defen ce, 
which shall not be less favorable than those provided by Article  105 and those following of the Geneva 
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.  
Article  51 
II. Gravebreaches. —Grave breaches to wh ich the preceding Article  relates shall be those involving 
any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property p rotected by the Convention; wil ful 
killing, torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, wilfully causing gre at suffering or 
serious injury to body or health, and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by 
military necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly.  33 
 Article  52 
III. Responsib ilities  of the Contracting Parties. —No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to 
absolve itself or any other High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself or by another High 
Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article . 
Article  53 
Enquiry proced ure.—At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry shall be instituted, in a 
manner to be decided between the interested Parties, concerning any alleged violation of the Convention.  
If agreement has not been reached concerning the procedure for the  enquiry, the Parties should agree 
on the choice of an umpire, who will decide upon the procedure to be followed.  
Once the violation has been established, the Parties to the conflict shall put an end to it and shall 
repress it with the least possible delay.  
FINAL PROVISIONS  
Article  54 
Languages. —The present Convention is established in English and in French. Both texts are equally 
authentic.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the Convention to be made in the 
Russian an d Spanish languages.  
Article  55 
Signature. —The present Convention, which bears the date of this day, is open to signature until 
February 12, 1950, in the name of the Powers represented at the Conference which opened at Geneva on 
April 21, 1949;  furthermore , by Powers not represented at that Conference, but which are parties to the  
Xth Hague Convention of October 18, 1907, for the adaptation to Maritime warfare of the principles of 
the Geneva Convention of 1906, or to the Geneva Conventions of 1864, 1906 or  1929 for the Relief of the 
Wounded and Sick in Armies in the Field.  
Article  56 
Ratification. —The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratifications shall 
be deposited at Berne.  
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification and certified copies of this 
record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal Council to all the Powers in whose  name the Convetion 
has been signed, or whose  accession has been notified.  
Article  57 
Coming into force. —The present Convention shall come into force six months after not less than 
two instruments of ratification have been deposited.  
Thereafter, it shall come into force for each High Contracting Party six months after the deposit of the 
instruments of ratification.  
Artic le 58 
Relation to the 1907 Convention. —The present Convention replaces the Xth Hague Convention of 
October 18, 1907, for the adaptation to Maritime Warfare of the principles of the Geneva convention of 
1906, in relations between the High Contracting Partie s. 
 
Article  59 
Accession. —From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power in whose name the 
present Convention has not been signed to accede to this Convention.  
Article  60 
Notification of accessions. —Accessions shall be notified in wr iting to the Swiss Federal Council, 
and shall take effect six months after the date on which they are received.  34 
 The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate the accessions to all the Powers in whose name the 
Convention has been signed, or whose accession ha s been notified.  
Article  61 
Immediate effect. —The situations provided for in Article  2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to 
ratifications deposited and accessions notified by the Parties to the conflict before or after the beginning 
of hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate by the quickest method any 
ratifications or accessions received from Parties to the conflict.  
Article  62 
Denunciation. —Each of th e High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty to denounce the                   
present Convention.  
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, which shall transmit it to 
the Governments of all the High Contracting Parties.  
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the notification thereof has been made to the Swiss 
Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which notification has been made at a time when the 
denouncing power is involved in a conflict shall not take  effect until peace has been concluded, and until 
after operations connected with release and repatriation of the persons protected by the present 
Convention have been terminated.  
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncing power. It shall in no way impair 
the obligations which the Parties to the conflict shall remain bound to fulfill by virtue of the principles of 
the law of nations, as they result from the usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of 
humanity and t he dictates of the public conscience.  
Article  63 
Regist ration with the United Nations. —The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present 
Convention with the Secretariat of the United Nations. The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform the 
Secretariat o f the United Nations of all ratifications, accessions and denunciations received by it with 
respect to the present convention.  
In witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective full powers, have signed the 
present Convention.  
Done at Ge neva this twelfth day of August, 1949, in the English and French languages. The original 
shall be deposited in the Archives of the Swiss Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit 
certified copies thereof to each of the signatory and acceding States.  
  35 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
GENEVA  CONVENTION RELATIVE TO THE TREATMENT OF PRISONERS OF WAR OF AUGUST 12, 1949  
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Government s represented at the Diplomatic Conference held 
at Geneva from April 21 to August  12, 1949, for the purpose of revising the Convention concluded at 
Geneva on July  27, 1929, relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, have agreed as follows: — 
PART I  
GENER AL PROVISIONS  
Article  1 
Respect for the Convention. —The High Contracting Parties undertake to respect and to ensure 
respect for the present Convention in all circumstances.  
Article  2 
Application of the Convention. —In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peace 
time, the present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which 
may arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if the state of  war is not recogni sed 
by one of them.  
In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peace time, the present convention shall 
apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which may arise between two or more of 
the High co ntracting Parties, even if the state of war is not recognized by one of them.  
The convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of a High 
Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets with no armed resistan ce. 
Although one of the Powers in conflict may not be a party to the present Convention, the Powers who 
are Parties thereto shall remain bound by it in their mutual relations. They shall furthermore be bound by 
the Convention in relation to the said Power,  if the latter accepts and applies the provisions thereof.  
Article  3 
Conflicts not of an international character. —In the case of armed conflict not of an international 
character occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each party to the conflict shall 
be bound to apply, as a minimum, the following provisions: — 
(1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have 
down their arms and those placed hors de combat  by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other cause, 
shall in all circumstances be treated humanely , without any adverse distinction founded on race, 
colour, religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria.  
To this end, the following  acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time and in any place 
whatsoever with respect to the above -mentioned persons: — 
(a) Violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment        
and torture;  
(b) taking of ho stages;  
(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading treatment;  
(d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment 
pronounced by a regularly constituted court affording all the judicial  guarantees which are recogni sed 
as indispensable by civilized peoples.  
(2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.  
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, may offer its 
services to the Parties t o the conflict.  36 
 The Parties to the conflict should further endeavor to bring into force, by means of special 
agreements, all or part of the other provisions of the present Convention.  
The application of the preceding provisions shall not affect the legal status of the Parties to                        
the conflict.  
Article  4 
Prisoners of war. —A. Prisoners of war, in the sense of the present Convention, are persons 
belonging to one of the following categories, who have fallen into the power of the enemy: — 
(1) Members of the armed forces of a Party to the conflict as well as members of militaries or 
volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces.  
(2) Members of other militias and memb ers of other volunteer corps, including those of organized 
resistance movements, belonging to a party to the conflict and operating in or outside their own 
territory, even if this territory is occupied, provided that such militias or volunteer corps, inclu ding 
such organi sed resistance movements, fulfil the following conditions: — 
(a) that of being commanded by a person responsible for his subordinates;  
(b) that of having a fixed distinctive sign recognizable at a distance;  
(c) that of carrying arms openly;  
(d) that of conducting their operations in accordance with the laws and customs of war.  
(3) Members of regular armed forces who profess allegiance to a government or an authority not 
recognized by the Detaining Power.  
(4) Persons who accompany the armed fo rces without actually being members thereof, such as 
civilian members of military aircraft crews, war correspondents, supply contractors, members of                
labour units or of services responsible for the welfare of the armed forces, provided that t hey have 
received authori sation from the armed forces which they accompany, who shall provide them for that 
purpose with an identity card similar to the annexed model.  
(5) Members of crews, including masters, pilots and apprentices, of the merchant marine and the 
crews of civil aircraft of the Parties to the conflict, who do not benefit by more favorable treatment 
under any other provisions of international law.  
(6) Inhabitants of a non -occupied territory, who on the approach of the enemy spontaneously take  
up arms to resist the invading forces, without having had time to form themselves into regular armed 
units, provided they carry arms openly and respect the laws and customs of war.  
B. The following shall likewise be treated as prisoners of war under the p resent Convention: — 
(1) Persons belonging, or having belonged, to the armed forces of the occupied country, if the 
occupying Power considers it necessary by reason of such allegiance to intern them, even though it 
has originally liberated them while hostilities were going on outside the territory it occupies, in 
particular where such persons have made an unsuccessful attempt to rejoin the armed forces to which 
they belong and which are engaged in combat, or where they fail to comply with a summons mad e to 
them with a view to internment.  
(2) The persons belonging to one of the categories enumerated in the present Article , who have 
been received by neutral or non -belligerent Powers on their territory and whom these Powers are 
required to intern under int ernational law, without prejudice to any more favorable treatment which 
these Powers may choose to give and with the exception of Article s 8, 10, 15,  30, fifth paragraph,               
58-67, 92,  126 and, where diplomatic relations exist between the Partie s to the conflict and the neutral 
or non -belligerent Power concerned, those Article s concerning the Protecting Power. Where such 
diplomatic relations exist, the Parties to a conflict on whom these persons depend shall be allowed to 
perform towards them the  functions of Protecting Power as provided in the present Convention, 
without prejudice to the functions which these Parties normally exercise in conformity with 
diplomatic and consular usage and treaties.  37 
 C. This Article  shall in no way affect the status of medical personnel and chaplains as provided for in 
Article  33 of the present Convention.  
Article  5 
Beginning and end of application. —The present Convention shall apply to the persons referred to in 
Article  4 from the time they fall into the power of the enemy and until their final release and repatriation.  
Should any doubt arise as to whether persons, having committed a belligerent act and having fallen 
into the hands of the enemy, belong to any of the cate gories enumerated in Article  4, such persons shall 
enjoy the protection of the present Convention until such time as their status has been determined by a 
competent tribunal.  
Article  6 
Special agreements. —In addition to the agreements expressly provided fo r in                                 
Article s 10, 23, 28, 33, 60, 65, 66, 67, 72, 73, 75, 109, 110, 118, 119, 122 and  132, the High Contracting 
Parties may conclude other special agreements for all matters concerning which they may deem it suitable 
to make  separate provision. No special  agreement shall adversely affect the situation of prisoners of war 
as defined by the present Convention. nor restrict the rights which it confers upon them.  
Prisoners of war shall continue to have the benefit of such agreeme nts as long as the convention is 
applicable to them, except where express provisions to the contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in 
subsequent agreements, or where more favorable measures have been taken with regard to them by one or 
other of the Par ties to the conflict.  
Article  7 
Non-renunciation rights. —Prisoners of war may in no circumstances renounce in part or of in 
entirely the rights secured to them by the present Convention, and by the special agreements referred to in 
the foregoing Article , if such  there be.  
Article  8 
Protecting Powers. —The present Convention shall be applied with the co -operation and under the 
scrutiny of the Protecting Powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests of the Parties to the conflict. 
For this purpose, the P rotecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, 
delegates from amongst their own nationals or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates 
shall be subject to the approval of the Power with which they are to carry out their duties.  
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate to the greatest extent possible the task of the representatives 
or delegates of the Protecting Powers.  
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not in any case exceed the ir mission 
under the present Convention. They  shall, in particular, take account of the imperative necessities of 
security of the State wherein they carry out their duties.  
Article  9 
Activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross. —The provision s of the present 
convention constitute no obstacle in the humanitarian activities which the International Committee of the 
Red Cross or any other impartial humanitarian organi sation may, subject to the consent of the Parties to 
the conflict concerned under take for the protection of prisoners of war and for their relief.  
Article  10 
Substitutes for Protecting Powers. —The High Contracting Parties may at the time agree to entrust 
to an organization which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the du ties incumbent on the 
Protecting Powers by virtue of the present Convention.  
When prisoners of war do not benefit or cease to benefit, no matter for what reason, by the activities 
of a Protecting Power or of an organization provided for in the first paragr aph above, the Detaining Power 
shall request a neutral State, or such an organi sation, to undertake the functions performed under the 
present Convention by a Protecting Power designated by the Parties to a conflict.  38 
 If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request or shall accept, 
subject to  provisions of this Article, the offer of the services of humanitarian  organization, such as the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, to assume the humanitarian functions perfor med by Protecting 
Powers under the present convention.  
Any neutral power or any organization invited by the Power concerned or offering itself for these 
purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibility towards the Party to the conflict on which 
persons protected by the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient assurances 
that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and to discharge them impartially.  
No derogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between powers 
one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its allies 
by reason of military events, more particularly where the whole, or a substantial part, of the t erritory of 
the said Power is occupied.  
Whenever in the present Convention mention is made of a Protecting Power, such mention applies to 
substitute organizations in the sense of the present Article . 
Article  11 
Conciliation procedure. —In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons, 
particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to the application or 
interpretation of the provisions of the present Convention, the Protecting Powers  shall lend their good 
officers with a view to settling the disagreement.  
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation of one Party or on its own 
initiative, propose to the Parties to the conflict a meeting of their represe ntatives, and in particular of the 
authorities responsible for prisoners of war, possibly on neutral territory suitable chosen. The Parties to 
the conflict shall be bound to give effect to the proposals made to them for this purpose. The Protecting 
Powers may, if necessary, propose for approval by the Parties to the conflict a person belonging to a 
neutral Power, or delegate by the International Committee of the Red Cross, who shall be invited to take 
part in such a meeting.  
PART II  
GENERAL PROTECTION OF PR ISONERS OF WAR  
Article  12 
Responsibilit y for the treatment of prisoners. —Prisoners of war are in the hands of the enemy 
Power, but not of the individuals or military units who have captured them. Irrespective of the individual 
responsibilities that may exist, the Detaining Power is responsible for the treatment given them.  
Prisoners of war may  only be transferred by the Detaining Power to a Power which is a party to the 
Convention and after the Detaining Power has satisfied itself of the willingness and ability of such 
transferee Power to apply the Convention. When prisoners of war are transfer red under such 
circumstances, responsibility for the application of the Convention rests on the Power accepting them 
while they are in its custody.  
Nevertheless, if that Power fails to carry out the provisions of the Convention in any important 
respect, th e Power by whom the prisoners of war were transferred shall, upon being notified by the 
Protecting Power, take effective measures to correct the situation or shall request the return of the 
prisoners of war. Such requests must be complied with.  
Article  13 
Humane treatment of prisoners. —Prisoners of war must at all times be humanely treated. Any 
unlawful act or omission by the Detaining Power causing death or seriously endangering the health of a 
prisoner of war in its custody is prohibited and will be regar ded as a serious breach of the present 
Convention. In particular, no prisoner of war may be subjected to physical mutilation or to medical or 
scientific experiments of any kind which are not justified by the medical, dental or hospital treatment of 
the pri soner concerned and carried out in his interest.  39 
 Likewise, prisoners of war must at all times be protected, particularly against acts of violence or 
intimidation and against insults and public curiosity.  
Measures of reprisal against prisoners of war are pr ohibited.  
Article  14 
Respe ct for the person of prisoners. —Prisoners of war are entitled in all circumstances to respect 
for their persons and their hono ur. 
Women shall be treated with all the regard due to their sex and shall in all cases benefit by treatm ent 
as favorable as that granted to men.  
Prisoners of war shall retain the full civil capacity which they enjoyed at the time of their capture. The 
Detaining Power may not restrict the exercise, either within or without its own territory, of the rights suc h 
capacity confers except in so far as the captivity requires.  
Article  15 
Maintenance of prisoners. —The Power detaining prisoners of war shall be bound to provide free of 
charge for their maintenance and for the medical attention required by their state of  health.  
Article  16 
Taking into consideration the provisions of the present Convention relating to rank and sex, and 
subject to any privileged treatment which may be accorded to them by reason of their state of health, age 
or professional qualifications, a ll prisoners of war shall be treated alike by the Detaining Power, without 
any adverse distinction based on race, nationality, religious belief or political opinions, or any other 
distinction founded on similar criteria.  
PART III  
CAPTIVITY  
SECTION I  
BEGINNING OF CAPTIVITY  
Article  17 
Questioning of prisoners. —Every prisoner of war, when questioned on the subject , is bound to give 
only his surname, first names and rank, date of birth, and army, regimental, personal or serial number, or 
failing this, equi valent information.  
If he wilfully infringes this rule he may render himself liable to a restriction of the privileges accorded 
to his rank or status.  
Each Party to conflict is required to furnish the persons under its jurisdiction who are liable to become  
prisoners of war, with an identity card showing the owner ’s surname, first names, rank, army, regimental, 
personal or serial number or equivalent information, and date of birth. The identity card may, 
furthermore, bear the signature or the fingerprints, o r both, of the owner, and may bear, as well, any other 
information the Party to the conflict may wish to add concerning persons belonging to its armed forces. 
As far as possible the card shall measure 6.5x10  cm. and shall be issued in  duplicate. The identi ty card 
shall be shown by the prisoner of war upon demand, but may in no case be taken away from him.  
No physical or mental torture, nor any other form of coercion may be inflicted on prisoners of war to 
secure from them information of any kind whatever. P risoners of war who refuse to answer may not be 
threatened, insulted, or exposed to any unpleasant or disadvantageous treatment of any kind.  
Prisoners of war who, owing to their physical or mental condition, are unable to state their identity 
shall be hand ed over to the medical service. The identity of such prisoners shall be established by all 
possible means, subject to the provisions of the preceding paragraph.  
The questioning of prisoners of war shall be carried out in a language which they understand.  40 
 Article  18 
Property of prisoners. —All effects and Article s of personal use, except arms, horses, military 
equipment and military documents, shall remain in the possession of prisoners of war, likewise their 
metal helmets and gas masks and like article s issu ed for personal protection. Effects and article s used for 
their clothing or feeding shall likewise remain in their possession, even if such effects and article s belong 
to their regulation military equipment.  
 
At no time should prisoners of war be without identity documents. The Detaining Power shall supply 
such documents to prisoners of war who possess none.  
Badges of rank and nationality, decorations and article s having above all a personal or sentimental 
value may not be taken from prisoners of war.  
Sums of money carried by prisoners of war may not be  taken away from them except by order of an 
officer, and after the amount and particulars of the owner have been recorded in a special register and an 
itemized re ceipt has been given, legibly inscribed with the name, rank and unit of the person issuing the 
said receipt. Sums  in the currency of the Detaining Power, or which are changed into such currency at the 
prisoner’s request, shall be placed to the credit of th e prisoner ’s account as provided in Article  64. 
The Detaining Power may withdraw article s of value from prisoners of war only for reasons of 
security; when such article s are withdrawn, the procedure laid down for sums of money impounded               
shall  apply.  
Such objects, likewise the sums taken away in any currency other than that of the Detaining Power, 
and the conversion of which has not been asked for by the owners, shall be kept in the custody of the 
Detaining Power and shall be returned in their initial shape to prisoners of war at the end of their 
captivity.  
Article  19 
Evacuation of prisoners. —Prisoners of war shall be evacuated as soon as possible after their 
capture, to camps situated in an area far enough from the combat zone for them to be ou t of danger.  
Only those prisoners of war who, owing to wounds or sickness, would run greater risks by being 
evacuated t han by remaining where they are, may be temporarily kept back in a danger zone.  
Prisoners of war shall not be unnecessarily exposed to da nger while awaiting evacuation from a 
fighting zone.  
Article  20 
Conditions of evacuation. —The evacuation of prisoners of war shall always be effected humanely 
and in conditions similar to those for the forces of the Detaining Power in their changes of stat ion. 
The Detaining Power shall supply prisoners of war who are being evacuated with sufficient food and 
potable water, and with the necessary clothing and medical attention. The Detaining Power shall take all 
suitable precautions to ensure their safety dur ing evacuation, and shall establish as soon as possible a list 
of the prisoners of war who are evacuated.  
If prisoners of war must, during evacuation, pass through transit camps, their stay in such camps shall 
be as brief as possible.  
SECTION II  
INTERNMENT  OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
CHAPTER I  
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS  
Article  21 
Restriction of liberty of movement. —The Detaining Power may subject prisoners of war to 
internment. It may impose on them the obligation of not leaving, beyond certain limits, the camp where 
they are interned, or if the said camp is fenced in, of not going outside its perimeter. Subject to the 
provisions of the present Convention relative to penal and disciplinary sanctions, prisoners of war may 
not be held in close confinement except where nece ssary to safeguard their health and then only during 
the continuation of the circumstances which make such confinement necessary.  41 
 Prisoners of war may be partially or wholly released on parole or promise, in so far as is allowed by 
the laws of the Power on  which they depend. Such measures shall be taken particularly in cases where 
this may contribute to the improvement of their state of health. No prisoner of war shall be compelled to 
accept liberty on parole or promise.  
Upon the outbreak of hostilities, ea ch Party to the conflict shall notify the adverse Party of the laws 
and regulations allowing or forbidding its own nationals to accept liberty on parole or promise. Prisoners 
of war who are paroled or who have given their promise in conformity with the law s and regulations so 
notified, are bound on their personal honor scrupulously to fulfill, both towards the Power on which they 
depend and towards the Power which has captured them, the engagements of their paroles or promises. In 
such cases, the Power on w hich they depend is bound neither to require nor to accept from them any 
service incompatible with the parole or promise given.  
Article  22 
Places and conditions of internment. —Prisoners of war may be interned only in premises located 
on land and affording every guarantee of hygiene and healthfulness.  Except  in particular cases which are 
justified by the interest of the prisoners themselves, they shall not be interned in penitentiaries.  
Prisoners of war interned in unhealthy areas, or where the climate is in jurious for them, shall be 
removed as soon as possible to a  more favo urable climate.  
The Detaining Power shall assemble prisoners of war in camps or camp compounds according to their 
nationality, language and customs, provided that such prisoners shall not  be separated from prisoners of 
war belonging to the armed forces with which they were serving at the time of their capture, except with 
their consent.  
Article  23 
Security of prisoners. —No prisoner of war may at any time be sent to, or detained in areas wh ere he 
may be exposed to the fire of the combat zone, nor may his presence be used to render certain points or 
areas immune from military operations.  
Prisoners of war shall have shelters against air bombardment and other hazards of war, to the same 
extent as the local civilian population. With  the exception of those engaged in the protection of their 
quarters against the aforesaid hazards, they may enter such shelters as soon as possible after the giving of 
the alarm.  Any other protective measure taken in f avor of the population shall also apply to them.  
Detaining Powers shall give the Powers concerned, through the intermediary of the Protecting 
Powers, all useful information regarding the geographical location of prisoner of war camps.  
Whenever military con siderations permit, prisoner of war camps shall be indicated in the day -time by 
the letters PW or PG, placed so as to be clearly from the air. The Powers concerned may, however, agree 
upon any other system of marking. Only prisoner of war camps shall be marked as such.  
Article  24 
Permanent transit camps. —Transit or screening camps of a permanent kind shall be  fitted out under 
conditions similar to those described in the present Section, and the prisoners therein shall have the same 
treatment as in other c amps.  
CHAPTER II  
QUARTERS, FOOD AND CLOTHING OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  25 
Quarters. —Prisoners of war shall be quartered under conditions as favorable as those for the forces 
of the Detaining Power who are billeted in the same area. The said conditions sh all make allowance for 
the habits and customs of the prisoners and shall in no case be prejudicial to their health.  
The foregoing provisions shall apply in particular to the dormitories of prisoners of war as regards 
both total surface and minimum cubic sp ace, and the general installations, bedding and blankets.  42 
 The premises provided for the use of prisoners of war individually or collectively, shall be entirely 
protected from dampness and adequately heated and lighted, in particular between dusk and lights  out. All 
precautions must be taken against the danger of fire.  
In any camps in which women prisoners of war, as well as men, are accommodated, separate 
dormitories shall be provided for them.  
Article  26 
Food. —The basic daily food rations shall be sufficient in quantity, quality and variety to keep 
prisoners of war in good health and to prevent loss of weight or the development of nutritional 
deficiencies. Account shall also be taken of the habitual diet of the prisoners.  
The Detaining Power shall s upply prisoners of war who work with such additional ratio ns as are 
necessary for the lab our on which they are employed.  
Sufficient drinking water shall be supplied to prisoners of war. The use of tobacco shall be permitted.  
Prisoners of war shall, as far as possible, be associated with the preparation of their meals; they may 
be employed for that purpose in the kitchens. Furthermore, they shall be given the means of preparing, 
themselves, the additional food in their possession.  
Adequate premises shall be provided for messing.  
Collective disciplinary measures affecting food are prohibited.  
Article  27 
Clothing. —Clothing, underwear and footwear shall be supplied to prisoners of war in sufficient 
quantities by the Detaining Power, which shall make allowance fo r the climate of the region where the 
prisoners are detained. Uniforms of enemy armed forces captured by the Detaining Power should, if 
suitable for the climate, be made available to clothe prisoners of war.  
The regular replacement and repair of the above article s shall be assured by the Detaining Power. In 
addition, prisoners of war who work shall receive appropriate clothing, wherever the nature of the          
work demands.  
Article  28 
Canteens. —Canteens shall be installed in all camps, where prisoners of war may procure foodstuffs, 
soap and tobacco and ordinary article s in daily use. The tariff shall never be in excess of local            
market prices.  
The profits made by camp canteens shall be used for the benefit of the prisoners; a special fund shall 
be created for this purpose. The prisoner ’s representative shall have the right to collaborate in the 
management of the canteen and of this fund.  
When a camp is closed down, the credit balance of the special fund shall be handed to an international 
welfare organization, to be employed for the benefit of prisoners of war of the same nationality as those 
who have attributed to the fund. In  case of a general repatriation, such profits shall be kept by  the 
Detaining Power, subject to any agreement to the contrary between the Powers concerned.  
CHAPTER III  
HYGIENE AND MEDICAL ATTENTION  
Article  29 
Hygiene. —The Detaining Power shall be bound to take all sanitary measures necessary to ensure the 
cleanliness and healthfulness of camps, and to prevent epidemics.  
Prisoners of war shall have for their use, day and night, conveniences which conform to the rules of 
hygiene and are maintained in a constant state of cleanliness. In any camps in which women prisoners of 
war are accommodated, separate conveniences shall be provided for them.  43 
 Also, apart from the baths and showers with which the camps shall be furnished, prisoners of war 
shall be provided with sufficient water and soap for their personal toilet and for w ashing their personal 
laundry; the necessary installations, facilities and time shall be granted them for that purpose.  
Article  30 
Medical attention. —Every camp shall have an adequate infirmary where prisoners of war may have 
the attention they require as well as appropriate diet. Isolation wards shall, if necessary, be set aside for 
cases of contagious or mental disease.  
Prisoners of war suffering from serious disease, or whose condition necessitates special treatment, a 
surgical operation or hospital care  must be admitted to any military or civilian medical unit where such 
treatment can be given, even if their repatriation is contemplated in the near future. Special facilities shall 
be afforded for the care , to be given to the disabled, in particular to the blind, and for their rehabilitation, 
pending repatriation.  
Prisoners of war shall have the attention, preferably, of medical personnel of the Power on which they 
depend and, if possible, of their nationali ty. 
Prisoners of war may not be prevented from presenting themselves to the medical authorities for 
examination. The detaining authorities shall, upon request, issue to every prisoner who has undergone 
treatment, an official certificate indicating the natu re of his illness or injury, and the duration and kind of 
treatment received. A duplicate of this certificate shall be forwarded to the Central Prisoners of War 
Agency.  
The costs of treatment, including those of any apparatus necessary for the maintenance of prisoners of 
war in good health, particularly dentures and other artificial appliances, and spectacles, shall be borne by 
the Detaining Power.  
Article  31 
Medical inspections. —Medical inspections of prisoners of war shall be made at least once a month. 
They shall include the checking and the recording of the weight of each prisoner of war.  Their  purpose 
shall be, in particular, to supervise the general state of health, nutrition and cleanliness of prisoners and to 
detect contagious diseases, especially tu berculosis, malaria and venereal disease. For this purpose, the 
most efficient methods available shall be employed, e.g., periodic mass miniature radiography for the 
early detection of tuberculosis.  
Article  32 
Prisoners engaged on medical duties. —Prisoners  of war who, though not attached to the medical 
service of their armed forces, are physicians, surgeons, dentists, nurses or medical orderlies, may be 
required by the Detaining Power to exercise their medical functions in the interests of prisoners of war 
dependent on the same Power. In that case they shall continue to be prisoners of war, but shall receive the 
same treatment as corresponding medical personnel retained by the Detaining Power. They shall be 
exempted from any other work under Article  49. 
CHAP TER IV  
MEDICAL PERSONNEL AND CHAPLAINS RETAINED TO ASSIST PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  33 
Rights and pr ivileges of retained personnel. —Members of the medical personnel and chaplains 
while retained by the Detaining Power with a view to assisting prisoners of wa r, shall not be considered 
as prisoners of war.  They shall, however, receive as a minimum the benefits and protection of the present 
Convention, and shall also be granted all facilities necessary to provide for the medical care of, and 
religious ministrati on to prisoners of war.  
They shall continue to exercise their medical and spiritual functions for the benefit of prisoners of 
war, preferably those belonging to the armed forces upon which they depend, within the scope of the 
military laws and regulations of the Detaining Power and under the control of its competent services, in  44 
 accordance with their professional etiquette. They shall also benefit by the following facilities in the 
exercise of their medical or spiritual functions: — 
(a) They shall be authori sed to visit periodically prisoners of war situated in working detachments 
or in hospitals outside the camp. For this purpose, the Detaining Power shall place at their disposal 
the necessary means of transport.  
(b) The senior medical officer in each camp s hall be responsible to the camp military authorities 
for everything connected with the activities of retained medical personnel. For this purpose, Parties to 
the conflict shall agree at the outbreak of hostilities on the subject of the corresponding ranks of the 
medical personnel, including that of societies mentioned in Article 26 of the Geneva Convention for 
the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of            
August 12, 1949.  This senior medical officer, as  well as chaplains, shall have the right to deal with 
the competent authorities of the camp on all questions relating to their duties. Such authorities shall 
afford them all necessary facilities for correspondence relating to these questions.  
(c) Although they shall be subject to the internal discipline of the camp in which they are 
retained, such personnel may not be compelled to carry out any work other than that concerned with 
their medical or religious duties.  
During hostilities, the Parties to the conf lict shall agree concerning the possible relief of retained 
personnel and shall settle the procedure to be followed.  
None of the preceding provisions shall relieve the Detaining Power of its obligations with regard to 
prisoners of war from the medical or s piritual point of view.  
CHAPTER V  
RELIGIOUS, INTELLECTUAL AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES  
Article  34 
Religious duties .—Prisoners of war shall enjoy complete latitude in the exercise of their religious 
duties, including attendance at the service of their faith, on condition that they comply with the 
disciplinary routine prescribe by the military authorities.  
Adequate premises shall be provided where religious services may be held.  
Article 35 
Retained chaplains .—Chaplains who fall into the hands of the enemy Power and who remain or are 
retained with a view to assisting prisoners of war, shall be allowed to minister to them and to exercise 
freely their ministry amongst prisoners of war of the same religion, in acco rdance with their religious 
conscience. They shall be allocated among the various camps and lab our detachments containing 
prisoners of war belonging to the same forces, speaking the same language or practicing the same 
religion. They shall enjoy the necess ary facilities, including the means of transport provided for in            
Article 33, for visiting the prisoners of war outside their camp. They shall be free to correspond, subject 
to censorship, on matters concerning their religious duties with the ecc lesiastical authorities in the country 
of detention and with the international religious organizations. Letters and cards which they may send for 
this purpose shall be in addition to the quota provided for in Article 71.  
Article 36 
Prisoners who are minist ers of religion .—Prisoners of war who are ministers of religion, without 
having officiated as chaplains to their own forces, shall be at liberty, whatever their denomination, to 
minister freely to the members of their community. For this purpose, they shal l receive the same treatment 
as the chaplains retained by the Detaining Power. They shall not be obliged to do any other work.  
Article 37 
Prisoners without a minister of their religion. —When prisoners of war have not the assistance of a 
retained chaplain o r of a prisoner of war minister of their faith, a minister belonging to the prisoners ’ or a 
similar denomination, or in his absence a qualified layman, if such a course is feasible from a 45 
 confessional point of view, shall be appointed at the request of the  prisoners concerned to fill this office. 
This appointment, subject to the approval of the Detaining Power, shall take place with the agreement of 
the community of prisoners concerned and, wherever necessary, with the approval of the local religious 
author ities of the same faith. The person thus appointed shall comply with all regulations established by 
the Detaining Power in the interests of discipline and military security.  
Article  38 
Recreation study, sports and games. —While respecting the individual preferences of every 
prisoner, the Detaining Power shall encourage the practice of intellectual, educational, and recreational 
pursuits, sports and games amongst prisoners, and shall take the measures necessary to ensure the 
exercise thereof by providing t hem with adequate premises and necessary equipment.  
Prisoners shall have opportunities for taking physical exercise including sports and games and for 
being out of doors. Sufficient open spaces shall be provided for this purpose in all camps.  
CHAPTER VI  
DISCIPLINE  
Article  39 
Administration. —Every prisoner of war camp shall be put under the immediate authority of a 
responsible commissioned officer belonging to the regular armed forces of the Detaining Power. Such 
officer shall have in his possession a copy of the present Convention; he shall ensure that its provisions 
are known to the camp staff and the guard and shall be responsible, under the direction of his government, 
for its application.  
Saluting. —Prisoners of war, with the exception of officers, must salute and show to all officers of the 
Detaining Power the external marks of respect provided for by the regulations applying in their own 
forces.  
Officer prisoners of war are bound to salute only officers of a higher rank of the Detaining Power; 
they must , however, salute the camp commander regardless of his rank.  
Article  40 
Badges and decorations. —The wearing of badges of rank and nationality, as well as of decorations 
shall be permitted.  
 
Article  41 
Posting of the Convention, and of regulations and order s concerning prisoners. —In every camp 
the text of the present Convention and its Annexes and the contents of any special agreement provided for 
in Article  6, shall be posted, in the prisoners ’ own language, at places where all may read them. Copies 
shall b e supplied, on request, to the prisoners who cannot have access to the copy which has been posted.  
Regulations, orders, notices and publications of every kind relating to the conduct of prisoners of war 
shall be issued to them in a language which they unde rstand. Such regulations, orders and publications 
shall be posted in the manner described above and copies shall be handed to the prisoners ’ representative. 
Every order and command addressed to prisoners of war individually must likewise be given in a 
language which they understand.  
Article  42 
Use of weapons. —The use of weapons against prisoners of war, especially against those who are 
escaping or attempting to escape, shall constitute an extreme measure, which shall always be preceded by 
warnings appropria te to the circumstances.  
 46 
 CHAPTER VII  
RANK OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  43 
Notification of ranks. —Upon the outbreak of hostilities, the Parties to the conflict shall 
communicate to one another the titles and ranks of all the persons mentioned in Article  4 of the present 
Convention, in order to ensure equality of treatment between prisoners of equivalent rank. Titles and 
ranks which are subsequently created shall from the subject of similar communications.  
The Detaining Power shall recognize promotions in  rank which have been accorded to prisoners of 
war and which have been duly notified by the Power on which these prisoners depend.  
Article  44 
Treatment of officers. —Officers and prisoners of equivalent status shall be treated with the regard 
due to their rank and age.  
In order to ensure service in officers ’ camps, other ranks of the same armed forces who, as far as 
possible, speak the same language, shall be assigned in sufficient numbers, account being taken of the 
rank of officers and prisoners of equiva lent status. Such orderlies shall not be required to perform any 
other work.  
Supervision of the mess by the officers themselves shall be facilitated in every way.  
Article  45 
Treatment of other prisoners. —Prisoners of war other than officers and prisoners o f equivalent 
status shall be treated with the regard due to their rank and age.  
Supervision of the mess by the prisoners themselves shall be facilitated in every way.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TRANSFER OF PRISONERS OF WAR AFTER THEIR ARRIVAL IN CAMP  
Article  46 
Conditio ns.—The Detaining Power, when deciding upon the transfer of prisoners of war, shall take 
into account the interests of the prisoners themselves, more especially so as not to increase the difficulty 
of their repatriation.  
The transfer of prisoners of war sh all always be effected humanely and in conditions not less 
favorable than those under which the forces of the detaining  Power are transferred. Account shall always 
be taken of the climatic conditions to which the prisoners of war are accustomed and the con ditions of 
transfer shall in no case be prejudicial to their health.  
The Detaining Power shall supply prisoners of war during transfer with sufficient food and drinking 
water to keep them in good health, likewise with the necessary clothing, shelter and me dical attention. 
The Detaining Power shall take adequate precautions especially in case of transport by sea or by air, to 
ensure their safety during transfer, and shall draw up a complete list of all transferred prisoners before 
their departure.  
Article  47 
Circumstances precluding transfer. —Sick or wounded prisoners of war shall not be transferred as 
long as their recovery may be endangered by the journey, unless their safety imperatively demands it.  
If the combat zone draws closer to a camp, the prisoners of war in the said camp shall not be 
transferred unless their transfer can be carried out in adequate conditions of safety, or unless they are 
exposed to greater risks by remaining on the spot than by being transferred.  47 
 Article  48 
Procedure for transfer. —In the event of transfer, prisoners of war shall be officially advised of their 
departure and of their new postal address. Such notifications shall be given in time for them to pack their 
luggage and inform their next of kin.  
They shall be allowed to take w ith them their personal effects, and the correspondence and parcels 
which have arrived for them. The weight of such baggage may be limited, if the conditions of transfer so 
require, to what each prisoner can reasonably carry, which shall in no case be more  then twenty -five 
kilograms per head.  
Mail and parcels addressed to their former camp shall be forwarded to them without delay. The camp 
commander shall take, in agreement with the prisoners ’ representative, any measures needed to ensure the 
transport of t he prisoners community property and of the luggage they are unable to take with them in 
consequence of restrictions imposed by virtue of the second paragraph of this Article . 
The costs of transfers shall be borne by the Detaining Power.  
SECTION III  
LABOUR OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  49 
General observations. —The Detaining Power may utilize the lab our of prisoners of war who are 
physically fit, taking into account their age, sex, rank and physical aptitude, and with a view particularly 
to maintaining them in  a good state of physical and mental health.  
Non-commissioned officers who are prisoners of war shall only be required to do supervisory work. 
Those not so required may ask for other suitable work which shall, so far as possible, be found for them.  
If offi cers or persons of equivalent status ask for suitable work, it shall be found for them, so far as 
possible, but they may in no circumstances be compelled to work.  
Article  50 
Authorized work. —Besides work connected with camp administration, installation or maintenance, 
prisoners of war may be compelled to do only such work as is included in the following classes: — 
(a) agriculture;  
(b) industries connected with the production or the extraction of raw materials, and manufacturing 
industries, with the exception  of metallurgical, machinery and chemical industries; public works and 
building operations which have no military character or purpose;  
(c) transport and handling of stores which are not military in character or purpose;  
(d) commercial business, and arts a nd crafts;  
(e) domestic service;  
(f) public utility services having no military character or purpose.  
Should the above provisions be infringed, prisoners of war shall be allowed to exercise their right of 
complaint, in conformity with Article  78. 
Article  51 
Working conditions. —Prisoners of war must be granted suitable working conditions, especially as 
regards accommodation, food, clothing and equipment; such conditions shall not be inferior to those 
enjoyed by nationals of the Detaining Power employed in similar work; account shall also be taken of 
climatic conditions.  
The Detaining Power , in utilizing the lab our of prisoners of war, shall ensure that in areas in which 
prisoners are employed, the national legislation concerning the protection of lab our, and, more 
particularly, the regulations for the safety of workers, are duly applied.  48 
 Prisoners of war shall receive training and be provided with the means of protection suitable to the 
work they will have to do and similar to those accorded to the nationa ls of the Detaining Power. Subject 
to the provisions of Article  52, prisoners may be submitted to the normal risks run by these civilian 
workers.  
Conditions of lab our shall in no case be rendered more arduous by disciplinary measures.  
Article  52 
Dangerous or humiliating lab our.—Unless he be a volunteer, no prisoner of war may be employed 
on lab our which is of an unhealthy or dangerous nature.  
No prisoner of war shall be assigned to lab our which would be looked upon as humiliating for a 
member of the Detain ing Power ’s own forces.  
The removal of mines or similar devices shall  be considered as dangerous lab our. 
Article  53 
Duration of lab our. —The duration of the daily lab our of prisoners of war, including the time of the 
journey to and fro, shall not be exces sive, and must in no case exceed that permitted for civilian workers 
in the district, who are nationals of the Detaining Power and employed on the same work.  
Prisoners of war must be allowed, in the middle of the day ’s work, a rest of not less than one hou r. 
This rest will be the same as that to which workers of the Detaining Power are entitled, if the latter is of 
longer duration. They shall be allowed in addition a rest of twenty -four consecutive hours every week, 
preferably on Sunday or the day of rest i n their country of origin. Furthermore, every prisoner who has 
worked for one year shall be granted a rest of eight consecutive days, during which his working pay shall 
be paid to him.  
If methods of labour such as piece work are employed, the length of the  working period shall not be 
rendered excessive thereby.  
Article  54 
Working pay, occu pational accidents and diseases. —The working pay due to prisoners of war 
shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of Article  62 of the present Convention.  
Prisoners of war who sustain accidents in connection with work, or who contract a disease in the 
course, or in consequence of their work, shall receive all the care their condition may require. The 
Detaining Power shall furthermore deliver to such prisoner s of war a medical certificate enabling them to 
submit their claims to the Power on which they depend, and shall send a duplicate to the Central Prisoners 
of War Agency provided for in Article  123. 
Article  55 
Medical supervision. —The fitness of prisoners o f war for work shall be periodically verified by 
medical examinations, at least once a month. The examinations shall have particular regard to the nature 
of the work which prisoners of war are required to do.  
If any prisoner of war considers himself incapa ble of working he shall be permitted to appear before 
the medical authorities of his camp; Physicians or surgeons may recommend that the prisoners who are, in 
their opinion, unfit for work, be exempted therefrom.  
Article  56 
Labour detachments. —The organi sation and administration of lab our detachments shall be similar 
to those of prisoner of war camps.  
Every lab our detachment shall remain under the control of and administratively part of a prisoner of 
war camp. The military authorities and the commander of  the said camp shall be responsible, under the 
direction of their government, for the observance of the provisions o f the present Convention in lab our 
detachments.  49 
 The camp commander shall keep an up -to-date record of the lab our detachments dependent on hi s 
camp, and shall communicate it to the delegates of the Protecting Power, of the International Committee 
of the Red Cross, or of other agencies giving relief to prisoners of war, who may visit the camp.  
Article  57 
Prisoners working for private employers. —The treatment of prisoners of war who work for private 
persons, even if the latter are responsible for guarding and protecting them, shall not be inferior to that 
which is provided for by the present Convention. The Detaining Power, the military authoritie s and the 
commander of the camp to which such prisoners belong shall be entirely responsible for the maintenance, 
care, treatment, and payment of the working pay of such prisoners of war.  
Such prisoners of war shall have the right to remain in communicatio n with the prisoners ’ 
representatives in the camps on which they depend.  
SECTION IV  
FINANCIAL RESOURCES OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  58 
Ready money. —Upon the outbreak of hostilities, and pending an arrangement on this matter with the 
Protecting Power, the Detaining Power may determine the maximum amount of money in cash or in any 
similar form, that prisoners may have in their possession. Any amount in excess, which was properly in 
their possession and which has been taken or withheld from them, shall be pla ced to their account, 
together with any monies deposited by them, and shall not be converted into any other currency without 
their consent.  
If prisoners of war are permitted to purchase services or commodities outside the camp against 
payment in cash, such  payments shall be made by the prisoner himself or the camp administration who 
will charge them to the accounts of the prisoners concerned. The Detaining Power will establish the 
necessary rules in this respect.  
Article  59 
Amounts in cash taken from prison ers.—Cash which was taken from prisoners of war, in 
accordance with Article  18, at the time of their capture, and which is in the currency of the Detaining 
Power, shall be placed to their separate accounts, in accordance with the provisions of Article  64 of the 
present Section.  
The amounts, in the currency of the Detaining Power, due to the conversion of sums in other 
currencies that are taken from the prisoners of war at the same time, shall also be credited to their       
separate accounts.  
Article  60 
Adva nces of pay. —The Detaining Power shall grant all prisoners of war a monthly advance of pay, 
the amount of which shall be fixed by conversion, into the currency of the said Power, of the          
following amounts: — 
Category I: Prisoners ranking below serge ants: eight Swiss francs.  
Category II: Sergeants and other non -commissioned officers, o r prisoners of equivalent rank: 
twelve Swiss francs.  
Category III: Warrant officers and commissioned officers below the rank of major or  
prisoners of equivalent rank: fifty Swiss francs.  
Category IV: Majors, lieutenant -colonels, colonels or prisoners of equivalent rank;  sixty               
Swiss francs.  
Category V: General officers or prisoners of war of equivalent rank: seventy -five Swiss francs.  50 
 However, the Parties to the conflict concerned may by special agreement modify the amount of 
advances of pay due to prisoners of the preceding categories.  
Furthermore, if the amounts indicated in the first paragraph above would be unduly high compared 
with the pay of the Detai ning Power ’s armed forces or would, for any reason, seriously embarrass the 
Detaining Power, then, pending the conclusion of a special agreement with the Power on which the 
prisoners depend to vary the amounts indicated above, the Detaining Power — 
(a) shal l continue to credit the accounts of the prisoners with the amounts indicated in the first 
paragraph above;  
(b) may temporarily limit the amount made available from these advances of pay to prisoners of 
war for their own use, to sums which are reasonable, but which, for Category I, shall never be inferior 
to the amount that the Detaining Power gives to the members of its own armed forces.  
The reasons for any limitations will be given without delay the Protecting Power.  
Article  61 
Supplementary pay. —The Deta ining power shall accept for distribution as supplementary pay to 
prisoners of war sums which the Power on which the prisoners depend may forward to them, on condition 
that the sums to be paid shall be the same for each prisoner of the same category, shall  be payable to all 
prisoners of that category depending on that Power, and shall be placed in their separate accounts, at the 
earliest opportunity, in accordance with the provisions of Article  64. Such  supplementary pay shall not 
relieve the Detaining Powe r of any obligation under this Convention.  
Article  62 
Working pay. —Prisoners of war shall be paid a fair working rate of pay by the detaining authorities 
direct. The rate shall be fixed by the said authorities , but shall at no time be less one-fourth of one Swiss 
franc for a full working day. The Detaining Power shall inform prisoners of war, as well as the Power on 
which they depend, through the intermediary of the Protecting Power, of the rate of daily working pay 
that it has fixed.  
Working pay shall li kewise be paid by the detaining authorities to prisoners of war permanently 
detailed to duties or to a skilled or semi -skilled occupation in connection with the administration, 
installation or maintenance of camps, and to the prisoners who are required to carry out spiritual or 
medical duties on behalf of their comrades.  
The working pay of the prisoners ’ representative, of his advisers, if any, and of his assistants, shall be 
paid out of the fund maintained by canteen profits. The scale of this working pay shall be fixed by the 
prisoners’ representative and approved by the camp commander. If there is no such fund, the detaining 
authorities shall pay these prisoners a fair working rate of pay.  
Article  63 
Transfer of funds. —Prisoners of war shall be permitted to receive remittances of money addressed 
to them individually or collectively.  
Every prisoner of war shall have at his disposal the credit balance of his account as provided for in the 
following Article , within the limits fixed by the Detaining Power, whi ch shall make such payments as are 
requested. Subject to financial or monetary restrictions which the Detaining Power regards as essential, 
prisoners of war may also have payments made abroad. In this case payments addressed by prisoners of 
war to dependan ts shall be given priority.  
In any event, and subject to the consent of the power on which they depend, prisoners may have 
payments made in their own country, as follows: the Detaining Power shall send to the aforesaid Power 
through the Protecting Power, a  notification giving all the necessary particulars concerning the prisoners 
of war, the beneficiaries of the payments, and the amount of the sums to be paid, expressed in the 
Detaining Power , currency. The said notification shall be signed by the prisoners  and countersigned by 
the camp commander. The Detaining Power shall debit the prisoners ’ account by a corresponding 51 
 amount; the sums thus debited shall be placed by it to the credit of the Power on which the             
prisoners depend.  
To apply the forego ing provisions, the Detaining Power may usefully consult the Model Regulations 
in Annex V of the present Convention.  
Article  64 
Prisoners ‟ accounts. —The Detaining Power shall hold an account for each pr isoner of war, showing 
at least  the following: — 
(1) The amounts due to the prisoner or received by him as advances of pay, as working pay or derived 
from any other source; the sums in the currency of the Detaining Power which were taken from him; the 
sums taken from him and converted at his request into the  currency of the said Power.  
(2) The payments made to the prisoner in cash, or in any other similar form; the payments made on 
his behalf and at his request; the sums transferred under Article  63, third paragraph.  
Article  65 
Management of prisoners ‟ accoun ts.—Ever y item entered in the account of a prisoner of war shall 
be countersigned or initialed by him, or by the prisoners ’ representative acting on his behalf.  
Prisoners of war shall at all times be afforded reasonable facilities for consulting and obtain ing copies 
of their accounts, which may likewise be inspected by the representatives of the Protecting Power s at the 
time of visits to the camp.  
When prisoners of war are transferred from one camp to another, their personal accounts will follow 
them. In ca se of transfer from one Detaining Power to another, the monies which are their property and 
are not in the currency of the Detaining Power will follow them. They shall be given certificates for any 
other monies standing to the credit of their accounts.  
The Parties to the conflict concerned may agree to notify to each other at specific intervals through 
the Protecting Power, the amount of the accounts of the prisoners of war.  
Article  66 
Winding up of accounts. —On the termination of captivity, through the release of a prisoner of war 
or his repatriation, the Detaining Power shall give him a statement, signed by an authorized officer of that 
Power, showing the credit balance then due to him. The Detaining Power shall also send through the 
Protecting Power to  the government upon which the prisoner of war depends, lists giving all appropriate 
particulars of all prisoners of war whose captivity has been terminated by repatriation, release, escape, 
death or any other means, and showing the amount of their credit balances. Such lists shall be certified on 
each sheet by an authorized representative of the Detaining Power.  
Any of the above provisions of this Article  may be varied by mutual agreement between any two 
Parties to the conflict.  
The power on which the pris oner of war depends shall be responsible for settling with him any credit 
balance due to him from the Detaining Power on the termination of his captivity.  
Article  67 
Adjustments between Parties to the conflict. —Advances of pay, issued to prisoners of war 
inconformity with Article  60, shall be considered as made on behalf of the power on which they depend. 
Such advances of pay, as well as all payments made by the said Power under Article  63, third paragraph, 
and Article  68, shall form the subject of arrangements between the Powers concerned, at the close                  
of hostilities.  
Article  68 
Claims for compensation. —Any claim by a prisoner of war for compensation in respect of any 
injury or other disability a rising out of work shall be referred to the Power on which he depends, through 
the Protecting Power. In accordance with Article  54, the Detaining Power will, in all cases, provide the 52 
 prisoner of war concerned with a statement showing the nature of the inj ury or disability, the 
circumstances in which it arose and particulars of medical or hospital treatment given for it.                      
This statement will be signed by a responsible officer of the Detaining Power and the medical particulars 
certified b y a medical officer.  
Any claim by a prisoner of war for compensation in respect of personal effects, monies or valuables 
impounded by the Detaining Power under Article  18 and not forthcoming on his repatriation, or in respect 
of loss alleged to be due to t he fault of the Detaining Power or any of its servants, shall likewise be 
referred to the Power on which he depends.  Nevertheless,  any such personal effects required for use by 
the prisoners of war whilst in captivity shall be replaced at the expense of th e Detaining Power. The 
Detaining Power will, in all cases, provide the prisoner of war with a statement, signed by a responsible 
officer, showing all available information regarding the reasons why such effects, monies or valuables 
have not been restored t o him. A copy of this statement will be forwarded to the Power on which he 
depends through the Central Agency for Prisoners of War provided for in Article  123. 
SECTION V  
RELATIONS OF PRISONERS OF WAR WITH THE EXTERIOR  
Article  69 
Notification of measures ta ken.—Immediately upon prisoners of war falling into its power, the 
Detaining Power shall inform them and the Powers on which they depend, through the Protecting Power, 
of the measures taken to carry out the provisions of the present Section. They shall likewise inform the 
parties concerned of any subsequent modifications of such measures.  
Article  70 
Capture card. —Immediately upon capture, or not more than one week after arrival at a camp, even 
if it is a transit camp, likewise in case of sickness or tran sfer to hospital or another camp, every prisoner 
of war shall be enabled to write direct to his family, on the one hand, and to the Central Prisoners of War 
Agency provided for in Article  123, on the other hand, a card similar, if possible, to the model an nexed to 
the present Convention, informing his relatives of his capture, address and state of health. The said cards 
shall be forwarded as rapidly as possible and may not be delayed in any manner.  
Article  71 
Correspondence. —Prisoners of war shall be allowed to send and receive letters and cards. If the 
Detaining Power deems it necessary to limit the number of letters and cards sent by each prisoner of war, 
the said number shall not be less than two letters and four cards mont hly exclusive of the capture cards 
provided for in Article  70, and conforming as closely as possible to the models annexed to the present 
Convention. Further limitations may be imposed only if the Protecting Power is satisfied that it would be 
in the inter ests of the prisoners of war concerned to do so owing to difficulties of translation caused by the 
Detaining Power ’s inability to find sufficient qualified linguists to carry out the necessary censorship. If 
limitations must be placed on the correspondence  addressed to prisoners of war, they may be ordered only 
by the Power on which the prisoners depend, possibly at the request of the Detaining Power. Such letters 
and cards must be conveyed by the most rapid method at the disposal of the Detaining Power; th ey may 
not be delayed or retained for disciplinary reasons.  
Prisoners of war who have been without news for a long period, or who are unable to receive news 
from their next of kin or to give them news by the ordinary postal route, as well as those who are at a 
great distance from their homes, shall be permitted to send telegrams, the fees being charged against the 
prisoners of war ’s accounts with the Detaining Power or paid in the currency at their disposal. They shall 
likewise benefit by this measure in ca ses of urgency.  
As a general rule, the correspondence of prisoners of war shall be written in their native language. 
The Parties to the conflict may allow correspondence in other languages.  
Sacks containing prisoner of war mail must be securely sealed and labeled so as clearly to indicate 
their contents and must be addressed to offices of destination.  
 53 
  
Article  72 
Relief Sh ipments . I. General principles. —Prisoners of war shall be allowed to receive by post or by 
any other means individual parcels or collective shipments containing, in particular, foodstuffs, clothing, 
medical supplies and article s of a religious, educational or recreational character which  may meet their 
needs, including books, devotional article s, scientific equipment, examination papers, musical 
instruments, sports outfits and materials allowing prisoners of war to pursue their studies or their cultural 
activities.  
Such shipments shall in  no way free the Detaining Power from the obligations imposed upon it by 
virtue of the present Convention.  
The only limits which may be placed on these shipments shall be those proposed by the Protecting 
Power in the interest of the prisoners themselves, o r by the International Committee of the Red Cross or 
any other organization giving assistance to the prisoners, in respect of their own shipments only, on 
account of exceptional strain on transport or communications.  
The conditions for the sending of indiv idual parcels and collective relief shall, if necessary, be the 
subject of special agreements between the Powers concerned, which may in no case delay the receipt by 
the prisoners of relief supplies. Books may not be included in parcels of clothing and foo dstuffs. Medical 
supplies shall, as a rule, be sent in collective parcels.  
Article  73 
II. Collective relief. —In the absence of special agreements between the Powers concerned on the 
conditions for the receipt and distribution of collective relief shipments , the rules and regulations 
concerning collective shipments, which are annexed to the present Convention, shall be applied.  
The special agreements referred to above shall in no case restrict the right of prisoners ’ 
representatives to take possession of col lective relief shipments intended for prisoners of war, to proceed 
to their distribution or to dispose of them in the interest of the prisoners.  
Nor shall such agreements restrict the right of representatives of the Protecting Power, the 
International Comm ittee of the Red Cross or any other organi sation giving assistance to prisoners of war 
and responsible for the forwarding of collective shipments, to supervise their distribution to the recipients.  
Article  74 
Exemption fr om postal and transport charges. —All relief shipments for prisoners of war shall be 
exempt from import, customs and other dues.  
Correspondence, relief shipments and authorized remittances of money addressed to prisoners of war 
or dispatched by them through the post office, either direct o r through the Information Bureaux provided 
for in Article  122 and the Central Prisoners of War Agency provided for in Article  123, shall be exempt 
from any postal dues, both in the countries of origin and destination, and in intermediate countries.  
If reli ef shipments intended for prisoners of war cannot be sent through the post office by reason of 
weight or for any other cause, the cost of transportation shall be borne by the Detaining Power in all the 
territories under its control. The other Powers, party  to the Convention, shall bear the cost of transport in 
their respective territories.  
In the absence of special agreements between the Parties concerned, the costs connected with 
transport of such shipments, other than costs covered by the above exemption,  shall be charged                           
to the senders.  
The High Contracting Parties shall endeavor to reduce, so far as possible, the rates charged for 
telegrams sent by prisoners of war, or addressed to them.  
Article  75 
Special means of transport. —Should military operations prevent the Powers concerned from 
fulfilling their obligation to assure the transport of the shipments referred to in Article s 70, 71, 72 and 77, 54 
 the Protecting Powers concerned, the International Committee of the Red Cross or an y other organization 
duly approved by the Parties to the conflict may undertake to ensure the conveyance of such shipments by 
suitable means (railway wagons, motor  vehicles, vessels aircraft, etc ). For this purpose, the High 
Contracting Parties shall endea vor to supply them with such transport and to allow its circulation, 
especially by granting the necessary safe -conducts.  
Such transport may also be used to convey: — 
(a) correspondence, lists and reports exchanged between the Central Information Agency refe rred 
to in Article  123 and the National Bureaux referred to in Article  122; 
(b) correspondence and reports relating to prisoners of war which the Protecting Powers, the 
International Committee of the Red Cross or any other body assisting the prisoners, exc hange either 
with their own delegates or with the Parties to the conflict.  
These provisions in no way detract from the right of any Party to the conflict to arrange other means 
of transport, if it should so prefer, nor preclude the granting of safe -conduct s, under mutually agreed 
conditions, to such means of transport.  
In the absence of special agreements, the costs occasioned by the use of such means of transport shall 
be borne proportionally by the Parties to the conflict whose nationals are benefited the reby.  
Article  76 
Censorship and examination. —The censoring of correspondence addressed to prisoners of war or 
dispatched by them shall be done as quickly as possible. Mail shall be censored only by the dispatching 
State and the receiving State, and once on ly by each.  
The examination of consignments intended for prisoners of war shall not be carried out under 
conditions that will expose the goods contained in them to deterioration; except in the case of written or 
printed matter, it shall be done in the pres ence of the addressee, or of a fellow —prisoner duly delegated 
by him. The delivery to prisoners of individual or collective consignments shall not be delayed under the 
pretext of difficulties of censorship.  
Any prohibition of correspondence ordered by Part ies to the conflict, either for military or political 
reasons, shall be only temporary and its duration shall be as short as possible.  
Article  77 
Preparation, execution and transmission of legal documents. —The Detaining Powers shall 
provide all facilities for the transmission, through the Protecting Power or the Central Prisoners of War 
Agency provided for in Article  123, of instruments, papers or documents intended for prisoners of war or 
dispatched by them , especially powers of attorney and wills.  
In all cases they shall facilitate the preparation and execution of such documents on behalf of 
prisoners of war; in particular, they shall allow them to consult a lawyer and shall take what measures are 
necessary  for the authentication of their signatures.  
SECTION VI  
RELATIONS BETWEEN PRISONERS OF WAR AND THE AUTHORITIES  
CHAPTER I  
COMPLAINTS OF PRISONERS OF WAR  RESPECTING THE CONDITIONS  OF CAPTIVITY  
Article  78 
Complaints and requests. —Prisoners of war shall have t he right to make known to the military 
authorities in whose power they are, their requests regarding the conditions of captivity to which they              
are subjected.  
They shall also have the unrestricted right to apply to the representatives of the Pr otecting Powers 
either through their prisoners ’ representative or, if they consider it necessary, direct, in order to draw their 55 
 attention to any points on which they may have complaints to make regarding their conditions                  
of captivity.  
They requests and complaints shall not be limited nor considered to be a part of the correspondence 
quota referred to in Article  71. They  must be transmitted immediately. Even if they are recognized to be 
unfounded, they may not give rise to any punishment.  
Prisoners’ representatives may send periodic reports on the situations in the camps and the needs of 
the prisoners of war to the representatives of the Protecting Powers.  
CHAPTER II  
PRISONERS OF  WAR REPRESENTATIVES  
Article  79 
Election. —In all places where there are prisoners of war, excepting those where there are officers, 
the prisoners shall freely elect by secret ballot, every six months, and also in case of vacancies, prisoners ’ 
representatives entrusted with representing them before the military author ities, the Protecting Powers, the 
International Committee of the Red Cross and any other organization which may assist them. These 
prisoners’ representatives shall be eligible for re -election.  
In camps for officers and persons of equivalent status or in mi xed camps, the senior officer among the 
prisoners of war shall be recognised as the camp prisoners ’ representative. In camps for officers, he shall 
be assisted by one or more advisers chosen by the officers; in mixed camps, his assistants shall be chosen 
from among the prisoners of war who are not officers and shall be elected by them.  
Officer prisoners of war of the same nation ality shall be stationed in lab our camps for prisoners of 
war, for the purpose of carrying out the camp administration duties for w hich the prisoners of war are 
responsible. These officers may be elected as prisoners ’ representatives under the first paragraph of this 
Article . In such a case the assistants to the prisoners ’ representatives shall be chosen from among those 
prisoners of war who are not officers.  
Every representative elected must be approved by the Detaining Power before he has the right to 
commence his duties. Where the Detaining Power refuses to approve a prisoner of war elected by his 
fellow prisoners of war, it must in form the Protecting Power of the reason for such refusal.  
In all cases the prisoners ’ representative must have the same nationality, language and customs as the 
prisoners of war whom here presents. Thus, prisoners of war distributed in different sections of a camp, 
according to their nationality, language or customs, shall have for each se ction their own prisoners ’ 
representative, in accordance with the foregoing paragraphs.  
Article  80 
Duties. —Prisoners’ representatives shall further the physical, spiritual and intellectual well -being of 
prisoners of war.  
In particular, where the prisoners decide to organize amongst themselves a system of mutual 
assistance, this organization will be within the province of the prisoners ’ representative, in addition to the 
special duties entrusted to him by other provisions of the present Convention.  
Prisoners’ representatives shall not be held responsible, simply by reason of their duties, for any 
offences committed by prisoners of war.  
Article  81 
Prerogatives. —Prisoners’ representatives shall not be required to  perform any other work, if the 
accomplishment of  their duties is thereby made more difficult.  
Prisoners’ representatives may appoint from amongst the prisoners such assistants as they may 
require. All material facilities shall be granted them, particularly a certain freedom of movement 
necessary for the  accomplishment of their duties  (inspection of lab our detachments, receipt                          
of supplies, etc .). 56 
 Prisoners’ representatives shall be permitted to visit premises where prisoners of war are detained, 
and every prisoner of war shall have the right to consult freely his prisoners ’ representative.  
All facilities shall likewise be accorded to the prisoners ’ represent atives for communication by post 
and telegraph with the detaining authorities, the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of the 
Red Cross and their delegates, the Mixed Medical Commissions and with the bodies which give 
assistance to prisoners of war. Prisoners ’ representatives of lab our detachments shall enjoy the same 
facilities for communication with the prisoners ’ representatives same facilities for communication with 
the prisoners ’ representatives of the principal camp. Such communications sha ll not be restricted, nor 
considered as forming a part of the quota mentioned in Article  71. 
Prisoners’ representatives who are transferred shall be allowed a reasonable time to acquaint their 
successors with current affairs.  
In case of dismissal, the reas ons therefore shall be communicated to the Protecting Power.  
CHAPTER III  
PENAL AND DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS  
1. General provisions  
Article  82 
Applicable legislation. —A prisoner of war shall be subject to the laws, regulations and orders in 
force in the armed forces of the Detaining Power; the Detaining Power shall be justified in taking judicial 
or disciplinary measures in respect of any offence committed by a prisoner of war against such laws, 
regulations or orders. However, no proceedings or punishments cont rary to the provisions of this Chapter 
shall be allowed.  
If any law, regulation or order of the Detaining Power shall declare acts committed by a prisoner of 
war to be punishable, whereas the same acts would not be punishable if committed by a member of th e 
forces of the Detaining Power, such acts shall entail disciplinary punishments only.  
Article  83 
Choice of disciplinary or judicial proceeding. —In deciding whether proceedings in respect of an 
offence alleged to have been committed by a prisoner of war shall be judicial or disciplinary, the 
Detaining Power shall ensure that the competent authorities exercise the greatest leniency and adopt, 
wherever possible, disciplinary rather than judicial measures.  
Article  84 
Courts. —A prisoner of war shall be tried only by a military court unless the existing laws of the 
Detaining Power expressly permit the civil courts to try a member of the armed forces of the Detaining 
Power in respect of the particular offence alleged to have been committed by the prisoner of war . 
In no circumstances whatever shall a prisoner of war be tried by a court of any kind which does not 
offer the essential guarantees of independence and impartiality as generally recognized, and, in particular, 
the procedure of which does not afford the ac cused the rights and means of defence provided for in 
Article  105. 
Article  85 
Offences committed before capture. —Prisoners of war prosecuted under the laws of the Detaining 
Power for acts committed prior to capture shall retain, even if convicted, the bene fits of the                      
present Convention.  
Article  86 
“Non his in idem.” —No prisoner of war may be punished more than once for the same act or on the 
same charge.  57 
 Article  87 
Penalties. —Prisoners of war may not be sentenced by the military authorities and courts of the 
Detaining Power to any penalties except those provided for in respect of members of the armed forces of 
the said Power who have committed the same acts.  
When fixing the penalty, the courts or authorities of the Detaining Power  shall take into 
consideration, to the widest extent possible, the fact that the accused, not being a national of the Detaining 
Power, is not bound to it by any duty of allegiance, and that he is in its power as the result of 
circumstances independent of h is own will. The said courts or authorities shall be at liberty to reduce the 
penalty provided for the violation of which the prisoner of war is accused, and shall therefore not be 
bound to apply the minimum penalty prescribed.  
Collective punishment for in dividual acts, corporal punishments, imprisonment in premises without 
daylight and, in general, any form of torture or cruelty, are forbidden.  
No prisoner of war may be deprived of his rank by the Detaining Power, or prevented from wearing 
his badges.  
Article 88 
Execution of Penalties. —Officers, non -commissioned officers and men who are prisoners of war 
undergoing a disciplinary or judicial punishment, shall not be subjected to more severe treatment than that 
applied in respect of the same punishment to mem bers of the armed forces of the Detaining Power of 
equivalent rank.  
A woman prisoner of war shall not be awarded or sentenced to a punishment more severe, or treated 
whilst undergoing punishment more severely, than a woman member of the armed forces of the  Detaining 
Power dealt with for a similar offence.  
In no case may a woman prisoner of war be awarded or sentenced to a punishment more severe, or 
treated whilst undergoing punishment more severely, than a male member of the armed forces of the 
Detaining Po wer dealt with for a similar offence.  
Prisoners of war who have served disciplinary or judicial sentences may not be treated differently 
from other prisoners of war.  
II. Disciplinary Sanctions  
Article  89 
General observations. —The disciplinary punishment applicable to prisoners of war are                          
the following: — 
I. Forms of Punishment. —(1) A fine which shall not exceed 50 per  cent. of the advances of pay and 
working pay which the prisoner of war would otherwise receive under the provisions of Article s 60 and 
62 during a period of not more than thirty days.  
 (2) Discontinuance of privileges granted over and above the treatment provided  for by the                  
present Convention.  
(3) Fatigue duties not exceeding two hours daily.  
(4) Confinement.  
The punishment referred to under ( 3) shall not be applied to officers.  
In no case shall disciplinary punishments be inhuman, brutal or dange rous to the health of prisoners 
of war.  
Article  90 
II. Duration of punishments. —The duration of any single punishment shall in no case exceed thirty 
days. Any period of confinement awaiting the hearing of a disciplinary offence or the award of 
disciplinary  punishment shall be deducted from an award pronounced against a prisoner of war.  58 
 The maximum of thirty days provided above may not be exceeded, even if the prisoner of war is 
answerable for several acts at the some  time when he is awarded punishment, whet her such acts are 
related or not.  
The period between the pronouncing of an award of disciplinary punishment and its execution shall 
not exceed one month.  
When a prisoner of war is awarded a further disciplinary punishment, a period of at least three days 
shall elapse between the execution of any two or the punishments, if the duration of one of these is ten 
days or more.  
Article  91 
Escapes. I. Successful escape. —The escape of a prisoner of war shall be deemed to have             
succeeded when: — 
(1) he has joined the armed forces of the power on which he depends, or those of an allied power;  
(2) he has left the territory under the control of the Detaining Power, or of an ally of the said power;  
(3) he has joined a ship flying the flag of a power on which he depends, or of an allied Power, in the 
territorial waters of the Detaining Power, the said ship not being under the control of the last             
named Power.  
Prisoners of war who have made good their escape in the sense of this Article  and who are recap tured, 
shall not be liable to any punishment in respect of their previous escape.  
Article  92 
II. Unsuccessful e scape. —A prisoner of war who attempts to escape and is recaptured before having 
made good his escape in the sense of Article  91 shall be liable o nly to a disciplinary punishment, in 
respect of this act, even if it is a repeated offence.  
A prisoner of war who is recaptured shall be handed over without delay to the competent                 
military authority.  
Article  88, fourth paragraph, notwithsta nding, prisoners of war punished as a result of an unsuccessful 
escape may be subjected to special surveillance. Such surveillance must not affect the state of their health, 
must be undergone in a prisoner of war camp, and must not entail the suppression o f any of the safeguards 
granted them by the present Convention.  
Article  93 
III. Connected offences. —Escape or attempt to escape, even if it is a repeated offence, shall not be 
deemed an aggravating circumstance if the prisoner of war is subjected to trial by judicial proceedings in 
respect of an offence committed during his escape or attempt to escape.  
In conformity with the principle stated in Article  83, offences committed by prisoners of war with the 
sole intention of facilitating their escape and which do not entail any violence against life or limb, such as 
offences against public property, theft without intention of self -enrichment, the drawing up or use of false 
papers, or the wearing of civilian clothing, shall occasion disciplinary punishment only.  
Prisoners of war who aid or abet an escape or an attempt to escape shall be liable on this count to 
disciplinary punishment only.  
Article  94 
IV. Notification of recapture. —If an escaped prisoner of war is recaptured, the Power on which he 
depends shall be notified thereof in the manner defined in Article  122, provided notification of his escape 
has been made.  
Article  95 
Procedure. I. Confinement awaiting hearing. —A prisoner of war accused of an offence against 
discipline shall not be kept in confinement pending the hearing unless a member of the armed forces of 59 
 the Detaining Power would be so kept if he were accused of a similar offence, or if it is essential in th e 
interests of camp order and discipline.  
Any period spent by a prisoner of war in confinement awaiting the disposal of an offence against 
discipline shall be reduced to an absolute minimum and shall not exceed fourteen days.  
The provisions of Article s 97 and 98 of this Chapter shall apply to prisoners of war who are in 
confinement awaiting the disposal of offences against discipline.  
Article  96 
II. Competent authorities and right of defence. —Acts which constitute offences against discipline 
shall be invest igated immediately.  
Without prejudice to the competence of courts and superior military authorities, disciplinary 
punishment may be ordered only by an officer having disciplinary powers in his capacity as camp 
commander, or by a responsible officer who rep laces him or to whom he has delegated his                   
disciplinary  powers.  
In no case may such powers be delegated to a prisoner of war or be exercised by a prisoner of war.  
Before any disciplinary award is pronounced, the accused shall be given pre cise information 
regarding the offences of which he is accused, and given an opportunity of explaining his conduct and of 
defending himself. He shall be permitted, in particular, to call witnesses and to have recourse, if 
necessary, to the services of a qu alified interpreter. The decision shall be announced to the accused 
prisoner of war and to the prisoners ’ representative.  
A record of disciplinary punishments shall be maintained by the camp commander and shall be open 
to inspection by representatives of the Protecting Power.  
Article  97 
Execution of punishment. I. Premises. —Prisoners of war shall not in any case be transferred to 
penitentiary establishments (prisons, penitentiaries, convict prisons, etc.)  to undergo disciplinary 
punishment therein.  
All pre mises in which disciplinary punishments are undergone shall conform to the sanitary 
requirements set forth in Article  25. A prisoner of war undergoing punishment shall be enabled to keep 
himself in a state of cleanliness, in conformity with Article  29. 
Officers and persons of equivalent status shall not be lodged in the same quarters as                               
non-commissioned officers or men.  
Women prisoners of war undergoing disciplinary punishment shall be confined in separate quarters 
from male pr isoners of war and shall be under the immediate supervision of women.  
Article  98 
II. Essential safeguards. —A prisoner of war undergoing confinement as a disciplinary punishment  
shall continue to enjoy the benefits of the provisions of this Convention excep t in so far as these are 
necessarily rendered inapplicable by the mere fact that he is confined. In no case may he be deprived of 
the benefits of the provisions of Article s 78 and 126.  
A prisoner of war awarded disciplinary punishment may not be deprived o f the prerogatives attached 
to his rank.  
Prisoners of war awarded disciplinary punishment shall be allowed to exercise and to stay in the open 
air at least two hours daily.  
They shall be allowed, on their request, to be present at the daily medical inspections. They shall 
receive the attention which their state of health requires and, if necessary, shall be removed to the camp 
infirmary or to a hospital.  
They shall have permission to read and write, likewise to send and receive letters. Parcels and 
remittances of money however, may be withheld from them until the completion of the punishment; they 60 
 shall meanwhile be entrusted to the prisoners ’ representative, who will hand over to the infirmary the 
perishable goods contained in such parcels.  
III. Judi cial proceedings  
Article  99 
Essential rules. I. General principles. —No prisoner of war m ay be tried or sentenced for an act 
which is not forbidden by the law of the Detaining Power or by International Law, in force at the time the 
said act was committed.  
No moral or physical coercion may be exerted on a prisoner of war in order to induce him to admit 
himself guilty of the act of which he is accused.  
No prisoner of war may be convicted without having had an opportunity to present his defence and 
the assista nce of a qualified advocate or counsel.  
Article  100 
II. Death  penalty. —Prisoners of war and the Protecting Powers shall be informed, as soon as 
possible, of the offences which are punishable by the death sentence under the laws of the                    
Detaining Power.  
Other offences shall not thereafter be made punishable by the death penalty without the concurrence 
of the Power on which the prisoners of war depend.  
The death sentence cannot be pronounced on a prisoner of war unless the attention of the c ourt has, in 
accordance with Article  87, second paragraph, been particularly called to the fact that since the accused is 
not a national of the Detaining Power, he is not bound to it by and duty of allegiance, and that he is in its 
power as the result of c ircumstances independent of his own will.  
Article  101 
III. Delay  in execution of the death penalty. —If the death penalty is pronounced on a prisoner of 
war, the sentence shall not be executed before the expiration of a period of at least six months from th e 
date when the Protecting Power receives, at an indicated address, the detailed communication provided 
for in Article  107. 
Article  102 
Procedure. I. Conditions for validity of sentence. —A prisoner of war can be validly sentenced only 
if the sentence has been pronounced by the same courts according to the same procedure as in the case of 
members of the armed forces of the Detaining Power, and if furthermore, the provisions of the present 
Chapter have been observed.  
Article  103 
II. Confinement awaiting tria l (Deduction from sentence, treatment. —Judicial investigations 
relating to a prisoner of war shall be conducted as rapidly as circumstances permit and so that his trial 
shall take place as soon as possible. A prisoner of war shall not be confined while awa iting trial unless a 
member of the armed forces of the Detaining Power would be so confined if he were accused of a similar 
offence, or if it is essential to do so in the interests of national security. In no circumstances shall this 
confinement exceed thr ee months.  
Any period spend by a prisoner of war in confinement awaiting trial shall be deducted from any 
sentence of imprisonment passed upon him and taken into account in fixing any penalty.  
The provisions of Article s 97 and 98 of this Chapter shall apply to a prisoner of war whilst in 
confinement awaiting trial.  
Article  104 
III. Notification of proceedings. —In any case in which the Detaining Power has decided to institute 
judicial proceedings against a prisoner of war, it shall notify the Protecting Power as soon as possible and 
at least three weeks before the opening of the trial. This period of three weeks shall run as from the day on 61 
 which such notification reaches the Protecting Power at the address previously indicated by the latter to 
the Detain ing Power.  
The said notification shall contain the following information: — 
(1) Surname and first names of the prisoner of war, his rank, his army, regimental, personal or serial 
number, his date or birth, and his profession or trade, if any;  
(2) Place of i nternment or confinement;  
(3) Specification of the charge or charges on which the prisoner of war is to be arraigned, giving the 
legal provisions applicable;  
(4) Designation of the court which will try the case, likewise the date and place fixed for the op ening 
of the trial.  
The same communication shall be made by the Detaining Power to the prisoners ’ representative.  
If no evidence is submitted, at the opening of a trial that the notification referred to above was 
received by the Protecting Power, by the pr isoner of war and by the prisoners ’ representative concerned, 
at least three weeks before the opening of the trial, then the latter cannot take place and must be 
adjourned.  
Article  105 
IV. Rights and means of defence. —The prisoner of war shall be entitled to assistance by one of his 
prisoner comrades, to defence by a qualified advocate or counsel of his own choice, to the calling of 
witnesses and, if he deems necessary, to the services of a competent interpreter. He shall be advised of 
these rights by the D etaining Power in due time before the trial.  
Failing a choice by the prisoner of war, the Protecting Power shall find him an advocate or counsel, 
and shall have at least one week at its disposal for the purpose. The Detaining Power shall deliver to the 
said Power, on request, a list of persons qualified to present the defence. Failing a choice of an advocate 
or counsel by the prisoner of war or the Protecting Power, the Detaining Power shall appoint a competent 
advocate or counsel to conduct the defence.  
The advocate or counsel conducting the defence on behalf of the prisoner of war shall have at hi s 
disposal a period of two week s at least before the opening of the trial, as well as the necessary facilities to 
prepare the defence of the accused. He may, in particular, freely visit the accused and interview him in 
private. He may also confer with any witnesses for the defence, including prisoners of war. He shall have 
the benefit of these facilities until the term of appeal or petition has expired.  
Particular s of the charge or charges on which the prisoner of war is to be arraigned, as well as the 
documents which are generally communicated to the accused by virtue of the laws in force in the armed 
forces of the Detaining Power, shall be communicated to the acc used prisoner of war in a language which 
he understands, and in good time before the opening of the trial. The same communication in the same 
circumstances shall be made to the advocate or counsel conducting the defence on behalf of the prisoner 
of war.  
The representatives of the Protecting Power shall be entitled to attend the trial of the case, unless, 
exceptionally, this is held in camera  in the interest of State security. In such a case the Detaining Power 
shall advise the Protecting Power accordingly.  
Article  106 
V. Appeals. —Every prisoner of war shall have, in the same manner as the members of the armed 
forces of the Detaining Power, the right of appeal or petition from any sentence pronounced upon him, 
with a view to the quashing or revising of the se ntence or the re -opening of the trial. He shall be fully 
informed of his right to appeal or petition and of the time limit within which he may do so.  
Article  107 
VI. Notification of findings and sentence. —Any judgment and sentence pronounced upon a 
prisone r of war shall be immediately reported to the Protecting Power in the form of a summary 
communication, which shall also indicate whether he has the right of appeal with a view to the quashing 62 
 of the sentence or the re -opening of the trial. This communicati on shall likewise be sent to the prisoner ’s 
representative concerned. It shall also be sent to the accused prisoner of war in a language he understands, 
if the sentence was not pronounced in his presence. The Detaining Power shall also immediately 
communic ate to the Protecting Power the decision of the prisoner of war to use or to waive his                   
right of appeal.  
Furthermore, if a prisoner of war is finally convicted or if a sentence pronounced on a prisoner of war 
in the first instance is a death sentence, the Detaining Power shall as soon as possible address to the 
Protecting Power a detailed communication containing: — 
(1) the precise wording of the finding and sentence;  
(2) a summarized report of any preliminary investigation and of the trial, emphasizing in particular 
the elements of the prosecution and the defence;  
(3) notification, where applicable, of the establishment where the sentence will be served.  
The communications provided for in the foregoing sub -paragraphs shall be sent to t he Protecting 
Power at the address previously made known to the Detaining Power.  
Article  108 
Execution of penalties, penal regulations. —Sentences pronounced on prisoners of war after a 
conviction has become duly enforceable, shall be served in the same est ablishments and under the same 
conditions as in the case of members of the armed forces of the Detaining Power. These conditions shall 
in all cases conform to the requirements of health and humanity.  
A woman prisoner of war on whom such a sentence has been  pronounced shall be confined in 
separate quarters and shall be under the supervision of women.  
In any case, prisoners of war sentenced to a penalty depriving them of their liberty shall retain the 
benefit of the provisions of Article s 78 and 126 of the pr esent Convention. Furthermore, they shall be 
entitled to receive and dispatch correspondence, to receive at least one relief parcel monthly, to take 
regular exercise in the open air, to have the medical care required by their state of health, and the spiri tual 
assistance they may desire. Penalties to which they may be subjected shall be in accordance with the 
provisions of Article  87, third paragraph.  
PART IV  
TERMINATION  OF CAPTIVITY  
SECTION I 
DIRECT REPATRIATION AND  ACCOMMODATION IN  NEUTRAL COUNTRIES  
Artic le 109 
General observations. —Subject to the provisions of the third paragraph of this Article , Parties to the 
conflict are bound to send back to their own country, regardless of number or rank, seriously wounded 
and seriously sick prisoners of war, after h aving cared for them until they are fit to travel, in accordance 
with the first paragraph of the following Article . 
Throughout the duration of hostilities, Parties to the conflict shall endeavor, with the co -operation of 
the neutral Powers concerned, to make arrangements for the accommodation in neutral countries of the 
sick and wounded prisoners of war referred to in the second paragraph of the following Article . They 
may, in addition, conclude agreements wit h a view to the direct repatriation or internment in a neutral 
country of able -bodied prisoners of war who have undergone a long period of captivity.  
No sick or injured prisoner of war who is eligible for repatriation under the first paragraph of this 
Article, may be repatriated against his will during hostilities.  63 
 Article  110 
Cases of repatriation and accommodation. —The following shall be repatriated direct: — 
(1) Incurably wounded and sick whose mental or physi cal fitness seems to have been                
gravely diminished.  
(2) Wounded and sick who, according to medical opinion, are not likely to recover within one year, 
whose condition requires treatment and whose mental or physical fitness seems to have been gravely 
diminished.  
(3) Wounded and sick who have recovered, but whose mental or physical fitness seems to have 
gravely and permanently diminished.  
The following may be accommodated in a neutral country: — 
(1) Wounded and sick whose recovery may be expected within one year of the date of the wound or 
the beginning of the illness, if treatment in a neutral country might increase the prospects of a more 
certain and speedy recovery.  
(2) Prisoners of war whose mental or physical health, according to medical opinion, is seriously 
threatened by continued cap tivity, but whose accommodation in a neutral country might remove                 
such a threat.  
The conditions which prisoners of war accommodated in a neutral country must fulfill in order to 
permit their repatriation shall be fixed, as shall likewise th eir status, by agreement between the Powers 
concerned. In general, prisoners of war who have been accommodated in a neutral country, and who 
belong to the following categories, should be repatriated: — 
(1) Those whose state of health has deteriorated so as to fulfill the conditions laid down                        
for direct repatriation.  
(2) Those whose mental or physical powers remain, even after treatment, considerably impaired.  
If no special agreements are concluded between the Parties to the conflict co ncerned, to determine the 
cases of disablement or sickness entailing direct repatriation or accommodation in a neutral country, such 
cases shall be settled in accordance with the principles laid down in the Model Agreement concerning 
direct repatriation an d accommodation in neutral countries of wounded and sick prisoners of war and in 
the Regulations concerning Mixed Medical Commissions annexed to the Present Convention.  
Article  111 
International in a neutral country. —The Detaining Power, the Power on which  the prisoners of 
war depend, and a neutral Power agreed upon by these two Powers, shall endeavor to conclude 
agreements which will enable prisoners of war to be interned in the territory of the said neutral Power 
until the close of hostilities.  
Article  112 
Mixed Medical Commissions. —Upon the outbreak of hostilities, Mixed Medical Commissions shall 
be appointed to examine sick and wounded prisoners of war, and to make all appropriate decisions 
regarding them. The appointment, duties and functioning of these  Commissions shall be in conformity 
with the provisions of the Regulations annexed to the present Convention.  
However, prisoners of war who, in the opinion of the medical authorities of the Detaining Power, are 
manifestly seriously injured or seriously sic k, may be repatriated without having to be examined by a 
Mixed Medial Commission.  
Article  113 
Prisoners entitled to examination by Mixed Medical Commissions. —Besides those who are 
designated by the medical authorities of the Detaining Power, wounded or sic k prisoners of war belonging 
to the categories listed below shall be entitled to present themselves for examination by the Mixed 
Medical Commissions provided for in the foregoing Article :— 
 (1) Wounded and sick proposed by a physician or surgeon who is of the same nationality, or a 
national of a Party to the conflict allied with the Power on which the said prisoners depend, and who 
exercises his functions in the camp.  64 
 (2) Wounded and sick proposed by their prisoners ’ representative.  
(3) Wounded and sick pro posed by the Power on which they depend, or by an organization duly 
recognized by the said Power and giving assistance to the prisoners.  
Prisoners of war who do not belong to one of the three foregoing categories may nevertheless present 
themselves for exa mination by Mixed Medical Commissions, but shall be examined only after those 
belonging to the said categories.  
The physician or surgeon of the same nationality as the prisoners who present themselves for 
examination by the Mixed Medical Commission, likewi se the prisoners ’ representative of the said 
prisoners, shall have permission to be present at the examination.  
Article  114 
Prisoners meeting with accidents. —Prisoners of war who meet with accidents shall, unless the 
injury is self -inflicted, have the benefit of the provisions of this Convention as regards repatriation or 
accommodation in a neutral country.  
Article  115 
Prisoners serving a sentence. —No prisoner of war on whom a disciplinary punishment has been 
imposed and who is eligible for repatriation  or for accommodation in a neutral country, may be kept back 
on the plea that he has not undergone his punishment.  
Prisoners of war detained in connection with a judicial prosecution or conviction and who are 
designated for repatriation or accommodation in  a neutral country, may benefit by such measures before 
the end of the proceedings or the completion of the punishment, if the Detaining Power consents.  
Parties to the conflict shall communicate to each other the names of those who will be detained until 
the end of the proceedings or the completion of the punishment.  
Article  116 
Cost of repatriation. —The costs of repatriating prisoners of war or of transporting them to a neutral 
country shall be borne, from the frontiers of the Detaining Power, by the Power  on which the said 
prisoners depend.  
Article  117 
Activity after repatriation. —No repatriated person may be employed on active military service.  
SECTION II  
RELEASE AND REPATRIATION OF PRISONERS  OF WAR AT THE CLOSE  OF HOSTILITIES  
Article  118 
Release and repa triation. —Prisoners of war shall be released and repatriated without delay after the 
cessation of active hostilities.  
In the absence of stipulations to the above effect in any agreement concluded between the Parties to 
the conflict with a view to the cessa tion of hostilities, or failing any such agreement, each of the Detaining 
Powers shall itself establish and execute without delay a plan of repatriation in conformity with the 
principle laid down in the foregoing paragraph.  
In either case, the measures ado pted shall be brought to the knowledge of the prisoners of war.  
The costs of repatriation of prisoners of war shall in all cases be equitably apportioned between the 
Detaining Power and the Power on which the prisoners depend. This apportionment shall be c arried out 
on the following basis:  
(a) If the two Powers are contiguous, the Power on which the prisoners of war depend shall bear 
the cost of repatriation from the frontiers of the Detaining Power.  65 
 (b) If the two Powers are not contiguous, the Detaining Power shall bear the costs of transport of 
prisoners of war over its own territory as far as its frontier or its port of embarkation nearest to the 
territory of the Power on which the prisoners of war depend. The Parties concerned shall agree 
between thems elves as to the equitable apportionment of the remaining costs of the repatriation. The 
conclusion of this agreement shall in no circumstances justify any delay in the repatriation of the 
prisoners of war.  
Article  119 
Details of procedure. —Repatriation sha ll be effected in conditions similar to those laid down in 
Article s 46 to 48 inclusive of the present Convention for the transfer of prisoners of war, having regard to 
the provisions of Article  118 and to those of the following paragraphs.  
On repatriation,  any article s of value impounded from prisoners of war under Article  18, and any 
foreign currency which has not been converted into the currency of the Detaining Power, shall be restored 
to them. Article s of value and foreign currency which, for any reason whatever, re not restored to 
prisoners of war on repatriation, shall be dispatched to the Information Bureau set up under Article  122. 
Prisoners of war shall be allowed to take with them their personal effects, and any correspondence 
and parcels which have arrived for them. The weight of such baggage may be limited, if the conditions of 
repatriation so require, to what each prisoner can reasonably carry. Each prisoner shall in all cases be 
authorized to carry at least twenty -five kilograms.  
The other personal effects of the repatriated prisoner shall be left in the charge of the Detaining Power 
which shall have them forwarded to him as soon as it has concluded an agreement to this effect, 
regulating the c onditions of transport and the payment of the costs involved, with the Power on which the 
prisoner depends.  
Prisoners of war against whom criminal proceedings for an indictable offence are pending may be 
detained until the end of such proceedings, and, if necessary, until the completion of the punishment. The 
same shall apply to prisoners of war already convicted for an indictable offence  
Parties to the conflict shall communicate to each other the names of any prisoners of war who are 
detained until the end  of the proceedings or until punishment has been completed.  
By agreement between the Parties to the conflict, commissions shall be established for the purpose of 
searching for dispersed prisoners of war and of assuring their repatriation with the least pos sible delay.  
SECTION III  
DEATH OF PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  120 
Wills, death certificates, burial, cremation. —Wills of prisoners of war shall be drawn up so as to 
satisfy the conditions of validity required by the legislation of their country of origin, whi ch will take 
steps to inform the Detaining Power of its requirements in this respect. At the request of the prisoner of 
war and, in all cases, after death, the will shall be transmitted without delay to the Protecting Power; a 
certified copy shall be sent to the Central Agency.  
Death certificates, in the form annexed to the present convention, or lists certified by a responsible 
officer, of all persons who die as prisoners of war shall be forwarded as rapidly as possible to the Prisoner 
of War Information B ureau established in accordance with Article  122.Thedeath certificates or certified 
lists shall show particulars of identity as set  out in the third paragraph of Article  17, and also the date and 
place of death, the cause of death, the date and also place of burial and all particulars necessary to identify 
the graves.  
The burial or cremation of a prisoner of war shall be preceded by a medical examination of the body 
with a view to confirming death and establishing a report to be made and, where necessary, e stablishing 
identity.  
The detaining authorities shall ensure that prisoners of war who have died in captivity are honorably 
buried, if possible according to the rites of the religion to which they belonged, and that their graves are 66 
 respected, suitably mai ntained and marked so as to be found at any time. Wherever possible, deceased 
prisoners of war who depended on the same Power shall be interred in the same place.  
Deceased prisoners of war shall be buried in individual graves unless unavoidable circumstanc es 
require the use of collective graves. Bodies may be cremated only for imperative reasons of hygiene, on 
account of the religion of the deceased or in accordance with his express wish to this effect. Incase of 
cremation, the fact shall be stated and the reasons given in the death certificate of the deceased.  
In order that graves may always be found, all particulars of burials and grave shall be recorded with a 
Graves Registration Service established by the Detaining Power. Lists of graves and particulars of the 
prisoners of war interred in cemeteries and elsewhere shall be transmitted to the Power on which such 
prisoners of war depended. Responsibility for the care of these graves and for records of any subsequent 
moves of the bodies shall rest on the Powe r controlling the territory, if a Party to the present Convention. 
These provisions shall also apply to the ashes which shall be kept by the Graves Registration Service until 
proper disposal thereof in accordance with the wishes of the home country.  
Articl e 121 
Prisoners killed or injured in special circumstances. —Every death or serious injury of a prisoner 
of war caused or suspected to have been caused by a sentry, another prisoner of war, or any other person, 
as well as any death the cause of which is unk nown, shall be immediately followed by an official enquiry 
by the Detaining Power.  
A communication on this subject shall be sent immediately to the Protecting Power, Statements shall 
be taken from witnesses, especially from those who are prisoners of war, and a report including such 
statements shall be forwarded to the Protecting Power.  
If the enquiry indicates the guilt of one or more persons, the Detaining Power shall take all measures 
for the prosecution of the person or persons responsible.  
PART V  
INFOR MATION BUREAUX AND  RELIEF SOCIETIES FOR PRISONERS OF WAR  
Article  122 
National Bureaux. —Upon the outbreak of a conflict and in all cases of occupation, each of the 
Parties to the conflict shall institute an official Information Bureau for prisoners of war who are in its 
power. Neutral or non -belligerent Powers who may have received within their territory persons belonging 
to one of the categories referred to in Article  4, shall take the same action with respect to such persons. 
The Power concerned shall ens ure that the Prisoners of War Information Bureau is provided with the 
necessary accommodation, equipment and staff to ensure its efficient working. It shall be at liberty to 
employ prisoners of war in such a Bureau under the conditions laid down in the Sec tion of the present 
Convention dealing with work by prisoners of war.  
Within the shortest possible period, each of the Parties to the conflict shall give its Bureau the 
information referred to in the fourth, fifth and sixth paragraphs of this Article  regar ding any enemy person 
belonging to one of the categories referred to in Article  4, who has fallen into its power. Neutral or               
non-belligerent Powers shall take the same action with regard to person belonging to such categories 
whom they have r eceived within their territory.  
The Bureau shall immediately forward such information by the most rapid means to the Powers 
concerned through the intermediary of the Protecting Powers and likewise of the Central Agency 
provided for in Article  123. 
This inf ormation shall make it possible quickly to advise the next of kin concerned. Subject to the 
provisions of Article  17, the information shall include, in so far as available to the Information Bureau, in 
respect of each prisoner of war, his surname, first na mes, rank, army, regimental, personal or serial 
number, place and full date of birth, indication of the Power on which he depends, first name of the father 
and maiden name of the mother, name and address of the person to be informed and the address to whic h 
correspondence for the prisoner may be sent.  67 
 The Information Bureau shall receive from the various departments concerned information regarding 
transfers, releases, repatriations, escapes, admissions to hospital, and deaths, and shall transmit such 
inform ation in the manner described in the third paragraph above.  
Likewise, information regarding the state of health of prisoner s of war who are seriously ill or 
seriously wounded shall be supplied regularly, every week if possible.  
The Information Bureau shall  also be responsible for replying to all enquiries sent to it concerning 
prisoners of war, including those who have died in captivity; it will make any enquiries necessary to 
obtain the information which is asked for if this is not in its possession.  
All w ritten communications made by the Bureau shall be authenticated by a signature or a seal.  
The information Bureau shall furthermore be charged with collecting all personal valuables, including 
sums in currencies other than that of the Detaining Power and do cuments of importance to the next of kin, 
left by prisoners of war who have been repatriated or released, or who have escaped or died, and shall 
forward the said valuables to the Powers concerned. Such article s shall be sent by the Bureau in sealed 
packets  which shall be accompanied by statements giving clear and full particulars of the identity of the 
person to whom the article s belonged, and by a complete list of the contents of the parcel. Other personal 
effects of such prisoners of war shall be transmit ted under arrangements agreed upon between the Parties 
to the conflict concerned.  
Article  123 
Central Agency. —A Central Prisoners of War Information Agency shall be created in a neutral 
country. The International Committee of the Red Cross shall, if it dee ms necessary, propose to the powers 
concerned the organization of such an Agency.  
The function of the Agency shall be to collect all the information it may obtain through official or 
private channels respecting prisoners of war, and to transmit it as rapidly as possible to the country of 
origin of the prisoners of war or to the Power on which they depend. It shall receive from the Parties to 
the conflict all facilities for effecting such transmissions.  
The High Contracting Parties, and in particular th ose whose nationals benefit by the services of the 
Central Agency, are requested to give the said Agency the financial aid it may require.  
The foregoing provisions shall in no way be interpreted as restricting the humanitarian activities of 
the Internation al Committee of the Red Cross, or of the relief Societies provided for in Article  125. 
Article  124 
Exemption from charges .—The National Information Bureaux and the Central Information Agency 
shall enjoy free postage for mail, likewise all the exemptions pr ovided for in Article  74, and further, so far 
as possible, exemption from telegraphic charges or, at least, greatly reduced rates.  
Article  125 
Relief societies and other organizations. —Subject to the measures which the Detaining Powers may 
consider essential to ensure their security or to meet any other reasonable need, the representatives of 
religious organizations, relief societies, or any other organization assisting prisoners of war, shall receive 
from the said Powers, for themselves and their du ly accredited agents, all necessary facilities for visiting 
the prisoners for distributing relief supplies and material, from any source, intended for religious, 
educational or recreative purposes, and for assisting them in organi sing their leisure time wi thin the 
camps. Such societies or organizations may be constituted in the territory of the Detaining Power or in 
any other country, or they may have an international character.  
The Detaining Power may limit the number of societies and organizations whose d elegates are 
allowed to carry out their activities in its territory and under its supervision, on condition, however that 
such limitation shall not hinder the effective operation of adequate relief to all prisoners of war.  
The special position of the Inter national Committee of the Red Cross in this field shall be recognized 
and respected at all times.  68 
 As soon as relief supplies or material intended for the above mentioned purposes are handed over to 
prisoners of war, or very shortly afterwards, receipts for  each consignment, signed by the prisoners ’ 
representative, shall be forwarded to the relief society or organization making the shipment. At the same 
time, receipts for these consignments shall be supplied by the administrative authorities responsible for 
guarding the prisoners.  
PART VI  
EXECUTION OF  THE CONVENTION  
SECTION I  
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article  126 
Supervision. —Representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall have permission to go to 
all places where prisoners of war may be, particularly to  places of i nternment, imprisonment and lab our, 
and shall have access to all premises occupied by prisoners of war; they shall also be allowed to go to the 
places of departure, passage and arrival of prisoners who are being transferred. They shall be able to 
interview the prisoners, and in particular the prisoners ’ representatives, without witnesses, either 
personally or through an interpreter.  
Representatives and delegates of the Protecting Powers shall have full liberty to select the places they 
wish to v isit. The duration and frequency of these visits shall not be restricted. Visits may not be 
prohibited except for reasons of imperative military necessity, and then only as an exceptional and 
temporary measure.  
The Detaining Power and the Power on which th e said prisoners of war depend may agree, if 
necessary, that compatriots of these prisoners of war be permitted to participate in the visits.  
The delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross shall enjoy the same prerogatives. The 
appointment o f such delegates shall be submitted to the approval of the Power detaining the prisoners of 
war to be visited.  
Article  127 
Dissemination of the Convention. —The High Contracting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in 
time of war, to disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in their respective 
countries, and, in particular, to include the study thereof in their programmes of military and, if possible, 
civil instruction, so that the principles thereof may become known to all thei r armed forces and to the 
entire population.  
Any military or other authorities, who in time of war assume responsibilities in respect of prisoners of 
war, must possess the text of the Convention and be specially instructed as to its provisions.  
Article  128 
Translations. Rules of application. —The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one 
another through the Swiss Federal Council and, during hostilities, through the Protecting Powers, the 
official translations of the present Convention, as well as the  laws and regulations which they may adopt 
to ensure the application thereof.  
Article  129 
Penal sanctions I. General observations. —The High Contracting Parties undertake to enact any 
legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for persons co mmitting, or ordering to be 
committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in the following Article . 
Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have 
committed, or to have ordered to be  committed, such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, 
regardless of their nationality, before its own courts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the 
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to another Hig h Contracting Party 
concerned, provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie  case.  69 
 Each High Contracting Party shall take measures necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to 
the provisions of the present Convention other than t he grave beaches defined in the following Article . 
In all circumstances, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defence, 
which shall not be less favorable than those provided by Article  105 and those following of the                   
present Convention.  
Article  130 
II. Grave breaches. —Grave breaches to which the preceding Article  relates shall be those involving 
any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protected by the Convention: willful 
killing, tor ture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, wilful ly causing great suffering or 
serious injury to body or health, compelling a prisoner of war to serve in the forces of the hostile Power, 
or wilfully depriving a prisoner of war of the righ ts of fair and regular trial prescribed in                     this 
Convention.  
Article  131 
III. Responsibilities of the Contracting Parties. —No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to 
absolve itself or any other High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself or by another High 
Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article . 
Article  132 
Enquiry procedure. —At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry shall be instituted, in a 
manner to be decided between  the interested Parties, concerning any alleged violation of the Convention.  
If agreement has not been reached concerning the procedure for the enquiry, the Parties should agree 
on the choice of an umpire who will decide upon the procedure to be followed.  
Once the violation has been established, the Parties to the conflict shall put an end to it and shall 
repress it with the least possible delay.  
SECTION II  
FINAL PROVISIONS  
Article  133 
 Languages. —The present Convention is established in English and in French. Both texts are     
equally authentic.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the Convention to be made in the 
Russian and Spanish languages.  
Article  134 
Relation to  the 1929 Convention. —The present Convention replaces the Convention of                    
July 27, 1929, in relations between the High Contracting Parties.  
Article  135 
Relation to the Hague Convention. —In the relations between the Powers which are bound b y the 
Hague Convention respecting the Law and Customs of War on Land, whether that of July 29, 1899, that 
of October 18, 1907, and which are parties to the present Convention, this last Convention shall be 
complementary to Chapter II of the Regulations ann exed to the above mentioned Conventions                     
of the Hague.  
Article  136 
Signature. —The present Convention, which bears the date of this day is open to signature until 
February 12, 1950, in the name of the Power represented at the Conference w hich opened at Geneva on 
April 21, 1949;  furthermore, by Powers not represented at that Conference, but which are parties to the 
Convention of July 27, 1929.  70 
 Article  137 
Ratification. —The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratification shall 
be deposited at Berne.  
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification and certified copies of this 
record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal Council to all the Powers in whose name the Convention 
has been signed, or whose accession has been notified.  
Article  138 
Coming into force. —The present Convention shall come into force six months after not less than 
two instruments of ratification have been deposited.  
Thereafter, it shall come into force for each  High Contracting Party six months after the deposit of the 
instrument of ratification.  
Article  139 
Accession. —From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power in whose name the 
present Convention has not been signed, to accede to this  Convention.  
Article  140 
Notification of accession. —Accessions shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, and 
shall take effect six months after the date on which they are received.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate the accessions  to all the Powers in whose name the 
Convention has been signed or whose accession has been notified.  
Article  141 
Immediate effect. —The situations provided for in Article s 2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to 
ratifications deposited and accounts notified  by the Parties to the conflict before or after the beginning of 
hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate by the quickest method any 
ratifications or accessions received from Parties to the conflict.  
Article  142 
Denunciation. —Each of the High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty to denounce the                   
present Convention.  
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, which shall transmit it to 
the Governments of all the High Contractin g Parties.  
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the notification thereof has been made to the Swiss 
Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which notification has been made at a time when the 
denouncing Power is involved in a conflict shal l not take effect until peace has been concluded, and until 
after operations connected with release and repatriation of the persons protected by the present 
Convention has been terminated.  
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncin g Power. It shall in no way impair 
the obligations which the parties to the conflict shall remain bound to fulfill by virtue of the principles of 
the law of nations, as the result from the usages established among civili sed peoples, from the laws of 
humani ty and the dictates of the public conscience.  
Article  143 
Registration with the United Nations. —The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present 
Convention with the Secretariat of the United Nations. The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform the 
Secretariat of the United Nations of all ratifications, accessions and denunciations received by it with 
respect to the present Convention.  
In witness whereof the undersigned, having deposited their respective full powers, have signed the 
present Convention.  
Done at Geneva this twelfth day of August 1949, in the English and French languages. The original 
shall be deposited in the Archives of the Swiss Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit 
certified copies thereof to each of the signatory and a cceding States.  71 
 THE FOURTH  SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
GENEVA CONVENTION RELATIVE TO THE PROTECTION  OF CIVILIAN PERSONS  
IN TIME  OF WAR OF AUGUST  12, 1949  
The undersigned Plenipotentiaries of the Government represented at the Diplomatic Conference held 
at Geneva from April 21 to August12, 1949, for the purpose establishing a Convention for the Protection 
of Civilian persons in Time  of War, have agreed as fol lows:  
PART I  
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article  1 
Respect for the Convention. —The High contracting parties undertake to respect and to ensure 
respect for the present Convention in all circumstances.  
Article  2 
Application of the Convention. —In addition to the provisions which shall be implemented in peace 
time, the present Convention shall apply to all cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which 
may arise between two or more of the High Contracting Parties, even if the state of  war is not recognized 
by one of them.  
The convention shall also apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of a High 
Contracting Party, even if the said occupation meets with no armed resistance.  
Although one of the powers in confl ict may not be a party to the present Convention, the Powers who 
are parties thereto shall remain bound by it in their mutual relations. They shall further  more be bound by 
the Convention in relation to the said Power, if the latter accepts and applies the  provisions thereof.  
Article  3 
Conflicts not of an international character. —In the case of armed conflict not of an international 
character occurring in the territory of one of the High Contracting Parties, each party to the conflict shall 
be bound to appl y, as a minimum, the following provisions:  
 (1) Persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have              
laid-down their arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other caus e, 
shall in all circumstances be treated humanely without any adverse distinction founded on race, color, 
religion or faith, sex, birth or wealth, or any other similar criteria.  
To this end, the following acts are and shall remain prohibited at any time an d in any place 
whatsoever with respect to the above -mentioned persons: — 
(a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment             
and torture;  
(b) taking of hostages;  
(c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliating and degrading treatment;  
(d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgement 
pronounced by a regularly constituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized 
as indispensa ble by civilized peoples.  
(2) The wounded and sick shall be collected and cared for.  
An impartial humanitarian body, such as the International Committee of the Red Cross, may offer its 
services to the Parties to the conflict.  
The Parties to the conflict sh ould further endeavor to bring into force, by means of special 
agreements, all or Part of the other provisions of the present Convention.  72 
 The application of the preceding provisions shall not affect the legal status of the Parties                       
to the conflict.  
Article  4 
Definition of protected persons. —Persons protected by the Convention are those who, at a given 
moment and in any manner whatsoever, find themselves, in case of a conflict or occupation, in the hands 
of a Party to the conflict or Occupying Power of which they are not nationals.  
Nationals of a State which is not bound by the Convention are not protected by it. Nationals of a 
neutral State who find themselves in the territory of a belligerent Stat e, and nationals of a co -belli-gerent  
State, shall not be regarded as protected persons while the State of which they are nationals has normal 
diplomatic representation in the State in whose hands they are.  
The provisions of Part II are, however, wider in application, as defined in Article 1 3.  
Persons protected by the Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded 
and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949, or by the Geneva Convention for the 
Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked  Members of Armed Forces at Sea of 
August 12, 1949, or by the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 
12, 1949, shall not be considered as protected persons within the meaning of the present Convention.  
Article 5 
Derogati ons.—Where, in the territory of a Party to the conflict, the latter is satisfied that an 
individual protected person is definitely suspected of or engaged in activities hostile to the security of the 
State, such individual person shall not be entitled to c laim such rights and privileges under the present 
Convention as would, if exercised in the favour of such individual person, be prejudicial to the security of 
such State.  
Where in occupied territory an individual protected person is detained as a spy or s aboteur, or as a 
person under definite suspicion of activity hostile to the security of the Occupying Power, such person 
shall, in those cases where absolute military security so requires, be regarded as having forfeited rights of 
communication under the p resent Convention.  
In each case, such persons shall nevertheless be treated with humanity and, in case of trial, shall not 
be deprived of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed by the present Convention. They shall also be 
granted the full rights  and privileges of a protected person under the present Convention at the earliest 
date consistent with the security of the State or Occupying rower, as the case may be.  
Article  6 
Beginning and end of application. —The present Convention shall apply from t he outset of any 
conflict or occupation mentioned, In Article 2.  
In the territory of Parties to the conflict, the application of the present Convention shall cease on the 
general close of military operations.  
In the case of occupied territory, the applic ation of the present Convention shall cease one year after 
the general close of military operations; however, the Occupying Power shall be bound, for the duration 
of the occupation, to the extent that such Power exercises the functions of government in suc h territory, 
by the provisions of the following Articles of the present Convention: 1 to 12, 27, 29 to 34, 47, 49, 51, 52, 
53, 59, 61 to 77, 143.  
Protected persons whose release, repatriation or re -establishment may take place after such dates shall 
meanw hile continue to benefit by the present Convention.  
Article  7 
Special agreements. —In addition to the agreements expressly p rovided for in Articles 11,  14, 15, 17, 
36, 108, 109, 132, 133 and 149, the High Contracting Parties may conclude other special agreements for 
all matters con cerning which they may deem it suitable to make separate provision. No special agreement 73 
 shall adversely affect the situation of protected persons, as defined by the present Convention, nor restrict 
the rights which it confers  upon them.  
Protected persons shall continue to have the benefit of such agreements as long as the Convention is 
applicable to them, except where express provisions to the contrary are contained in the aforesaid or in 
subsequent agreements, or where more favourable measures have been taken with regard to them by one 
or other of the Parties to the conflict.  
Article  8 
Non-renunciatio n of rights. —Protected persons may in no circumstances renounce in part or in 
entirety the rights secured to them by the present Convention, and by the special agreements referred to in 
the foregoing Article, if such there be.  
Article  9 
Protecting Powers. —The present Conventi on shall be applied with the co -operation and under the 
scrutiny of the Protecting Powers whose duty it is to safeguard the interests of the Parties  to the conflict. 
For this pur pose, the Protecting Powers may appoint, apart from their diplomatic or consular staff, 
delegates from amongst their own nationals or the nationals of other neutral Powers. The said delegates 
shall be subject  to the approval of the Power with which they are to carry out their duties. The Parties to 
the conflict shall facili tate to the greatest extent possible the task of the representatives or delegates of the 
Protecting Powers.  
The representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall not in any case exceed their mission 
under the present Convention. They shall, in p articular, take account of the imperative necessities of 
security of the State wherein they carry out their duties.  
Article 10 
Activities of the Internatio nal Committee of the Red Cross. —The provision of the present 
Convention constitute no obstacle to th e humanitarian activities which the International Committee of the 
Red Cross or any other impartial humanitarian organization may, subject to the consent of the Parties to 
the conflict concerned, undertake for the protection of civilian persons and for the ir relief.  
Article  11 
Substitutes for Protecting Power. —The High Contracting Parties may at any time agree to entrust 
to an organization which offers all guarantees of impartiality and efficacy the duties incumbent on the 
Protecting Powers by virtue of th e present Convention.  
When persons protected by the present Convention do not benefit or cease to benefit, no matter for 
what reason, by the activities of a Protecting Power or of an organization provided for in the first 
paragraph above, the Detaining Po wer shall request a neutral State, or such an organization, to undertake 
the functions performed under the present Convention by a Protecting Power designated by the Parties to 
a conflict.  
If protection cannot be arranged accordingly, the Detaining Power shall request or shall accept, 
subject to the provisions of this Article, the offer of the services of a humanitarian organization, such as 
the International Committee of the Red Cross, to assume the humanitarian functions performed by 
Protecting Powers un der the present Convention.  
Any neutral Power or any organization invited by the Power concerned or offering itself for these 
purposes, shall be required to act with a sense of responsibility towards the Party to the conflict on which 
persons protected by  the present Convention depend, and shall be required to furnish sufficient assurances 
that it is in a position to undertake the appropriate functions and to discharge them impartially.  
No derogation from the preceding provisions shall be made by special agreements between Powers 
one of which is restricted, even temporarily, in its freedom to negotiate with the other Power or its allies 
by reason of military events, more particularly where the whole, or a substantial part, of the territory of 
the said Powe r is occupied.  74 
 Whenever in the present Convention mention is made of a Protecting Power, such mention applies to 
substitute organizations in the sense of the present Article.  
The provisions of this Article shall extend and be adapted to cases of national s of a neutral State who 
are in occupied territory or who find themselves in the territory of a belligerent State in which the State of 
which they are nationals has not normal diplomatic representation.  
Article 12 
Conciliation Procedure. —In cases where they deem it advisable in the interest of protected persons, 
particularly in cases of disagreement between the Parties to the conflict as to the application or 
interpretation of the provisions of the present Convention, the Protecting Powers shall lend the ir good 
offices with a vie w to settling the disagreement.  
For this purpose, each of the Protecting Powers may, either at the invitation of one, Party or on its 
own initiative, propose to the Parties to the conflict a meeting of their representatives, and in particular of 
the authorities responsible for protected persons, possibly on neutral territory suitably chosen. The Parties 
to the conflict shall be bound to give effect to the proposals made to them for this purpose. The Protecting 
Powers may, if necess ary, propose for approval by the Parties to the conflict, a person belonging to a 
neutral Power, or delegated by the International Committee of the Red Cross, who shall be invited to take 
part in such a meeting.  
PART II  
GENERAL, PROTECTION OF POPULATIONS AGAINST CERTAIN  
CONSEQUENCES OF WAR  
Article  13 
Field of application of Part II. —The provisions of Part II cover the whole of the populations of the 
countries in conflict, withou t any adverse distinction based,  in particul ar, on race, nationality, religion or 
political opinion, and are intended to alleviate the sufferings caused by war.  
Article  14 
Hospital and safety zones  and localities. —In time of peace, the High Contracting Parties and, after 
the outbreak of hostilities, the Parties thereto, may establish in their own territory and, if the need arises, 
in occupied areas, hospital and safety zones and localities so organized as to protect  from the effect of 
war, wounded, sick and aged persons, children under fifteen, expectant mothers and mothers of children 
under seven.  
Upon the outbreak and during the course of hostilities, the Parties concerned may conclude 
agreements on mutual recogni tion of the zones and localities they have created. They may for this 
purpose implement the provisions of the Draft Agreement annexed to the present Convention, with such 
amendments as they may consider necessary.  
The Protecting Powers and the Internation al Committee of the Red Cross are invited to lend their 
good offices in order to facilitate the institution and recognition of these hospital and safety zones                   
and localities.  
Article  15 
Neutralized zones. —Any Party to the conflict may, ei ther direct or through a neutral State or some 
humanitarian organization, propose to the adverse Party to establish, in the regions where fighting is 
taking place, neutralized zones intended to shelter from the effects of war the following persons,                 
without distinction: —  
(a) wounded and sick combatants or non -combatants;  
(b) civilian persons who take no part in hostilities, and who, while they reside in the zones, 
perform no work of a military character.  75 
 When the Parties concerned have agreed upon the geographical position, administration, food supply 
and supervision of the proposed neutralized zone, a written agreement shall be concluded and signed by 
the representatives of the Parties to the conflict. Th e agreement shall fix the beginning and the duration of 
the neutralization of the zone.  
Article  16 
Wounded  and sick. I Genera protection. —The wounded and sick, as well as the infirm, and 
expectant mothers, shall be the object of particular protection and respect.  
As far as military considerations allow, each Party to the conflict shall facilitate the steps taken to 
search for the killed. and wounded, to assist the shipwrecked and other persons exposed to grave danger, 
and to protect them against pillage a nd ill -treatment.  
Article  17 
II. Evacuation. —The Parties to the conflict shall endeavour to conclude local agreements for the 
removal from besieged or encircled areas, of wounded, sick, infirm, and aged persons, children and 
maternity cases, and for the passage of ministers of all religions, medical personnel and medical 
equipment on their way to such areas.  
Article  18 
III. Protection of Hospitals. —Civilian hospitals organized to give care to the wounded and sick, the 
infirm and maternity cases, may in no circumstances be the object of attack but sha ll at all times be 
respected and protected by the Parties to the conflict.  
States which are Parties to a conflict shall provide all civilian hospitals with certificates showing that 
they are civilian hospitals and that the buildings which they occupy are not used for any purpose which 
would deprive these hospitals of protection in accordance with Article 19.  
Civilian hospitals shall be marked by means of the emblem provided for in Article 38 of the Geneva 
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of  the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field 
of August 12 , 1949, but only if so authorized by the State.  
The Parties to the conflict shall, in so far as military considerations permit, take the necessary steps to 
make the distinctive emblems indicating civilian hospitals clearly visible to the enemy land, air and naval 
forces in order to obviate the possibility of any hostile action.  
In view of the dangers to which hospitals may be ex posed by being close to military objectives, it is 
recommend ed that such hospitals be situated as far as possible from such objectives.  
Article  19 
IV. Discontinua nce of protection of hospitals. —The protection to which civilian hospitals are 
entitled shall not cease unless they are used to commit, outside their huma nitarian duties, acts harmful to 
the enemy. Protection may however, cease only after due warning has been given, naming, in all 
appropriate cases, a reasonable time limit, and after such warning has remained unheeded. The fact that 
sick or wounded members of the armed forces are nursed in these hospitals, or the p resence of small arms 
and ammu nition taken from such combatants which have not yet been handed to the proper service, shall 
not be considered to be acts harmful to the enemy.  
Article 20 
V. Hospita l staff. —Persons regularly and solely engaged in the operation and administration of 
civilian hospitals, including the personnel engaged in the search for, removal and transporting of and 
caring for wounded and sick civilians, the infirm and maternity case s shall be respected and protected .  
In occupied territory and in zones of military operations, the above personnel shall be recognisable by 
means of an identity card certifying their status, bearing the photograph of the holder and embossed with 
the stamp  of the responsible authority, and also by means of a stamped, water -resistant armlet which they 
shall wear on the left arm while carrying out their duties. This armlet shall be issued by the State and shall 76 
 bear the emblem provided for in Article 38 of th e Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the 
Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field of August 12, 1949.  
Other personnel who are engaged i n the operation and administra tion of civilian hospitals shall be 
entitled to respect and p rotection and to wear the armlet, as provided in and under the conditions 
prescribed in this Article, while they are employed on such duties. The identity card shall state the duties 
on which they are employed.  
The management of each hospital shall at all  times hold at the disposal of the competent national or  
occupying authorities an up -to-date list of such personnel.  
Article  21 
VI. Land and sea  transport. —Convoys of vehicles or hospital trains on land or specially provided 
vessels on sea, conveying wounded and sick civilians, the infirm and maternity cases, shall be respected 
and protected in the same manner as the hospitals provided for in Article 18, and shall be marked, with 
the consent of the State, by the display of the distinctive emblem provided for in Article 38 of the Geneva 
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field 
of August 12, 1949.  
Article 22 
VII. Air transport. —Aircraft exclusively employed for the removal of wounded and sick civilians, 
the infirm and maternity cases, or for the transport of medical personnel and equipment, shall not be 
attacked, but shall be respected while flying at heights, times and on routes specifically agreed upon 
between all the Parties to the conflict concerned.  
They may be marked with the distinctive emblem provided for in Article 38 of the Geneva 
Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field 
of August 12, 1949.  
Unless agreed otherwise, flights over enemy o r enemy occupied territory are prohibited.  
Such aircraft shall obey every summons to land. In the event of a landing thus imposed, the aircraft 
with its occupants may continue its flight after examination, if any.  
Article  23 
Consignment of medic al suppli es, food and clothing. —Each High Contracting Party shall allow the 
free passage of all consignments of medical and hospital stores and objects necessary for religious 
worship intended only for  civilians of another High Con tracting Party, even if the latter is its adversary. It 
shall likewise part the free passage of all consignments of essential foodstuffs, clothing and tonics 
intended for children under fifteen, expectant mothers and maternity cases.  
The obligation of a H igh Contracting Party to allow the free passage of the consignments indicated in 
the preceding paragraph is subject to the condition that this Party is satisfied that there are no serious 
reasons for fearing:  
(a) that the consignments may be diverted from  their destination,  
(b) that the control may not be effective, or  
(c) that a definite advantage may accrue to the military efforts or economy of the enemy through 
the substitution of the above -mentioned consignments for goods which would otherwise be pro vided 
or produced by the enemy or through the release of such material, services or facilities as would 
otherwise be required for the production of such goods.  
The Power which allows the passage of the consignments indicated in the first paragraph of this  
Articl e may make such permission con ditional on the distribution to the persons benefited thereby being 
made under the local supervision of the Protecting Powers.  
Such consignments shall be forwarded as rapidly as possible, and the Power which permits th eir free 
passage shall have the right to prescribe the technical arrangements under which such passage is allowed.  77 
 Article  24 
Measures  relating to child welfare. —The Parties to the conflict shall take the necessary measures to 
ensure that children under f ifteen, w ho are orphaned or are separat ed from their families as a result of the 
war, are not left to their own resources, and that their maintenance, the exercise of their religion and their 
education are facilitated in all circumstances. Their education shall, as far as possible, be entrusted to 
persons of a similar cultural tradition.  
The Parties to the conflict shall facilitate the reception of such children in a neutral country for the 
duration of the conflict with the consent of the Protecting Power,  if any, and under due safeguard for the 
observance of the principles stated in the first paragraph .  
They shall, furthermore, endeavour to arrange for all children under twelve to be identified by the 
wearing of identity discs or by some other means.  
Article 25 
Family news. —All persons in the territory of a Party to the conflict, or in a territory occupied by it, 
shall be enabled to give news of a strictly personal nature to members of their families, wherever they 
may be, and to receive news from them. This correspondence sh all be forwarded speedily and without 
undue delay.  
If, as a result of circumstances, it becomes difficult or impossible to exchange family correspondence 
by the ordinary post, the Parties to the conflict concerned shall apply to a neutral intermediary, su ch as the 
Central Agency provided for in Article 140, and shall decide in Consultation with it how to ensure the 
fulfilment  of their obligations under the best possible conditions, in particular with the co -operation of the 
National Red Cross (Red Crescent , Red Lion and Sun) Societies.  
If the Parties to the conflict deem it necessary to restrict family correspondence, such restrictions shall 
be confined to the compulsory use of standard forms containing twenty -five freely chosen words, and to 
the limitatio n of the number of these forms despatched to one each month.  
Article  26 
Dispersed families. —Each Party to the conflict shall facilitate enquiries made by members of 
families dispersed owing to the war, with the object of renewing contact with one another and, of 
meeting, if possible. It shall encourage, in particular, the work of organisations en gaged on this task 
provided they are acceptable to it and conform to its security regulations.  
PART III  
STATUS AND TREATMENT OF PROTECTED PERSONS  
SECTION I  
PROVISIONS COMMON TO THE TERRITORIES OF THE PARTIES TO THE CONFLICT  AND                                         
TO OCCUPIED TERRITORIES  
Article  27 
Treatment I . General observations. —Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances, to respect 
for their persons, their honour, their family rights, their religious convictions  and practices, and their 
manners and customs. They shall at all times be humanely treated, and shall be protected especially 
against all acts of violence or threats thereof and against insults and public curiosity.  
Women shall be especially protected aga inst any attack on their honour, in particular against rape, 
enforced prostitution, or any form of indecent assault.  
Without prejudice to the provisions relating to their state of health, age and sex, all protected persons 
shall be treated with the same c onsideration by the Party to the conflict in whose power they are, without 
any adverse distinction based, in particular, on race, religion or political opinion.  
However, the Parties to the conflict may take such measures of control and security in regard to 
protected persons as may be neces sary as a result of the war.  78 
 Article  28 
II. Danger  zones. —The presence of a protected person may not be used to render certain points or 
areas immune from military operations.  
Article  29 
III. Responsibilities. —The Party to the conflict in whose hands protected persons may be, is 
responsible for the treatment accorded to them by its agents, irrespective of any individual responsibility 
which may be incurred.  
Article  30 
Application to Protecting P owers and relief  organi sations. —Protected persons shall have every 
facility for making application to the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross, 
the National Red Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) Society of the country where they may be, as 
well as to any organisations that might assist them.  
These several organisations shall be granted all facilities for that purpose by the authorities, within the 
bounds set by military or security considerations.  
Apart from the visits of the delegates of the Protecting Powers and of the International Committee of 
the Red Cross, provided for by Article 143, the Detaining or Occupying Powers shall facilitate as much as 
possible visits to protected persons by the repr esentatives of other organisations whose object is to give 
spiritual aid or material relief to such persons.  
Article  31 
Prohibition of coercion. —No physical or moral coercion shall be exercised against protected 
persons, in particular to obtain informatio n from them or from third parties.  
Article  32 
Prohibition of corp oral punishment, torture, etc. —The High Contracting Parties specifically agree 
that each of them is prohibited from taking any measure of such a character as to cause the physical 
suffering or extermination of protected persons in their hands. This prohibition applies not only to 
murder, torture, corporal punishment, mutilation and medical or scientific experiments not necessitated by 
the medical treatment of a protected person, but also to a ny other measures of brutality whether applied 
by civilian or military agents.  
Article  33 
Individual responsibility, collective penalt ies, pillage, reprisals. —No protected person may be 
punished for an offence he or she has not personally committed. Collective penalties and likewise all 
measures of intimidation or of terrorism are prohibited.  
Pillage is prohibited.  
Reprisals against protected persons and their  property are prohibited.  
Article 34 
Hostages. —The takin g of hostages is prohibited.   
SECTION II  
ALIENS IN THE TERRITORY OF A PARTY TO THE CONFLICT  
Article  35 
Right to leave the territory. —All protected persons who may desire to leave the territory at the 
outset of, or during a conflict, shall be entitled to do so, unless their departure is contrary to the national 
interest of the State. The applications of such persons to leave shall be decided in accordance with 
regularly established procedures and th e decision shall be taken as rapidly as possible.  Those persons 
permitted to leave may provide themselves with the necessary funds for their journey and take with them 
a reasonable amount of their effects and articles of personal use.  79 
 If any such person i s refused permission to leave the territory, he shall be entitled to have such refusal 
reconsidered as soon as possible by an appropriate court or administrative board designated by the 
Detaining Power for that purpose.  
Upon request, representatives of th e Protecting Power shall, unless reasons of security prevent it, or 
the persons concerned object, be furnished with the reasons for refusal of any request for permission to 
leave the territory and be given, as expeditiously as possible, the names of all pe rsons who have been 
denied permission to leave.  
Article  36 
Method of repatriation. —Departures permitted under the foregoing Article shall be carried out in 
satisfactory conditions as regards safety, hygiene, sanitation and food. All costs in connection th erewith, 
from the point of exit in the territory of the Detaining Power, shall be borne by the country of destination, 
or, in the case of accommodation in neutral country, by the Power whose nationals are benefited. The 
practical details of such movements may, if necessary, be settled by special agreements between the 
Powers concerned.  
The foregoing shall not prejudice such special agreements as may be concluded between Parties to the 
conflict concerning the exchange and repatriation of their nationals in enemy hands.  
Article 37 
Persons in confinement. —Protected persons who are confined  pending proceedings or subject to a 
sentence involving loss of liberty, shall during their confinement be humanely treated.  
As soon as they are released, they may ask to leave the territory in conformity with the                    
foregoing Articles.  
Article  38 
Non-repatriated pe rsons. I. General observations. —With the exception of special measures 
authorised by the present Convention, in particular by Articles 27 and 41 thereof, the situation of 
protected persons shall continue to be regulated, in principle, by the provisions concerning aliens in time 
of peace. In any case, the following rights shall be granted to them: —  
(1) They shall be enabled to receive the indivi dual or col lective relief that may be sent to them.  
(2) They shall, if their stat e of health so requires, receive medical attention and hospital treatment to 
the same extent as the nationals of the State concerned.  
(3) They shall be allowed to practise their religion and to receive spiritual assistance from ministers of 
their faith.  
(4) If they reside in an area particularly exposed to the dangers of war, they shall be authorised to 
move from that area to the same extent as the nationals of the State concerned.  
(5) Children under fifteen years, pregnant women and mothers of children under seven years shall 
benefit by any preferential treatment to the same extent as the nationals of the State concerned.  
Article  39 
II. Means of existence. —Protected persons who, as a result of the war, have lost their gainful 
employment, shall be grante d the opportunity to find paid employment. That opportunity shall, subject to 
security considerations and to the provisions of Article 40 , be equal to that enjoyed by the nationals of the 
Power in whose territory they are.  
Where a Party to the conflict ap plies to a protected person methods of control which result in his 
being unable to support himself, and especially if such a person is prevented for reasons of security from 
finding paid employment on reasonable conditions, the said Party shall ensure his support and that of his 
dependents.  
Protected persons may in any case receive allowances from their home country, the Protecting Power, 
or the relief societies referred to in Article 30.  80 
 Article 40 
III. Employment. —Protected persons may be compelled to work only to the same extent as nationals 
of the Party to the conflict in whose territory they are.  
If protected persons are of enemy nationality, they may only be compelled to do work which is 
normally necessary to ensure the feed ing, sheltering, clothing, transport and health of human beings and 
which is not directly related to the conduct of military operations.  
In the cases mentioned in the two preceding paragraphs, protected persons compelled to work shall 
have the benefit of the same working conditions land of the same safeguards  as national workers, in 
particular as regards wages, hours of labour, clothing and equipment, previous training and compensation 
for occupational accidents and diseases.  
If the above p rovisions are infringed, protected persons shall be allowed to exercise their right of 
complaint in accordance with Article 30.  
Article  41 
IV. Assigned residence Internment. —Should the Power in whose hands protected persons may be 
consider the measures of  control mentioned in the present Convention to be inadequate, it may not have 
recourse to many other measure of control more severe than that of assigned residence or internment, in 
accordance with the provisions of Articles 42 and 43.  
In applying the pr ovisions of Article 39, second paragraph, to the cases of persons required to leave 
their usual places of residence by virtue of a decision placing them in assigned residence elsewhere, the 
Detaining Power shall be guided as closely as possible by the stan dards of welfare set forth in Part III,  
Section IV of this Convent ion. 
Article 42 
V. Grounds for in ternment or assigned residence. —The internment or placing in assigned 
reside nce of protected per sons may be ordered only if the security of the Detaining Pow er makes it 
absolutely necessary.  
Voluntary  internment. —If any person, acting through the, representatives of the Protecting Power, 
voluntarily demands internment, and if his situation renders this step necessary, he shall be interned by 
the Power in whose hands he may be.  
Article  43 
VI. Procedure. —Any protect ed person who has been Interned or placed in assigned residence shall 
be entitled to have such action reconsidered as soon as possible by an appropriate court or administrative 
board designated by the Detaining Power for that purpose. If the internment or placing in assigned 
residence is maintained, the court or administrative board shall periodically, and at least twice yearly, give 
consideration to his or her cage, with a vi ew to the favourable amendment of the initial decision, if 
circumstances permit.  
Unless the protected persons concerned object, the Detaining Power shall, as rapidly as possible, give 
the Protecting Power the names of any protected persons who have been interned or subjected to assigned 
residence, or who have been released from internm ent or assigned residence. The decisions of the courts 
or boards mentioned in the first paragraph of the present Article shall, also, subject to the same 
conditions, be notified as rapidly as possible to the Protecting Power.  
Article  44 
VII. Refugees. —In applying the measures of control mentioned in the present Convention, the 
Detaining Power shall not treat as enemy aliens exclusively on the basis of their nationality de jure  of an 
enemy State refugees who do not, in fact, enjoy the protection of any gove rnment.  
Article  45 
VIII. Transfer to another Power. —Protected persons shall not be transferred to a Power which is 
not a party to the Convention.  
This provision shall in no way constitute an obstacle to the repatriation of protected persons, or to 
their return to their country of residence after the cessation of hostilities.  81 
 Protected persons may be transferred by the Detaining Power only to a Powe r which is a party to the 
present Convention and after the Detaining Power has satisfied itself of the willingness and ability of such 
transferee Power to apply the present Convention. If protected persons are transferred under such 
circumstances, responsi bility for the application of the present Convention rests on the Power accepting 
them, while they are in its custody. Nevertheless, if that Power fails to carry out the provisions of the 
present Convention in any important respect, the Power by which the protected persons were transferred 
shall, upon being so notified by the Protecting Power, take effective measures to correct the situation or 
shall request the return of the protected persons. Such request must be complied with.  
In no circumstances shall a protected person be transferred to a country where he or she may have 
reason to fear persecution for his or her political opinions or religious beliefs.  
The provisions of this Article do not constitute an obstacle to the extradition, in pursuance of 
extradition treaties concluded before the outbreak of hostilities, of protected persons accused of offences 
against ordinary criminal law.  
Article  46 
Cancel lation of restrictive measures. —In so far as they have not been previously withdrawn, 
restrictive measures taken regarding protected persons shall be cancelled as soon as possible after the                       
close of hostilities.  
Restrictive measures affecting their property shall b e cancelled, in accordance with the law of the 
Detaining Power, as soon as possible after the close of hostilities.  
SECTION III  
OCCUPIED TERRITORIES  
Article 47 
Inviolability of rights. —Protected persons who are in occupied territory shall not be deprived,  in any  
case or in any manner whatsoever, of the benefits of the present Convention by any change introduced, as 
the result of the occupation of a territory, into the institutions or government of the said territory, nor by 
any agreement concluded between the auth orities of the occupied territories and the Occupying Power, 
nor by any annexation by the latter of the whole or part of the occupied territory.  
Article  48 
Special cases of repatriation. —Protected persons who are not nationals of the Power whose territory  
is occupied, may avail themselves of the right to leave the territory subject to the provisions of Article 35, 
and decisions thereon shall be taken according to the procedure which the Occupying Power shall 
establish in accordance with the said Article.  
Article  49 
Deport ations, transfers, evacuations. —Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations 
of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that of any 
other country, occupied or not, are prohi bited, regardless of their motive.  
Nevertheless, the Occupying Power may undertake total or partial evacuation of a given area if the 
security of the population or imperative military reasons so demand. Such evacuations may not involve 
the displacement of  protected persons outside the bounds of the occupied territory except when for 
material reasons it is impossible to avoid such displacement. Persons thus evacuated shall be transferred 
back to their homes as soon as hostilities in the area in question hav e ceased.  
The Occupying Power undertaking such transfers or evacuations shall ensure, to the greatest 
practicab le extent, that proper accommo dation is provided to receive the protected persons, that the 
removals are effected in satisfactory conditions of hygiene, health, safety and nutrition, and that members 
of the same family are not separated.  
The Protecting Power shall be informed of any transfers and evacuations as soon as they have             
taken place.  82 
 Article  50 
Children. —The Occupying Power shall, with the co -operation of the national and local authorities, 
facilitate the proper working of all institutions devoted to the care and education of children . 
The Occupying Power shall take all necessary steps  to facilitate the identification of children and the 
registration of their parentage. It may not, in any case, change their personal status, nor enlist them in 
formations or organizations subordinate to it.  
Should the local institutions be inadequate for the purpose, the Occupying Power shall make 
arrangements for the maintenance and education, if possible by persons of their own nationality, language 
and religion, of children who are orphaned or separated from their parents as a result of the war and who 
cannot be adequately cared for by a near relative or friend.  
A special section of the Bureau set up in accordance with Article 136 shall be responsible for taking 
all necessary steps to identify children whose identity is in doubt. Particulars of their pa rents or other near 
relatives should always be recorded if available.  
The Occupying Power shall not hinder the application of any preferential measures in regard to food, 
medical care and protection against the effects of war which may have been adopted p rior to the 
occupation in favour of children under fifteen years, expectant mothers, and mothers of children under 
seven years.  
Article 51 
Enlistment Labour. —The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to serve in its armed 
or auxiliary forces. N o pressure or propaganda which aims at securing voluntary enlistment is permitted.  
The Occupying Power may not compel protected persons to work unless they are over eighteen years 
of age, and then only on work which is necessary either for the needs of th e army of occupation, or for the 
public utility services, or for the feeding, sheltering, clothing, transportation or health of the population of 
the occupied country. Protected persons may not be compelled to undertake any work which would 
involve them in  the obligation of taking part in military operations. The Occupying Power may not 
compel protected persons to employ forcible means to ensure the security of the installations where they 
are performing compulsory labour.  
The work shall be carried out onl y in the occupied territory where the persons whose services have 
been requisitioned are. Every such person shall, so far as possible, be kept in his usual place of 
employment. Workers shall be paid a fair wage and the work shall be proportionate to their physical and 
intellectual capacities. The legislation in force in the occupied country concerning working con ditions, 
and safeguards as regards, in particular, such matters as wages, hours of work, equipment, preliminary 
training and compensation for occup ational accidents and diseases, shall be applicable to the protected 
persons assigned to the work referred to in this article.  
In no case shall requisition of labour lead to a mobilization of workers in an organization of a military 
or semi -military chara cter.  
Article 52 
Protection of workers. —No contract, agreement or regulation shall impair the right of any worker, 
whether voluntary or not and wherever he may be, to apply to the representatives of the Protecting Power 
in order to request the said Power' s intervention.  
All measures aiming at creating unemployment or at restricting the opportunities offered to workers 
in an occupied territory, in order to induce them to work for the Occupying Power, are prohibited.  
Article 53 
Prohibited destruction. —Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real or personal property 
belonging individually or collectively to private persons, or to the State, or to other public authorities, or 
to social or co -operative organizations, is prohibited, except where such destruc tion is render ed absolutely 
necessary by military operations.  83 
 Article 54 
Judges and public officials. —The Occupying Power may not alter the status of public officials or 
judges in the occupied territories, or in any way apply sanctions to or take any meas ures of coercion or 
discrimination against them, should they  abstain from fulfilling their functions for reasons of conscience.  
This prohibition does not prejudice the application of the second paragraph of Article 51. It does not 
affect the right of t he Occupy ing Power to remove public officials from their posts.  
Article  55 
Food and medic al supplies for the population. —To the fullest extent of the means available to it, 
the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring the food and medical supplies of the pop ulation; it should, 
in particular, bring in the necessary foodstuffs, medical stores and other articles if the resources of the 
occupied territory are inadequate.  
The Occupying Power may not requisition foodstuffs, articles or medical supplies available i n the 
occupied territory, except for use by the occupation forces and administration personnel, and then only if 
the requirements of the civilian population have been taken into account. Subject to the provisions of 
other international,  Conven tions, the Oc cupying Power shall make arrangements to ensure that fair value 
is paid for any requisitioned goods.  
The Protecting Power shall, at any time, be at liberty to verify the state of the food and medical 
supplies in occupied territories, except where temporar y restrictions are made necessary by imperative 
military requirements.  
Article  56 
Hygiene and public health. —To the fullest extent of the means available to it, the Occupying Power 
has the duty of ensuring and maintaining, with the co -operation of nationa l and local authorities, the 
medical and hospital estab lishments and services, public health and hygiene in the occupied territory, with 
particular reference to the adoption and application of the prophylactic and preventive measures necessary 
to combat th e spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Medical personnel of all categories shall be 
allowed to carry out their duties.  
If new hospitals are set up in occupied territory and if the competent organs of the occupied State are 
not operating there, the  occupying authorities shall, if necessary, grant them the recognition provided for 
in Article 18. In similar circumstances, the occupying authorities shall also grant recognition, to hospital 
personnel' and transport vehicles under the provisions of Artic les 20 and 21.  
In adopting measures of health and hygiene and in their imple mentation, the Occupying Power shall 
take into consideration the moral and ethical susceptibilities of the population of the occupied territory.  
Article  57 
Requisition o f hospitals. —The Occupying Power may requisition civilian hospitals only temporarily 
and only in cases of urgent necessity for the care of military wounded and sick, and then an condition that 
suitable, arrangements are made in due time for the care and trea tment of, the patients and for the needs of 
the civilian population for hospital accommodation.  
The material, and stores of civili an hospitals cannot be requisi tioned so long as they are necessary for 
the needs of the civilian population.  
Article  58 
Spiritual assistance. —The Occupying Power shall permit ministers of religion to give. spiritual 
assistance for the members of their religious communities.' The Occupying Power shall also accept 
consignments of books and articles required for religious needs  and shall facilitate their distribution in 
occupied territory,  
The Occupying Power shall not detain protected persons in an area particularly exposed to the 
dangers of war unless the security of the population or imperative military reasons so demand.  84 
 The Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory 
it occupies.  
Article  59 
Relief I. Collective relief. —If the whole or part of the population of an occupied territory is 
inadequately supplied, the Occupyi ng Power shall agree to relief schemes on behalf of the said 
population, and shall facilitate them by all the means at its disposal.  
Such schemes, which may be undertaken either by States or by impartial humanitarian organizations  
such as the Internationa l Com mittee of the Red Cross, shall consis t, in particular, of the provi sion of 
consignments of foodstuffs, medical supplies and clothing.  
All Contracting Parties shall permit the free passage of these consignments and shall guarantee                
their protection.  
A Power granting free passage to consignments on their way to territory occupied by an adverse Party 
to the conflict shall, however, have the right to search the consignments, to regulate their passage 
according to prescribed times and r outes, and to be reasonably satisfied through the Protecting Power that 
these consignments are to be used for the relief of the needy population and are not to be used for the 
benefit of the Occupying Power.  
Article  60 
II. Responsib ilities of the Occupyin g Power. —Relief consignments shall in no way relieve the 
Occupying Power of any of its responsibilities under Articles 55, 56 and 59. The Occupying Powers shall 
in no way whatsoever divert relief consignments from the purpose for which they are intended, e xcept in 
cases of urgent necessity, in the interests of the population of the occupied territory and with the consent 
of the Protecting Power.  
Article  61 
III. Distributions. —The distribution of the relief consignments referred to in the foregoing Articles 
shall be carried out with the co -operation and under the supervision of the Protecting Power. This duty 
may also be delegated, by agreement between the Occupying Power and th e Protecting Power, to a 
neutral Power, to the International Committee of the Red Cross or to any other impartial                  
humanitarian body.  
Such consignments shall be exempt in occupied territory from all charges, taxes or customs duties 
unless these are necessary in the interests of the economy of the territory. The Occupying Power shall 
facilitate the rapid distribution of these consignments.  
All Contracting Parties shall endeavour to permit the transit and transport, free of charge, of such 
relief consignments on their way to occupied territories.  
Article  62 
IV. Individual relief. —Subject to imperative reasons of security, protected persons in occupied 
territories shall be permitted to receive the individual relief consignments sent to them.  
Article  63 
National Red Cr oss and other relief societies. —Subject to temporary, and exceptional measures 
imposed for urgent reasons of security by the Occupying Power:  
(a) recognized National Red Cross (Red Crescent, Red Lion and Sun) Societies shall be able to 
pursue their activities in accordance with Red Cross principles, as defined by the International Red 
Cross Conferences. Other relief societies shall be permitted to continue their humanitarian acti vities 
under similar conditions ;  
(b) the Occupying  Power may not require any changes in the personnel or structure of th ese 
societies, which would pre judice the aforesaid activities.  85 
 The same principles shall apply to the activities and personnel of special organizations of a                   
non-milita ry character, which already exist or which may be established, for the purpose of ensuring the 
living conditions of the civilian population by the maintenance of the essential public utility services, by 
the distribution of relief and by the organization o f rescues.  
Article 64 
Penal legisl ation. I. General observations. —The penal laws of the occupied territory shall remain in 
force, with the exception that they may be repealed or suspended by the Occupying Power in cases where 
they constitute a threat to its security or an obstacle to the application of the present Conven tion. Subject 
to the latter consideration and to the necessity for ensuring the effective administration of justice, the 
tribunals of the occupied territory shall continue to function in respect of all offences covered by the           
said laws.  
The Occu pying Power may, however, subject the population of the occupied territory to provisions 
which are essential to enable the Occupying Power to fulfill  its obligations under the present Convention, 
to maintain the orderly government of the territory, and to ensure the security of the Occupying Power, of 
the members and property of the occupying forces or administration, and likewise of the establishments 
and lines of communications used by them.  
Article  65 
II. Publication. —The penal provisions enacted by the  Occupying Power shall not come into force 
before they have been published and brought to the knowledge of the inhabitants in their own language. 
The effect of these penal provisions shall not be retroactive.  
Article  66 
III. Competent Courts. —In case of a breach of the penal provisions promulgated by it by virtue of 
the second paragraph of Article 64, the Occupying Power may hand over the accused to its properly 
constituted, non -political military courts, on condition that the said courts sit i n the occupied country. 
Courts of appeal shall preferably sit in the occupied country.  
Article  67 
IV. Applicable provisions. —The courts shall apply only those provisions of law which were 
applicable prior to the offence, and which are In accordance with g eneral principles of law, in particular 
the principle that the penalty shall be proportional to the offence. They shall take into consideration the 
fact that the accused is not a national of the Occupying Power.  
Article  68 
V. Penalties Death penalty. —Protected persons who commit an offence which is solely intended to 
harm the Occupying Power, but which does not constitute an attempt on the life or limb of members of 
the occupying forces or administration, nor a grave collective danger, nor seriously damage  the property 
of the occupying force s or administration or the ins tallations used by them, shall be liable to internment o r 
simple im prisonment, provided the duration of such internment or imprisonment is proportionate to the 
offence committed. Furthermore , internment or imprisonment shall, for such offences, be the only 
measure adopted for depriving protected persons of liberty. The courts provided for under Article 66 of 
the present Convention may at their discretion convert a sentence of imprisonment to one of internment 
for the same period.  
The penal provisions promulgated by the Occupying Power in accordance with Articles 64 and 65 
may impose the death penalty on a protected person only in cases where the person is guilty of espionage, 
of serious acts of sabotage  against the military installa tions of the Occupying Power or of intentional 
offences which have caused the death of one or more persons, provided that such offences were 
punishable by death under the law of the occupied territory in force before the occupation began.  
The death penalt y may not be pronounced against a protected person unless the attention of the court 
has been particularly called to the fact that since the accused is not a national of the Occupying Power, he 
is not bound to it by any duty of allegiance.  86 
 In any case, th e death penalty may not be pronounced against a protected person who was under 
eighteen years of age a t the time  of the offence.  
Article  69 
VI. Deduction from sentenc e of period spent under arrest. —In all cases, the duration of the period 
during which a p rotected person accused of an offence is under a rrest awaiting trial or punish ment shall 
be deducted from any period of imprisonment awarded.  
Article  70 
VII. Offenc es committed before occupation. —Protected persons shall not be arrested, prosecuted 
or conv icted by the Occupying Power for acts committed or for opinions expressed before the occupation, 
or during a temporary interruption thereof, with the exception. of breaches of the laws and                 
customs of war.  
Nationals of the Occupying Power w ho, before the outbreak of hostilities, have sought refuge in the 
territory of the occupied State, shall not be arrested, prosecuted, convicted or deported from the occupied 
territory, except for of fences committed after the out break of hostilities, or for offences under common 
law committed before the outbreak of hostilities which, according to the law of the occupied State, would 
have justified extradition in time of peace.  
Article  71 
Penal proc edure. I. General observations. —No sentence shall be pronounced by the competent 
courts of the Occupying Power except after a regular trial.  
Accused persons who are prosecuted by the Occupying Power shall be promptly informed, in writing, 
in a language which they understand, of the part iculars of the charges preferred against them, and shall be 
brought to trial as rapidly as possible. The Protecting power shall be informed of all proceedings 
instituted by the Occupying Power against protected persons in respect of charges involving the d eath 
penalty or imprisonment for two years or more; it shall be enabled, at any time, to obtain information 
regarding the state of such proceedings. Furthermore, the Protecting Power shall be entitled, on request, to 
be furnished with all particulars of th ese and of any other proceedings instituted by the Occupying Power 
against protected persons.  
The notification to the Protecting Power, as provided for in the second paragraph above, shall be sent 
immediately, and shall in any case reach the Protecting Po wer three weeks before the date of the first 
hearing. Unless  at the opening  of the trial, evidence is sub mitted that the provisions of this Article are 
fully complied with, the trial shall not proceed. The notification shall include the following particula rs:—  
(a) description of the accused;  
(b) place of residence or detention ;  
(c) specification. of the charge or charges (with mention of the penal provisions under which                 
it is brought);  
(d) designation of the  court which will hear the case;  
(e) place and date of the first hearing.  
Article  72 
II. Right of defence. —Accused persons shall have the right to present evidence nece ssary to their 
defence and may, in particular, call witnesses. They shall have the righ t to be assisted by a qualified 
advocate or counsel of their own choice, who shall be able to visit them freely and shall enjoy the 
necessary facilities for preparing the defence.  
Failing a choice by the accused, the Protecting Power may provide him with a n advocate or counsel. 
When an accused person has to meet a serious, charge and the Protecting Power is not functioning, the 
Occupying Power, subject to the consent of the accused, shall provide an advocate or counsel.  87 
 Accused persons shall, unless they f reely waive such assistance, be aided by an interpreter, both 
during preliminary investigation and during the hearing in court. They shall have the right at any time to 
object to the interpreter and to ask for his replacement.  
Article  73 
III. Right of app eal.—A convicted person shall have the right of appeal provided for by the laws 
applied by the court. He shall be fully informed of his right to appeal or petition and of the time limit 
within which he may do so.  
The penal procedure provided in the presen t Section shall apply, as far as it is applicable, to appeals. 
Where the laws applied by the Court make no provision for appeals, the convicted person shall have the 
right to petition against the finding and sentence to the competent authority of the Occup ying Power.  
Article  74 
IV. Assi stance by the protecting Power. —Representatives of the Protecting Power shall have the 
right to attend the trial of any protected person, unless the hearing has, as an exceptional measure, to be 
held in camera  in the interests of the security of the Occupying Power, which shall then notify the 
Protecting Power. A notification in respect of the date and place of trial shall be sent to the                   
Protecting Power.  
Any judgment involving a sentence of death, or imprisonment for two years or more, shall be 
communicated, with the relevant grounds, as rapidly as possible to the Protecting Power. The notification 
shall contain a reference to the notification made under Article 71 and, in the case of sentenc es of 
imprisonment, the name of the place where the sentence is to be served. A record of judgments other than 
those referred to above shall be kept by the court and shall be open to inspection by representatives of the 
Protecting Power. Any period allowed  for appeal in the case of sentences involving the death penalty, or 
imprisonment of two years or more, shall not run until notification of judgment has been received by the 
Protecting Power.  
Article  75 
V. Death sentence. —In no case shall persons condemne d to death be deprived of the right of petition 
for pardon or reprieve.  
No death sentence shall be carried out before the expiration of a period of at least six months from the 
date of receipt by the Pr otecting Power of the notification of the final judgm ent confirming such death 
sentence, or of an order denying pardon or reprieve.   
The six months period of suspension of the death sentence here  in prescribed may be reduced in 
individual cases in circumstances of grave emergency involving an organized thre at to the security of the 
Occupying Power or its forces, provided always that the Protecting Power is notified of such reduction 
and is given reasonable time and opportunity to make representations to the competent occupying 
authorities in respect of such death sentences.  
Article  76 
Treatment of detainees. —Protected persons accused of offences shall be detained in the occupied 
country, and if convicted they shall serve their sentences therein. They shall, if possible, be separated 
from other detainees and s hall enjoy conditions of food a nd hygiene which will be suffi cient to keep them 
in good health, and which will be at least equal to those obtaining in prisons in the occupied country.  
They shall receive the medical attention required by their state of hea lth.  
They shall also have the right to receive any spiritual assistance which they may require.  
Women shall be confined in separate quarters and shall be under the direct supervision of women.  
Proper regard shall be paid to the special treatment due to minors.  
Protected persons who are detained shall have the right to be visited by delegates of the Protecting 
Power and of the International Committee of the Red Cross, in accordance with the prov isions of            
Article 143.  88 
 Such persons shall have the right to receive at least one relief parcel monthly.  
Article 77 
Handing over of detain ees at the close of occupation. —Protected persons who have been accused 
of offences or convicted by the co urts in occupied territory, shall be handed over at the close of 
occupation, with the relevant records, to the authorities of the liberated territory.  
Article  78 
Security measures. Int ernment and assigned residence.  If the Occupying Power considers it 
necessary, for imperative reasons of security, to take safety measures concerning protected persons, it 
may, at the most, subject them to assigned residence or to internment.   
Right of appeal. —Decisions regarding such assigned residence or internment shall be made 
according to a regular procedure to be prescribed by the Occupying Power in accordance with the 
provisions of the present Convention. This procedure shall include the right of appeal f or the parties 
concerned. Appeals shall be decided with the least possible delay. In the event of the decision being 
upheld, it shall be subject to periodical review, if possible every six months, by a competent body set up 
by the said Power.  
Protected pe rsons made subject to assigned residence and thus required to leave their homes shall 
enjoy the full benefit of Article 39 of the present Convention.  
SECTION IV  
REGULATIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF INTERNEES CHAPTER  
CHAPTER I 
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article  79 
Cases of intern ment and applicable provisions. —The Parties to the conflict shall not intern 
protected persons, except in accordance with the provisions of Articles 41, 42, 43, 68 and 78.  
Article  80 
Civil capacity. —Internees shall retain their full civil capacity and shall exercise such attendant rights 
as may be compatible with their status.  
Article  81 
Maintenance. —Parties to the conflict who intern protected persons shall be bound to provide free of 
charge for the ir maintenance, and to grant them also the medical attention required by their state of health.  
No deduction from the allowances, salaries or credits due to the internees shall be made for the 
repayment of these costs.  
The Detaining Power shall provide f or the support of those depe ndent on the internees, if such 
dependents are without adequate means of support or are unable to earn a living.  
Article  82 
Grouping of Internees. —The Detaining Power shall, as far as possible, accommodate the internees 
accordi ng to their nationality, language and customs. Internees who are nationals of the same country 
shall not be separated merely because they have different languages.  
Throughout the duration of their internment, members of the same family, and in particular parents 
and children, shall be lodged together in the same place of internment, except when separation of a 
temporary nature is necessitated for reasons of employment or health or for the purposes of enforcement 
of the provisions of Chapter IX of the prese nt Section. Internees may request that their children who are 
left at liberty without parental care shall be interned with them.  89 
 Wherever possible, interned members of the same family shall be housed in the same premises and 
given separate accommodation f rom other internees, together with facilities for leading a proper                 
family life.  
CHAPTER II  
PLACES OF INTERNMENT  
Article  83 
Location of places of internment Marking of camps. —The Detaining Power shall not set up places 
of internment in areas particularly exposed to the dangers of war.  
The Detaining Power shall give the enemy Powers, through the intermediary of the Protecting 
Powers, all useful i nformation re garding the geograp hical location of places of internment.  
Whenever military considerations permit, internment camps shall be indicated by the letters IC, 
placed so as to be clearly visible in the daytime from the air. The Powers concerned may, however, agree 
upon any other  system of marking. No place other than an internment camp shall be marked as such.  
Article  84 
Separate internment .—Internees shall be accommodated and administered separately from prisoners 
of war and from persons deprived of liberty for any other reason.  
Article 85 
Accommodation, hygiene. —The Detaining Power is bound to take all necessary and possible 
measures to ensure that protected persons shall, from the outset of their internment, be accommodated in 
buildings, or quarters which afford every possible safeguard as regards hygiene and health, and provide 
efficient protection against the rigours of the climate and  the effects of the war. In no case sh all 
permanent places of intern ment be situated in unhealthy areas or in districts the climate of which is 
injurious to the internees. In all cases where the district, in which a protected person is temporarily 
interned , is an unhealthy area or has a climate which is harmful to his health, he shall be removed to a 
more suitable place of internment as rapidly as circumstances permit.  
The premises shall be fully protected from dampness, adequately heated and lighted, in p articular 
between dusk and lights out. The sleeping quarters shall be sufficiently spacious and well ventilated, and 
the internees shall have suitable bedding and sufficient blankets, account being taken of the climate, and 
the age, sex, and state of healt h of the internees.  
Internees shall have for their use, day and night, sanitary conveniences which conform to the rules of 
hygiene, and are constantly maintained in a state of cleanliness. They shall be provided with sufficient 
water and soap for their da ily personal toilet and for washing their personal laundry; installations and 
facilities necessary for this purpose shall be granted to them. Showers or baths shall also be available. The 
necessary time shall be set aside for washing and for cleaning.  
Whe never it Is necessary, as an exceptional and temporary measure, to accommodate women 
internees who are not members of a family unit in the same place of internment as men, the provision of 
separate sleeping quarters and sanitary conveniences for the use of  such women internees                             
shall be obligatory.  
Article  86 
Premises for religious services. —The Detaining Power shall place at the disposal of interned 
persons, of whatever denomination, premises suitable for the holding of their re ligious services.  
Article 87 
Canteens. —Canteens shall be installed in every place of internment, except where other suitable 
facilities are available. Their purpose shall be to enable internees to make purchases, at prices not higher 
than local market pri ces, of foodstuffs and articles of everyday use, including soap and tobacco, such as 
would increase their personal well -being and comfort.  90 
 Profits made by canteens shall be credited to a welfare fund to be set up for each place of internment, 
and administe red for the benefit of the internees attached to such place of internment. The Internee 
Committee provided for in Article 102 shall have the right to check the management of the canteen and of 
the said fund.  
When a place of internment is closed down, the balance of the welfare fund shall be transferred to the 
welfare fund of a place of internment for internees of the same nationality, or, if such a place does not 
exist, to a central welfare fund which shall be administered for the benefit of all internees remaining in the 
custody of the Detaining Power. In case of a general release, the said profits shall be kept by the 
Detaining Power, subject to any agreement to the contrary between the Powers concerned.  
Article 88 
Air raid  shelters. Protective measures. —In all places of internment exposed to air raids and other 
hazards of war, shelters adequate in number and structure to ensure the necessary protection shall be 
installed. In case of alarms, the internees shall be free to enter such shelters as quickly as  possible, 
excepting those who remain for the protection of their quarters against the aforesaid hazards. Any 
protective measures taken in favour of the population shall also apply to them.  
All due precautions must be taken in places of internment against  the danger of fire.  
CHAPTER III  
FOOD AND CLOTHING  
Article  89 
Food. —Daily food rations for internees shall be sufficient in quantity, quality and variety to keep 
internees in a good state of health and prevent the development of nutritional deficiencies. Account shall 
also be taken of the customary diet of the internees.  
Internees shall also be given the means by which they can prepare for themselves any additional food 
in their possession.  
Sufficient drinking water shall be supplied t o internees. The use of tobacco  shall be permitted.  
Internees who work shall receive add itional rations, in pro portion to the kind of labour which                 
they perform.  
Expectant and nursing mothers and children under fifteen years of age, shall be given additional food,  
in proportion to their                        physio logical nee ds.  
Article  90 
Clothing. —When taken into custody, internees shall be given all facilities to provide themselves with 
the necessary clothing, footwear and change of underwear, and later on, to procure further supplies if 
required. Should any internees not have sufficient clothing, account being taken of the climate, and be 
unable to procure any, it shall be provided free of charge to them by the Detaining Power.  
The clothing supplied by the Detaining Power to internees and the outward markings placed on th eir 
own clothes shall not be ignominious nor expose them to ridicule.  
Workers shall receive suitable wor king outfits, including protec tive clothing, whenever the nature of 
their work so requires.  
CHAPTER IV  
HYGIENE AND MEDICAL ATTENTION  
Article  91 
Medical attention. —Every place of internment shall have an adequate infirmary, under the direction 
of a qualified doctor, where internees may have the attention they require, as well as appropriate diet. 
Isolation wards shall be set aside for cases of cont agious or mental diseases.  91 
 Maternity cases and internees suffering from serious diseases, or whose conditions require special 
treatment, a surgical operation or hospital care, must be admitted to any institution where adequate 
treatment can be given and s hall receive care not inferior to that provided for the general population.  
Internees shall, for preference, have the attention of medical personnel of their own nationality.  
Internees may not be prevented from presenting themselves to the medical author ities for 
examination. The medical authorities of the Detaining Power shall, upon request, issue to every internee 
who has undergone treatment an official certificate showing the nature of his illness or injury, and the 
duration and nature of the treatment  given. A duplicate of this certificate shall be forwarded to the Central 
Agency provided for in Article 140.  
Treatment, including the provision of any apparatus necessary for the maintenance of internees in 
good health, particularly dentures and other ar tificial appliances and spectacles, shall be free of charge to 
the internee.   
Article  92 
Medical inspections. —Medical inspections of internees shall be made at least once a month. Their 
purpose shall be, in particular, to supervise the general state of he alth, nutrition and cleanliness of 
internees and to detect contagious diseases, especially tuberculosis, malaria, and general diseases. Such 
inspections shall include, in particular the checking of weight of each internee and, at least once a year, 
radiosc opic examination.  
CHAPTER V  
RELIGIOUS, INTELLECTUAL AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES  
Article  93 
Religious duties. —Internees shall enjoy complete latitude in the exercise of their religious duties, 
including attendance at the services of their faith, on condition that they comply with the disciplinary 
routine prescribed by the detaining authorities.  
Ministers of relig ion who are inte rned shall be allowed to minis ter freely to the members of their 
community. For this purpose the Detaining Power shall ensure their equitable allocation amongst the 
various places of internment in which there are internees speaking the same  language and belonging to the 
same religion. Should such ministers be too few in number, the Detaining Power shall provide them with 
the necessary facilities including means of transport, for moving from one place to another, and they shall 
be authorized to visit any internees who are in hospital. Ministers of religions shall be at liberty to 
correspond on matters concerning their ministry with the religious authorities in the country of detention 
and, as far as possible, with the international religious o rganizations of their faith. Such correspondence 
shall not be considered as forming a part of the quota mentioned in Article 107. It shall, however, be 
subject to the provisions of Article 112.  
When internees do not have at their disposal the assistance o f, ministers of their faith, or should these 
latter be too few in number, the local religious authorities of the same faith may appoint, in agreement 
with the Detaining Power, a minister of the internees ’ faith or, if such a course is feasible from a 
denom inational point of view, a minister of similar religion or a qualified layman. The latter shall enjoy 
the facilities granted to the ministry he has assumed. Persons so appointed shall comply with all 
regulations laid down by the Detaining Power in the inte rests of discipline and security.   
Article  94 
Recre ation, study, sports and games. —The Detaining Power shall encourage intellectual, 
educational and recreational pursuits, sports and games amongst internees, whilst leaving them free to 
take part in them or not. It shall take all practicable measures to ensure the exercise thereof in part icular 
by providing suitable premises.  
All possible facilities shall be granted to internees to continue their studies or to take up new subjects. 
The education of children and young people shall be ensured; they shall be allowed to attend schools 
either within the place of internment or outside.  92 
 Internees shall be given opportunities for physical exercise, sports and outdoor games. For this 
purpose, sufficient open spaces shall be set aside in all places of internment. Special playgrounds shall be 
reserv ed for children and young people.  
Article  95 
Working conditions. —The Detaining Power shall not employ internees as workers, unless they so 
desire. Employment which, if undertaken under compulsion by a protected person not in internment, 
would involve a br each of Article 40 or 51 of the present Convention, and employment on work which is 
of a degrading or humiliating character are in any case prohibited.  
After a working period of six weeks, internees shall be free to give up work at any moment, subject to 
eight days ’ notice.  
These provisions constitute no obstacle to the right of the Detaining Power to employ interned 
doctors, dentists and other medical personnel in their professional capacity on behalf of their fellow 
internees, or to employ internees for  administrative and maintenance work in places of internment and to 
detail such persons for work in the kitchens or for other domestic tasks, or to require such persons to 
undertake duties connected with the protection of internees against aerial bombardme nt or other war risks. 
No internee may, however, be required to perform tasks for which he is, in the opinion of a medical 
officer, physically unsuited.  
The Detaining Power shall take entire responsibility for all working conditions, for medical attention , 
for the payment of wages, and for ensuring that all employed internees receive compensation for 
occupational accidents and diseases. The standards prescribed for the said working conditions and for 
compensation shall be in accordance with the national la ws and regulations, and with the existing 
practice; they shall in no case be inferior to those obtaining for work of the same nature in the same 
district. Wages for work done shall be determined on an equitable basis by special agreements between 
the inter nees, the Detaining Power, and, if the case arises, employers other than the Detaining Power, due 
regard being paid to the obligation of the Detaining Power to provide for the free maintenance of 
internees and for the medical attention which their state of  health may require. Internees permanently 
detailed for categories of work mentioned in the third paragraph of this Article, shall be paid fair wages 
by the Detaining Power. The working conditions and the scale of compensation for occupational 
accidents an d diseases to internees, thus detailed shall not be inferior to those applicable to work of the 
same nature in the same district.  
Article  96 
Labour detachments. —All labour detachments shall remain part of and dependent upon a place of 
internment. The comp etent authorities of the Detaining Power and the commandant of a place of 
internment shall be responsible for the observance in a labour detachment of the provisions of the present 
Convention. The commandant shall keep an up -to-date list of the labour deta chments subordinate to him 
and shall communicate it to the delegates of the Protecting Power, of the International Committee of the 
Red Cross and of other humanitarian organisations who may visit the places of internment.  
CHAPTER VI  
PERSONAL PROPERTY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES  
Article  97 
Valuables and personal effects. —Internees shall be permitted to retain articles of personal use. 
Monies, cheques, bonds, etc., and valuables in their possession may not be taken from them except in 
accordance with established  procedure. Detailed receipts shall be given therefor.  
The amounts shall be, paid into the account of every inter nee as provided for in Article 98. Such 
amounts may not be converted into any other currency unless legislation in force in the territory in w hich 
the owner is interned so requires or the internee gives his consent.  
Articles which have above all a personal or sentimental value may not be taken away.  
A woman internee shall not be searched except by a woman.  93 
 On release or repatriation, internee s shall be given all articles, monies or other valuables taken from 
them during internment and shall receive in currency the balance of any credit to their accounts kept in 
accordance with Article 98, with the exception of an articles or amounts withheld b y the Detaining Power 
by virtue of its legislation in force. If the property of an internee is so with held, the owner shall receive a 
detailed receipt.  
Family or identity documents in the possession of internees may not be taken away without a receipt 
being given. At no time shall internees be left without identity documents. If they have none, they shall be 
issued with special documents drawn up by the detaining authorities, which will serve as their identity 
papers until the end of their internment.  
Internees may keep on their persons a certain amount of money, in cash or in the shape of purchase 
coupons, to enable them to make purchases.  
Article 98 
Financial resources and indi vidual accounts. —All internees shall receive regular allowances, 
sufficient to enable them to purchase goods and articles, such as tobacco, toilet requisites, etc. Such 
allowances may take the form of credits or purchase coupons.  
Furthermore, internees may receive allowances from the Power to which they owe allegiance, the 
Protec ting Powers, the organisations which may assist them, or their families, as well as the income on 
their property in accordance with the law of the Detaining Power. The amount of allowances granted by 
the Power to which they owe allegiance shall be the same for each category of internees                              
(infirm, sick, pregnant women, etc.) but may not be a llocated by that Power or distributed by the 
Detaining Power on the basis of discrimi nations between internees which are prohibited by Article 27 of 
the present Convention.  
The Detaining Power shall open a regular account for every internee, to which shal l be credited the 
allowances named in the present Article, the wages earned and the remittances received, together with 
such sums taken from him as may be available under the legislation in force in the territory in which he is 
interned. Internees shall be  granted all faciliti es consistent with the legisla tion in force in such territory to 
make remittances to their families and to other dependents. They may draw from their accounts the 
amounts necessary for their personal expenses, within the limits fixed b y the Detaining Power. They shall 
at all times be afforded reasonable facilities for consulting and obtaining copies of their accounts. A 
statement of accounts shall be furnished to the Protecting Power, on request and shall accompany the 
Internee in case of transfer.   
CHAPTER VII  
ADMINISTRATION AND DISCIPLINE  
Article  99 
Camp administration.  Posting o f the Convention and of orders. —Every place of internment shall 
be put under the authority of a responsible officer, chosen from the regular military forces or the regular 
civil administration of the Detaining Power. The officer in charge of the place of internment must have in 
his posse ssion a copy of the present Convention in the official language, or one of the official languages, 
of his country and shall be responsible for its application. The staff in control of internees shall be 
instructed in the provisions of the present Conventio n and of the administrative measures adopted to 
ensure its application.  
The text of the present Convention and the texts of special agreements concluded under the said 
Convention shall be posted inside the place of internment, in a language which the inte rnees understand, 
or shall be in the possession of the Internee Committee.  
Regulations, orders, notices and publications of every kind shall be communicated to the internees 
and posted inside the places of internment, in a language which they understand.  
Every order and command addressed to internees individually must. likewise be given in a language 
which they understand.  94 
 Article  100 
General discipline. —The disciplinary regime in places of internment shall be consistent with 
humanitarian principles, and  shall in no circumstances include regulations imposing on internees any 
physical exertion dangerous to their health or involving physical or moral victimization. Identification by 
tatooing or imprinting signs or markings on the body , is prohibited.  
In pa rticular, prolonged standing and roll -calls, punishment drill, military drill and manoeuvres, or the 
reduction of food rations, are prohibited.  
Article  101 
Complaints and petitions —Internees shall have the right to present to the authorities in whose 
power they are, any petition with regard to the conditions of internment to which they are subjected.  
They shall also have the right to apply without restriction through the Internee Co mmittee or, if they 
consider It necessary, direct to the representatives of the Protecting Power, in order to indicate to them 
any points on which they may have complaints to make with regard to the conditions of internment.  
Such petitions and complaints shall be transmitted forthwith and without alteration, and even if the 
latter are recognized to be unfounded they may not occasion any punishment.  
Periodic reports on the situation in places of internment and as to the needs of the internees may be 
sent b y the Internee Committees to the representatives of the Protecting Powers.  
Article 102 
Internee com mittee. I. Election of members. —In every Place of internment, the internees shall 
freely elect by secret ballot every six months, the members of a Committee  empowered to represent them 
before the Detaining and the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of the Red Cross and any 
other organization which may assist them. The members of the Committee shall be eligible for                         
re-electi on.  
Internees so elected shall enter upon their duties after their election has been approved by the 
detaining authorities. The reasons for any refusals or dismissals shall be communicated to the Protecting 
Powers concerned.  
Article  103 
II. Duties. —The I nternee Committees shall further the physical, spiritual and intellectual well -being 
of the internees.  
In case the internees decide. in particular, to organise a system of mutual assistance amongst 
themselves, this organisation would be within the competence of the Committees in addition to the 
special duties entrusted to them under other provisions of the present Convention.  
Article 104 
III. Prerogative. —Members of Internee Committees shall not be required to perform any other work, 
if the accomplishment of their duties is rendered more difficult thereby.  
Members of Internee Committees may appoint from amongst the internees such assistants as they 
may require. All material facilities shall be granted to them, particularly a certain freedom of movement 
necessary for the accomplishment of their duties (visits  to labour detachments, receipt of supplies, etc.).  
All facilities shall likewise be accorded to members of Internee Committees for communication by 
post and telegraph with the detaining authorities, the Protecting Powers, the International Committee of 
the Red Cross and their delegates, and with the organizations which give assistance to internees. 
Comm ittee members in labour detach ments shall enjoy similar facilities for communication with their 
Internee Committee in the principal place of internment. Su ch communications shall not be limited, nor 
considered as forming a part of the quota mentioned in Article 107.  
Members of Internee Committees who are transferred shall be allowed a reasonable time to acquaint 
their successors with current affairs.  95 
 CHAPT ER VIII  
RELATIONS WITH THE EXTERIOR  
Article  105 
Notification of measures taken. —Immediately upon interning protected persons, the Detaining 
Powers shall inform them, the Power to which they owe allegiance and their Protecting Power of the 
measures taken fo r executing the provisions of the present Chapter. T he Detaining Powers shall like wise 
inform the Parties concerned of any subsequent modifications of such measures.  
Article  106 
Internment card. —As soon as he is interned, or at the latest not more than one week after his arrival 
in a place of internment, and likewise in cases of sickness or transfer to another place of internment or to 
a hospital, every internee shall be enabled to send direct to his family, on the one hand, and to the Central 
Agency provided for by Article 140, on the other, an internment card similar, if possible, to the model 
annexed to the present Convention, informing his relatives of his detention, address and state of health . 
The said cards shall be forwarded as rapidly as possible and may not be delayed in any way.  
Article  107 
Correspondence. —Internees shall be allowed to send and receive letters and cards. If the Detaining 
Power deems it necessary to limit the number of le tters and cards sent by each internee, the said number 
shall not be less than two letters and four cards monthly; these shall be, drawn up so as to conform as 
closely as possible to the models annexed to the present Convention. If limitation s must be place d on the 
corres pondence addressed to internees, they may be ordered only by the power to which such internees 
owe allegiance, possibly at the request of the Detaining Power. Such letters and cards must be conveyed 
with reasonable despatch; they may not be delayed or retained for disciplinary reasons.  
Internees who have been a long time without news, or who find it impossible to receive news from 
their relatives, or to give them news by the ordinary postal route, as well as those who are at a 
considerable d istance from their homes, shall be allowed to send telegrams, the charges being paid by 
them in the currency at their disposal. They shall likewise benefit by this provision in cases which are 
recognized to be urgent.  
As a rule, internees ’ mail shall be w ritten in their own language. The Parties to the conflict may 
authorize correspondence in other languages.  
Article 108 
Relief sh ipments. I. General principles. —Internees shall be allowed to receive, by post or by any 
other means, individual parcels or col lective  shipments containing in parti cular foodstuffs, clothing, 
medical supplies, as well as books and objects of a devotional, educational or recreational character which 
may meet their needs. Such shipments shall in no. way free the Detaining Power from -the obligations 
imposed upon it by virtue of the present Convention.  
Should military necessity require the quantity of such shipment ’s to be limited, due notice thereof 
shall be given to the Protecting Power and to the International Committee of the Red Cross, or to any 
other organization giving assistance to the internees and responsible for the forwarding of such shipments.  
The conditions for the sending of individual parcels and collective shipments shall, if necessary, be 
the subject of special agree ments between the Powers concerned, which may in no case delay the receipt 
by the internees, of relief supplies. Parcels of clothing and foodstuffs may not include books. Medical 
relief supplies shall, as a rule, be sent in collective  parcels.  
Article  109 
II. Collective relief. —In the absence of special agreements between Parties to the con flict regarding 
the conditions for the receipt and distribution of collective relief shipments, the regulations concerning 
collective relief which are annexed to the present Convention shall be applied.  96 
 The special agreements provided for above shall in n o case restrict the right of Internee Committees 
to take possession of collective. relief shipments intended for internees, to undertake their distribution and 
to dispose of them in the interests of the recipients.  
Nor shall such agreements restrict the r ight of representatives of the Protecting Powers, the 
International Committee of the Red Cross, or any other organization giving assi stance to internees and 
respon sible for the forwarding of collective shipments, to supervise their distribution to the reci pients.  
Article  110 
III. Exemption fro m postal and transport charges. —All relief shipments for internees shall be 
exempt from import, customs and other dues.  
All matter sent by mail, including relief parcels sent by parcel post and remittances of money, 
addressed from other countries to internees or despatched by them through the post office, either direct or 
through the Information Bureaux provided for in Article 136 and the Central Information Agency 
provided for in Article 140, shall be exempt from all  postal dues both in the  countries of origin and 
desti nation and in intermediate countries. To this end, in particular, the exemption provided by the 
Universal Postal Convention of 1947 and by the agreements of the Universal Postal Union in favour of 
civilians of enemy nationality detained in camps or civilian prisons, shall be extended to the other 
interned persons protected by the present Convention. The countries not signatory to the above -mentioned 
agreements shall be bound to grant freedom from charges  in the same circumstances.  
The cost of transporting relief shipments which are intended for internees and which, by reason of 
their weight or any other cause, cannot be sent through the post office , shall be borne by the Detain ing 
Power in all the territ ories under its control. Other Powers which are Parties to the present Convention 
shall bear the cost of transport in their respective territories.  
Costs connected with the transport of such shipments, which are not covered by the above paragraphs, 
shall be charged to the senders.  
The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to reduce, so far as possible, the charges for telegrams 
sent by internees, or addressed to them.  
Article 111 
Special means of transport. —Should military operations prevent the Powers concerned from 
fulfilling their obligation to ensure the conveyance of the mail and relief shipments provided for in 
Articles 106, 107, 108 and 113, the Protecting Powers concerned, the International Committee of the Red 
Cross or any other organization duly approved by the Parties to the conflict may undertake the 
conveyance of such shipments by suitable means (rail, motor vehicles, vessels or aircraft, etc.) For this 
purpose, the High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to supply them with such transport, and to allow its 
circulation, espe cially by granting the necessary safe -conducts.  
Such transport may also be used to convey: — 
(a) correspondence, lists and reports exchanged between the Central Information Age ncy referred 
to in Article 140 and the National Bureaux referred to in Article 136;  
(b) correspondence and reports relating to internees which the Protecting Powers, the 
international Committee of the Red Cross or any other organization assisting the inte rnees exchange 
either with their own delegates or with the Parties to the conflict.  
These provisions in no way detract from the right of any Party to the conflict to arrange other means 
of transport if it should so prefer, nor preclude the granting of saf e-conducts, under mutually agreed 
conditions, to such means of transport.  
The costs occasioned by the use of such means of transport shall. be borne, in proportion to the 
importance of the shipments, by the Parties to the conflict whose nationals are bene fited thereby.  
Article  112 97 
 Censorship and examination. —The censoring of correspondence addressed to internees or                 
despatched by them shall be done as quickly as possible.  
The examination of consignments intended for internees shall not be carried out under conditions that 
will expose the goods contained in them to deterioration. It shall be done in the presence o f the addressee, 
or of a fellow -internee d uly delegated by him. The deli very to internees of individual or collective 
consignments  shall not be delayed under the pretext of difficulties of censorship .  
Any prohibition o f correspondence ordered by the parties to the conflict either for military or political 
reasons, shall be only temporary and its duration shall be as short as possibl e.  
Article  113 
Execution and t ransmission of legal documents. —The Detaining Powers shall provide all 
reasonable facilities for the transmission, through the Protecting Power or the Central Agency provided 
for in Article 140 or as otherwise required, of wi lls, powers of attorney, letters of authority, or any other 
document intended for internees or despatched by them.  
In all cases the Detaining Powers shall facilitate the execution and authentication in due legal form of 
such documents on behalf of interne es, in particular by allowing them to consult a lawyer.  
Article 114 
Management of property. —The Detaining Power shall afford internees all facilities to enable them 
to manage their property, provided this is not incompatible with the conditions of internm ent and the law 
which is applicable. For this purpose, the said Power may give them permission to leave the place of 
internment in urgent cases and if circumstances allow.  
Article 115 
Facilities for r eparation and conduct of cases. —In all cases where an internee is a party to 
proceedings in any court, the Detaining Power shall, if he so requests, cause the court to be informed of 
his detention and shall, within legal limits, ensure that all necessary steps are taken to prevent him fr om 
being in any way prejudiced, by reason of his internment, as regards the preparation and conduct of his 
case or as regards the execution of any judgment of the court.  
Article  116 
Visits. —Every internee shall be allowed to receive visitors, especially n ear relatives, at regular 
intervals and as frequently as possible.  
As far as is possible, internees shall be permitted to visit their homes in urgent cases, particularly in 
cases of death or serious illness of relatives.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENAL AND DISCIPLINARY  SANCTIONS  
Article  117 
General provisions. Applicable legislation. —Subject to the provisions of the present Chapter,           
the laws. in force, in the territory in which they are detained will continue to apply to internees who 
commit offences during internment.  
If general laws, regulations or orders declare acts committed by internees to be punishable, whereas 
the same acts a re not punishable when committed by persons who are not internees, such acts shall entail 
disciplinary punishments only.  
No internee may be punished more than once for the same act, or on the same count.   
Article  118 
Penalties. —The courts or authorities shall in passing sentence take as far as possible into account the 
fact that the defendant is not a national of the Detaining Power. They shall be free to reduce the penalty 98 
 prescribed for the offence with which the internee is charged and shall not be obl iged, to this end, to apply 
the minimum sentence prescribed.  
Imprisonment in premises without daylight, and, in general, all forms of cruelty without exception are 
forbidden.  
Internees who have served disciplinary or judicial sentences shall not be treat ed differently from      
other internees.  
The duration of preventive detention undergone by an internee shall be deducted from any 
disciplinary or judicial penalty involving confinement to which he may be sentenced.  
Internee Committees shall be informed of all judicial proceedings instituted against internees whom 
they represent, and of their result.  
Article 119 
Disciplinary punishments. —The disciplinary punishments applicable to internees shall be                           
the following: — 
(1) A fine which shall not exceed 50 per cent. of the wages which the internee would otherwise 
receive under the provisions if Article 95 during a period of not more than thirty days.  
(2) Discontinuance of privileges granted over and above the treatment pro vided for by the           
present Convention.  
(3) Fatigue duties, not exceeding two hours daily, In connection with the maintenance of the                
place of internment.  
(4) Confinement.  
In no case shall disciplinary penalties be inhuman, brutal o r dangerous for the health of internees. 
Account shall be taken of the internee ’s age, sex and state of health.  
The duration of any single punishment shall in no case exceed a maximum of thirty consecutive days, 
even if the internee is answerable for several  breaches of discipline when his case is dealt with, whether 
such breaches are connected or not.  
Article  120 
Escapes. —Internees who are recaptured after having escaped or when attempting to escape, shall be 
liable only to disciplinary punishment in respect of this act, even if it is a repeated offence,  
Article 118, paragraph 3, notwithstanding, internees punished as a re sult of escape or attempt to 
escape, may be subjected to special surveillance, on condition that such surveillance does not affect the 
state of their health, that it is exercised in a place of internment and that it does not entail the abolition of 
any of the safeguards granted by the present Convention.  
Internees who aid and abet an escape or attempt to escape, shall be liable on this count to disciplinary 
punishment only.  
Article  121 
Connected offences. —Escape, or attempt to escape, even if it is a repe ated offence, shall not be 
deemed an aggravating circumstance in cases where an internee is prosecuted for offences committed 
during his escape.  
The Parties to the conflict shall ensure  that the competent authorities exercise leniency in deciding 
whether punishment inflicted for an offence shall be of a disciplinary or judicial nature, especially in 
respect of acts committed in connection with an escape, whether successful or not.  
Article  122 99 
 Investigations . Confinement awaiting hearing. —Acts which constitute offences against discipline 
shall be investigated immediately. This rule shall be applied, in particular, in cases of escape or attempt to 
escape. Recaptured internees shall be handed over to the competent authorities as soon as possi ble.  
In case of offences against discipline, confinement awaiting trial shall be reduced to an absolute 
minimum for all internees, and shall not exceed fourteen days. Its duration shall in any case be deducted 
from any sentence of confinement. The provisi ons of Articles 124 and 125 shall apply to internees who 
are in confinement awaiting trial for offences against discipline.  
Article  123 
Competent authorities, Procedu re.—Without prejudice to the competence of courts and higher           
autho rities, disci plinary punishment may be ordered only by the command ant of the place of internment, 
or by a responsible officer or official who replaces him, or to whom he has delegated his                   
disciplinary powers.  
Before any disciplinary punishment  is aw arded, the accused inter nee shall be given precise 
information regarding the offences of which he is accused, and given an opportunity of explaining his 
conduct and of defending himself. He shall be permitted, in particular, to call witnesses and to have 
recourse, if necessary, to the services of a qualified interpreter. The decision shall be announced in the 
presence of the accused and of a member of the Internee Committee.  
The period elapsing between the time of award of a disciplinary punishment and its execution shall 
not exceed one month.  
When an internee is awarded a further disciplinary punishment, a period of at least three days shall 
elapse between the execution of any two of the punishments, if the duration of one of these Is ten                 
days or more.  
A record of disciplinary punishments shall be maintained by the commandant of the place of 
internment and shall be open to inspection by representatives of the Protecting Power.  
Article  124 
Premise s for disciplinary punishments. —Internees shall not in any case be transferred to 
penitentiary establishments (prisons, penitentiaries, convict prisons, etc.) to undergo disciplinary 
punishment therein.  
The premises in which disciplinary punishments are undergone shall conform to sanita ry 
requirements; they shall in particular be provided with adequate bedding. Internees undergoing 
punishment shall be enabled to keep themselves in a state of cleanliness.  
Women internees undergoing disciplinary punishment shall be confined in separate qu arters from 
male internees and shall be under the immediate supervision of women.  
Article  125 
Essential safeguards. —Internees awarded disciplinary punishment shall be allowed to exercise and 
to stay in the open air at least two hours daily.  
They shall be allowed if they so request, to be present at the daily medical inspections. They shall 
receive the attention which their state of health requires and, if necessary, shall be removed to the 
infirmary of the place of internment or to a hospital.  
They shall have permission to read and write, likewise to send and receive letters. Parcels and 
remittances of money, however, may be withheld from them until the completion of their punishment; 
such consignments shall meanwhile be entrusted to the Interne e Committee, who will hand over to the 
infirmary the perishable goods contained in the parcels.  
No internee given a disciplinary punishment may be deprived of the benefit of the provisions of             
Articles 107 and 143 of the present Convention.   100 
 Article  126 
Provisions appl icable to judicial proceedings. —The provisions of Articles 71 to 76 inclusive shall 
apply, by analogy, to proceedings against internees who are in the national territory of the                   
Detaining Power.  
CHAPTER X  
TRANSFE RS OF INTERNEES  
Article  127 
Conditions. —The transfer of internees shall always be effected humanely. As a general rule, it shall 
be carried out by rail or other means of transport, and under conditions at least equal to those obtaining 
for the forces of the Detaining Power in their changes of st ation. If as an exceptional measure such 
removals have to be effected on foot, they may not take place unless the internees are in a fit state of 
health, and may not in any case expose them to excessive fatigue.  
The Detaining Power shall supply internees during transfer with drinking water and food sufficient in 
quantity, quality and variety to maintain them in good health, and also with the necessary clothing , 
adequate shelter and the necessary medical  attentions . The Detaining Power shall take all suitab le 
precautions to ensure their safety during transfer, and shall establish before their departure a complete list 
of all internees transferred.  
Sick, wounded or infirm internees and maternity cases shall not be transferred if the journey would be 
seriousl y detrimental to them, unless their safety imperatively so demands.  
If the combat zone draws close to a place of internment, the internees in the said place shall not be 
transferred unless their removal can be carried out in adequate conditions of safety,  or unless they are 
exposed to greater risks by remaining on the spot than by being transferred.  
When making decisions regarding the transfer of internees, the Detaining Power shall take their 
interests into account and, in particular, shall not do anythi ng to increase the difficulties of repatriating 
them or returning them to their own homes.  
Article  128 
Method. —In the event of transfer, internees shall be officially advised of their departure and of their 
new postal address. Such notification shall be g iven in time for them to pack their luggage and inform 
their next of kin.  
They shall be allowed to take with them their personal effects, and the correspondence and parcels 
which have arrived for them . The weight of such baggage may be limited if the cond itions of transfer so 
require, but in no case to less than twenty -five kilograms per Internee.  
Mail and parcels addressed to their former place of internment shall be forwarded to them                  
without delay.  
The commandant of the place of i ntern ment shall take, in agree ment with the Internee Committee, 
any measures needed to ensure the transport of the internees ’ community property and of the luggage the 
internees are unable to take with them in consequence of restrictions imposed by virtue of the                   
second paragraph.  
CHAPTER XI  
DEATHS  
Article  129 101 
 Wills. Death certificates. —The wills of internees shall be received for safe -keeping by the 
responsible authorities; and in the event of the death of an internee his will shall be transmitted without 
delay to a person whom he has previously designated.  
Deaths of internees shall be certified in every case  by a doctor, and a death certificate shall be made 
out, showing the causes of death and the conditions under which it occurred.  
An official record of the death, duly registered, shall be drawn up in accordance with the procedure 
relating thereto in force  in the territory where the place of internment is situated, and a duly certified copy 
of such record shall be transmitted without delay to the Protecting Power as well as to the Central Agency 
referred to in Article 140.  
Article  130 
Burial Cremation. —The detaining authorities shall ensure that internees who die while interned are 
honourably b uried, it possible according to  the rites of the religion to which they belonged and that their 
graves are respected, properly maintained, and marked in such a way th at they can always be recognized.  
Deceased internees shall be buried in individual graves unless unavoidable circumstances require the 
use of collective graves. Bodies may be cremated only for imperative reasons of hygiene, on account of 
the religion of the deceased or in accordance with h is expressed wish to this effect. In case of cremation, 
the fact shall be stated and the reasons given in the death certificate of the deceased. The ashes shall be 
retained for safe -keeping by the detain ing authorities and shall be transferred as soon as p ossible to the 
next of kin on their request.  
As soon as circumstances permit, and not later than the close of hostilities, the Detaining Power shall 
forward lists of graves of deceased internees to the Powers on whom deceased internees depended , 
through t he Information Bureaux provided for in Article 136. Such lists shall include all particulars 
necessary for the identification of the deceased internees, as well as the exact location of their graves.  
Article  131 
Internees killed or injured in special c ircumstances. —Every death or serious injury of an internee, 
caused or suspected to have been caused by a sentry, another internee or any other person, as well as any 
death the cause of which is unknown, shall be immediately followed by an official enquiry by the 
Detaining Power.  
A communication on this subject shall be sent immediately to the Protecting Power. The evidence of 
any witnesses shall be taken, and a report including such evidence shall be prepared and forwarded to the 
said Protecting Power.  
If the enquiry indicates the guilt of one or more persons, the Detaining Power shall take all neces sary 
steps to ensure the prose cution of the person or persons responsible.  
CHAPTER XII  
RELEASE, REPATRIATION AND ACCOMMODATION IN NEUTRAL COUNTRIES  
Article  132 
During hostilities or occupation. —Each interned person shall be released by the Detaining Power as 
soon as the reasons which necessitated his internment no longer exist.  
The Parties to the conflict shall, moreover, endeavour during the course of hostiliti es, to conclude 
agreements for the release, the repatriation, the return to places of residence or the accommodation in a 
neutral country of certain classes of internees, in particular children, pregnant women and mothers with 
infants and young children, w ounded and sick, and internees who have been detained for a long time.  
 Article  133  
After the close of hostilities. —Internment shall cease as soon as possible after the close of hostilities.  102 
 Internees in the territory of a Party to the conflict against w hom penal proceedings are pending for 
offences not exclusively subject to disciplinary penalties, may be detained until the close of such 
proceedings and, if circumstances require, until the completion of the penalty. The same shall apply to 
internees who have been previously sentenced to a punishment depriving them of liberty.  
By agreement between the Detaining Power and the Powers concerned, committees may be set up 
after the close of hostilities, or of the occupation of territories, to search for disper sed internees.  
Article  134 
Repatriation and ret urn to last place of residence. —The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour, 
upon the close of hostilities or occupation, to ensure the return of all internees to their last place of 
residence, or to facilitate their repatriation.  
Article  135 
Costs. —The Detaining Power shall bear the e xpense of returning released internees to the places 
where they were residing when interned, or, if it took them into custody while they were in transit or on 
the high seas, the cost of completing their journey or of their return to their point of departur e.  
Where a Detaining Power refuses permission to reside in its territory to a released, internee who 
previously had his permanent domicile therein, such Detaining Power shall pay the cost of the said 
internee’s repatriation. If, however, the internee elec ts to return to his country on his own responsibility or 
in obedience to the Government of the Power to which he owes allegiance, the Detaining Power need not 
pay the expenses of his journey beyond the point of his departure from its territory. The Detaini ng Power 
need not pay the cost of repatriation of an internee who was interned at his own request.  
If internees are transferred in accordance with Article 45, the transferring and receiving Powers shall 
agree on the portion of the above costs to be borne by each.  
The foregoing shall not prejudice such special agreements as may be concluded between Part ies to the 
conflict concerning the exchange and repatriation of their nation als in enemy hands.  
 SECTION V   
INFORMATION BUREAUX AND CENTRAL  AGENCY  
Article  136 
National Bureaux. —Upon the outbreak of a conflict and in all cases of occupation, each of the 
Parties to the conflict shall establish an official Information Bureau responsible for receiving and 
transmitting information in respect of the protected persons who are in its pow er.  
Each of the Parties to the conflict shall, within the shortest possible period. give its Bureau 
information of any measure taken by it concerning any protected persons who are kept in custody for 
more than two weeks, who are subjected to assigned resi dence or who are interned. It shall, furthermore, 
require its various departments concerned with such matters to provide the aforesaid Bureau promptly 
with information concerning all changes pertaining to these protected persons, as for example, transfers,  
releases, repatriations, escapes, admittances, to hospitals, births and deaths.  
Article  137 
Transmission of information. —Each national Bureau shall immediately forward information 
concerning protected persons by the most rapid means to the Powers of whom  the aforesaid persons are 
nationals, or to Powers in whose territory they resided, through the intermediary of the Protecting Powers 
and likewise through the Central Agency provided for in Article 140. The Bureaux shall also reply to all 
enquiries which m ay be received regarding protected persons.  
Information Bureaux shall transmit information concerning a protected person unless its transmission 
might be detrimental to the person concerned or to his or her relatives. Even in such a case, the 
information may not be withheld from the Central Agency which, upon being notified of the 
circumstances, will take the necessary precautions indicated in Article 140.  103 
 All communications in writing made by any Bureau shall be authenti cated by a signature or a seal.   
Article  138 
Particulars required. —The information received by the national Bureau and transmitted by it shall 
be of such a character as to make it possible to identify the protected person exactly and to advise his next 
of kin quickly. The information in r espect of each person shall include at least his surname, first names, 
place and date of birth, nationality, last residence and distinguishing characteristics, the first name of the 
father and the maiden name of the mother, the date, place and nature of th e action taken with regard to the 
individual, the address at which correspondence may be sent to him and the name and address of the 
person to be informed.  
Likewise, information regarding the state of health of internees who are seriously ill or seriously  
wounded shall be supplied regularly and if possible every week.  
Article 139 
Forwarding of person valuables. —Each national Information Bureau shall, furth ermore, be respon sible 
for collecting all personal valuables left by protected persons mentioned in Article 136, in particular  those 
who have been repatriat ed or released, or who have escaped or died; it shall forward the said valuables to 
those concerned, either direct, or, if necessary, through the Central Agency. Such articles shall be sent by 
the Bur eau in sealed packets which shall be accompanied by statements giving clear and full identity 
particulars of the per son to whom the articles be longed, and by a complete list of the contents of the 
parcel. Detailed records shall be maintained of the receipt  and despatch of all such valuables.  
Article  140 
Central Agency. —A Central Information Agency for protected persons, in particular for internees, 
shall be created i n a neutral country. The Inter national Committee of the Red Cross shall, if it deems 
necessary, propose to the Powers concerned the organization of such an Agency, which may be the same 
as that provided for in Article 123 of the Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of 
War of August 12, 1949.  
The function of the Agency s hall be to collect all information of the type set forth in Article 136 
which it may obtain through official or private channels and to transmit it as rapidly as possible to the 
countries of origin or of residence of the persons concerned, except in cases where such transmissions 
might be detrimental to the persons whom the said information concerns, or to their relatives. It shall 
receive from the Parties to the conflict all reasonable facilities for effecting such transmissions.  
The High Contracting Part ies, and in particular those whose nationals benefit by the services of the 
Central Agency, are requested to give the said A gency the financial aid it may require.  
The foregoing provisions shall i n no way be interpreted as res tricting the humanitarian act ivities of 
the International Committee of the Red Cross and of the relief societies described in Article 142.   
Article  141 
Exemption from charges. —The national Information Bureaux and the Central Information Agency shall 
enjoy free postage for all mail, l ikewise the exemptions provided for in Article 110, and furt her, so far as 
possible, exemp tion from telegraphic charges or, at least, greatly reduced rates  
PART IV  
EXECUTION OF THE CONVENTION  
SECTION I  
GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Article 142 
Relief soc ieties and other organizations. —Subject to the measures which the Detaining Powers may 
consider essential to ensure their security or to meet any other reasonable need, the representatives of 
religious organisations, relief societies, or any other organizations assis ting the protected persons,  shall 104 
 receive from these Powers, for themselves or their duly accredited agents, all facilities for visiting the 
protected persons, for distribut ing relief supplies and material from any source, intended for educational, 
recreat ional or religious purposes, or for assisting them in organizing their leisure time within the places 
of internment. Such societies or organizations may be constituted in the territory of the Detaining Power, 
or in any other country, or they may have an In ternational character.  
The Detaining Power may limit th e number of societies and orga nizations whose delegates are 
allowed to carry out their activities in its territory and under its supervision, on condition, however, that 
such limitation shall not hind er the supply of effective and adequate relief to all protected persons.  
The special position of the International Committee of the Red Cross in this field shall be recognized 
and respected at all times.  
Article 143 
Supervision. —Representatives or delegates of the Protecting Powers shall have permission to go to 
all places where protected persons are, particu larly to places of internment, detention and work.  
They shall have access to all prem ises occupied by protected per sons and  shall be able to interview 
the latter without witnesses, per sonally or through an interpreter.  
Such visits may not be prohibite d except for reasons of impera tive military necessity, and then only as 
an exceptional and temporary measure. Their duration an d frequency shall not be restricted.  
Such representatives and delegates shall have full liberty to select the places they wish to visit. The 
Detaining or Occupying Power, the Protecting Power and when occasion arises the Power of origin of the 
persons to be visited, may agree that compatriots of the internees shall be permitted to participate in                   
the visits.  
The delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross shall also enjoy the above 
prerogatives. The appointment of such deleg ates shall be submitted to the approval of the Power 
governing the territories where they will carry out their duties.  
Article  144 
Dissemination of the Convention. —The High Contacting Parties undertake, in time of peace as in 
time of war, to disseminate the text of the present Convention as widely as possible in their respective 
countries, and , in particular, to include the study thereof in their programmes  of military and, if possible, 
civil instruction, so that the principle thereof may become known to the entire population.  
Any civilian, military, police or other authorities, who in time of war assume responsibilities in 
respect of protected persons, must possess the text of the Convention and be specially instructed as to               
its provisions.  
Article  145 
Translations. Rules of application. —The High Contracting Parties shall communicate to one 
another through the Swiss Federal Council and, during hostilities, through the Protection Powers, the 
official translations of the present Convention, as well as the laws and regulations which they may adopt 
to ensure the application thereof.  
Article  146 
Penal sanctions I. General observations. —The High contracting Parties undertake to enact any 
legislation necessary to provide effective penal sanctions for  persons committing, or ordering to be 
committed, any of the grave breaches of the present Convention defined in the following Article.  
Each High Contracting Party shall be under the obligation to search for persons alleged to have 
committed, or do have, o rdered to be committed,  such grave breaches, and shall bring such persons, 
regardless of their nationality, before its own co urts. It may also, if it prefers, and in accordance with the 
provisions of its own legislation, hand such persons over for trial to  another High Contracting Party 
concerned, provided such High Contracting Party has made out a prima facie case.  105 
 Each High Contracting Party shall take measure necessary for the suppression of all acts contrary to 
the provisions of the present Convention other than the grave breaches defined in the following Article.  
In all circumstance, the accused persons shall benefit by safeguards of proper trial and defence which 
shall  not be less favourable than those provided by Article 105 and those following of th e Geneva 
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War of August 12, 1949.  
Article  147 
II. Grave breaches. —Grave breaches to which the preceding Article  relates shall be those involving 
any of the following acts, if committed against persons or property protected by the present Convention: 
wilful killing torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments, wilfully causing great 
suffering or serious injury to body or health, unlawful deportation or transfer or unlawful confinement of 
a protected person, compelling a protected person to serve in the forces of a hostile Power, or wilfully 
depriving a protected person of the rights of fair and regular trial prescribed in the present Convention, 
taking of hostages and extensive destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military 
necessity and carried out unlawfully and wantonly.  
Article  148 
III. Responsibilities of the Contracting Parties. —No High Contracting Party shall be allowed to 
absolve itself or any other High Contracting Party of any liability incurred by itself of by another                  
High Contracting Party in respect of breaches referred to in the preceding Article . 
Article  149 
Enquiry procedure. —At the request of a Party to the conflict, an enquiry shall be instituted, in a 
manner to be decided between the interested Parties concerning any alleged violation of the Convention.  
If agreement has not been reached concerning the procedure for the enquiry, the Parties should agree 
on the choice of an umpire who will decide upon the procedure to be followed.  
Once the violation has been established, the Parties to the conflict shall put an end to it and shall 
repress it with the leas t possible delay.  
SECTION  II 
FINAL PROVISIONS  
Article  150 
Languages. —The present Convention is established in English and in French. Both texts are         
equally authentic.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall arrange for official translations of the Convention to be made in the 
Russian and Spanish languages.  
Article  151 
Signature. —The present Convention, which bears the date of this day, is open to signature until 
February 12, 1950, in the name of the Powers represented at the Conference which opened at Geneva on 
April 21,1949.  
Article  152 
Ratifications. —The present Convention shall be ratified as soon as possible and the ratifications 
shall be deposited  at Berne.  
A record shall be drawn up of the deposit of each instrument of ratification and certified copies of this 
record shall be transmitted by the Swiss Federal Council to all the Powers in whose name the Convention 
has been signed, or whose accession has been notified.  
Article 153 
Coming into force. —The present Convention shall come into for ce six months after not less than 
two instruments of ratification have been deposited.  106 
 Thereafter, it shall come into force for each High Contracting Party six months after the deposit of the 
instrument of ratification.  
Article  154 
Relation with the Hague Conventions. —In the relations between the Powers who are bound by the 
Hague Conventions respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land, whether that of July 29, 1899,or 
that of October 18, 1907, and who are parties to the present Convention, this last Conv ention shall be 
supplementary to Sections II and III of the Regulations annexed to the above mentioned Conventions of 
the Hague.  
Article  155 
Accession. —From the date of its coming into force, it shall be open to any Power whose name the 
present Convention has not been signed, to accede to this Convention.  
Article  156 
Notification of accessions. —Accessions shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, 
and shall take effect six months after the date on which they are received.  
The Swiss Federal C ouncil shall communicate the accessions to all the Powers in whose name the 
Convention has been signed, or whose accession has been notified.  
Article  157 
Immediate  effect. —The situations provided for in Article s 2 and 3 shall give immediate effect to 
ratifications deposited and accessions notified by the parties to the conflict before or after the beginning 
of hostilities or occupation. The Swiss Federal Council shall communicate by the quickest method any 
ratifications or accessions received from the Parties to conflict.  
Article  158 
Denunciation. —Each of the High Contracting Parties shall be at liberty to denounce the                   
present Convention.  
The denunciation shall be notified in writing to the Swiss Federal Council, which shall transmit it to 
the Governments of all the High Contracting Parties.  
The denunciation shall take effect one year after the notification thereof has been made to the Swiss 
Federal Council. However, a denunciation of which notification has been made at a time when the  
denouncing Power is involved in a conflict shall not take effect until peace has been concluded, and until 
after operations connected with release, repatriation and re -establishment of the persons protected by the 
present Convention have been terminated.  
The denunciation shall have effect only in respect of the denouncing Power. It shall in no way impair 
the obligations which the Parties to the conflict shall remain bound to fulfill by virtue of the principles of 
the law of nations, as they result from the  usages established among civilized peoples, from the laws of 
humanity and the dictates of the public conscience.  
Article  159 
Registration with the United Nations. —The Swiss Federal Council shall register the present 
Convention with the Secretariat of the United Nations.  
The Swiss Federal Council shall also inform the Secretariat of the United Nations of all ratifications, 
accessions and denunciations received by it with respect to the present Convention.  
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, having deposited  their respective full powers, have signed the 
present Convention.  
DONE at Geneva this twelfth day of August 1949, in the English and French languages. The original 
shall be deposited in the Archives of the Swiss Confederation. The Swiss Federal Council shall transmit  
certified copies thereof to each of the signatory and acce ding States.  
--------------------------The Hindu Marriage (Validation of Proceedings) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE HINDU MARRIAGES (VALIDATION OF PROCEEDINGS) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1960  
[6th May, 1960 .] 
An Act to validate certain proceedings under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Hindu Marriage s (Validation of 
Proceedings) Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Valida tion of proceedings of certain c ourts under Act 25 of 1955 .—(1) All proceedings taken 
and decrees and orders passed before the commence ment of this Act by any of the c ourts referred             
to in sub -section ( 2), exercising or purporting to exercise jurisdiction under  the Hindu Marriage                    
Act, 1955  (25 of  1955) , shall, notwithstanding any ju dgment, decree or order of any c ourt, be deemed to 
be as good and val id in law as if the c ourt exercising or purporting to exercis e such jurisdiction had been a 
district court within the meaning of the said Act.  
(2) The courts referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the following, namely: — 
The court of an a dditional judge, additional district judge, j oint district judge, a ssistant district 
judge, a ssistant judge and any other court, by whatever name called, not being lower in rank than the 
court of a subordinate judge.  
 
 
--------------------------The International Development Association (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (STATUS, IMMUNITIES  
AND  PRIVILEGES) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1960  
[9th September, 1960.]  
An Act to implement the international agreement for the establishment and operation of the 
International Development Association in so far as it relates to the status, immunities and 
privileges of that Association, and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the International 
Development Association (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notificatio n in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Agreement ” means the Agreement for the establishment and operation of the international 
body known as the International Development Association;  
(b) “Association ” means the International Development Association established under the 
Agreement.  
3. Conferment of status and certain immunities and privileges on the Association and 
conferment of certain immunities and privileges on its officers and employees. —(1) Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any other law, the provisions of Article VIII of the Agreement set 
out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India:  
Provided that nothing in section 9 thereof shall be construed as— 
(a) entitling the Association to import into India goods free of any duty of customs without any 
restriction on their subsequent sale therein; or  
(b) conferring on the Association any exemption from duties or taxes which form part  of the price 
of goods  sold; or  
(c) conferring on the Association any exemption from duties or taxes which are in fact no more 
than charges for services rendered.  
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend 
the Schedule in c onformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the 
Agreement set out therein.  
4. Power to make rules. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
5. Notifications under section 3 and rules under section 4 to be placed before           
Parliament. —Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 and every rule made under 
section 4 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued or made be fore each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 2[in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session  immediately following the session or the 
successive se ssions aforesaid] both Houses agree for making any modification in the notification, or as 
the case may be, in the rule, or both Houses agree that the notification or rule should not be issued or 
made, the notification or rule shall thereafter have effect o nly in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that notification or rule.  
                                                           
1. 15th October, 1960, vide notification No. S.O. 2474A, dated 11th October, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 20  of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule, for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  2 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
Provisions of the agreement which shall have force of law  
ARTICLE VIII  
STATUS , IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES  
Section 1.—Purposes of Article . 
To enable the Association to fu lfil the functions with which  it is entrusted, the status, immunities 
and privileges provided in this Article shall be accorded to the Association in the territories of each 
member.  
Section 2.—Status of the Association.  
The Association shall possess full juridical personality and, in particular, the capacity: — 
(i) to contract;  
(ii) to acqu ire and dispose of immovable and movable property;  
(iii) to institute legal proceedings.  
Section 3.—Position of the Association with regard to Judicial Process.  
Actions may be brought against the Association only in a court of competent jurisdiction in the  
territories of a member in which the Association has an office, has appointed an agent for the purpose 
of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed securities . No actions shall, 
however, be brought by members or persons acting fo r or deriving claims from members.  The 
property and a ssets of the Association shall, wheresoever located and by whomsoever held, be 
immune from all forms of seizure, attachment or execution be fore the delivery of final judg ment 
against the Association.  
Section 4.—Immunity of Assets from Seizure.  
Property and assets of the Association, wherever located and by whomsoever held, shall be 
immune from search, requisition, confiscation, expropriation or any other form of seizure by 
executive or legislative action.  
Section 5.—Immunity of Archives.  
The archives of the Association shall be inviolable.  
Section  6.—Freedom of Assets from Restrictions.  
To the extent necessary to carry out the operations provided for in this Agreement and subject to 
the provisions of th is Agreement, all property and assets of the Association shall be free from 
restrictions , regulations , controls and moratoria of any nature.  
Section 7.—Privilege  for Communication s. 
The official communications of the Association shall be accorded by each member the same 
treatment that it accords to the official communications of other members.  
Section 8.—Immunities and Privileges of Officers and Employees.  
All Governors, Executive Directors, Alternates, Officers and employees of the Association,  
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts performed by them in their official 
capacity except when the Association waives this immunity;  
  3 
 (ii) not being local nationals, shall be accorded the same immunities from immigration 
restrictions, alien re gistration requirements and national service obligations and the same facilities 
as regard exchange restrictions as are accorded by members to the representatives, officials, and 
employees of comparable rank of other members;  
(iii) shall be granted the sam e treatment in respect of travelling facilities as is accorded by 
members to representatives, officials and employees of comparable rank of other members.  
Section 9.—Immunities from Taxation.  
(a) The Association, its assets, property, income and transactions authori zed by this Agreement, 
shall be immune from all taxation and from all customs duties.  The Association shall also be immune 
from liability for the collection or payment of any tax or duty.  
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of s alaries and emoluments paid by the Association to 
Executive Directors, Alternates, officials or employees of the Association who are not local citizens, 
local subjects, or other local nationals.  
(c) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation  or security issued by the Association 
(including any dividend or interest thereon ) by whomsoever  held,  
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is issued by the 
Association; or  
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the place or currency in which it is 
issued, made payable or paid, or the location of any office or place of business maintained by the 
Association.  
(d) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obli gation or security guaranteed by the 
Association (including any dividend or interest thereon) by whomsoever held,  
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security solely because it is guaranteed by 
the Association; or  
(ii) if the sole jurisdicti onal basis for such taxation is the location of any office or place of 
business maintained by the Association.  
 
--------------------------The Mahendra Partab Singh Estates (Repeal) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE MAHENDRA PARTAB SINGH ESTATES (REPEAL) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1960  
[18th December, 1960.]  
An Act to repaeal the Mahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923 and to provide for matters 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of  the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Mahendra Partab Singh Estates (Repeal) Act, 1960.  
2. Repeal of Act 24 of 1923. —The M ahendra Partab Singh Estates Act, 1923, is hereby repealed.  
3. Certain conditions of Sanad to be of no effect. —On and from th e commenceme nt of this Act, all 
conditions and provisions attached to the Sanad  granted to Prem Partab Singh — 
(a) prohibiting his heirs to render assistance or support to Mahendra Partab Singh either 
pecuniarily or otherwi se in any manner whatsoever, or  
(b) in so far as they prohibit his heirs to alienate any property referred to in the Sanad  to 
Mahendra Partab Singh without the sanction of the Government,  
shall cease to have any effect.  
Explanation. —In this sect ion, “Sanad ” means the Sanad , dated the 7 th day of September, 1924 
granted to Prem Parta b Singh in pursuance of the Act repealed by section 2.  
--------------------------The Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
                                                                                                     
THE MANIPUR LAND REVENUE AND LAND REFORMS  ACT, 196 0                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
PART I  
CHAPTER  I.—PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
PART II  
CHAPTER  II.—REVENUE DIVISIONS, REVENUE OFFICERS AND THEIR APPOINTMENT  
3. Power to create , alter or abolish districts, sub -divisions, etc.  
4. Appointment of revenue officers.  
5. Deputy Commissioner and certain other revenue officers.  
6. Settlement officers.  
7. Subordinat ion of revenue officers.  
8. Combination of offices.  
9. Notification of appointment s. 
10. Seals.  
CHAPTER  III.—LAND AND LAND REVENUE  
11. Title of Government to lands, etc.  
12. Right to trees, forest s, etc.  
13. Assignment of land for special purposes.  
14. Allotment of land.  
15. Unauthorised occupation of land.  
16. Liability of land to land revenue.  
17. Alluvial land s. 
18. Land revenue in case of diluvion.  
19. Assessment of land to land revenue.  
20. Diversion of land.  
21. Remission or suspension of revenue on failure of crops.  
22. Responsibility for payment of land revenue.  
23. R eceipt for land revenue.  
CHAPTER  IV.—SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT OF LAND REVENUE  
24. Definition s of “revenue survey”, “settlement” and “term of settlement”.  
25. Inquiry in to profits of agriculture.  
26. Revenue survey.  
27. Power to require assistance from landholders.  2 
 SECTION S 
28. Survey numbers and villages.  
29. Division of survey numbers into sub -division s.  
30. Determination of revenue -rates.  
31. Preparation of statistical and fiscal records.  
32. Revenue -rates how determined.  
33. Publication of table of  revenue -rates. 
34. Confirmation of the table of revenue -rates.  
35. Rates of revenue to form part of settlement register.  
36. Introduction of revenue -rates.  
37. Dur ation  of revenue -rates.  
38. Assessment on holdings.  
39. Additional assessment for water adva ntages.  
40. Continuance of survey operations and rates in force at commencement of Act. 
41. Power of deputy commissioner to correct errors, etc.  
CHAPTER  V.—LAND RECORDS  
42. Preparation of record of rights.  
43. Publication of the record of rights.  
44. Jurisdiction of civil courts.  
45. Correction of bona fide  mistake in register.  
46. Register of mutation s. 
47. Penalty for neglect to furnish information.  
48. Assistance in preparation of maps.  
49. Certified copies.  
50. Maps and other records open to inspection.  
51. Power to transfer duty of maintaining maps and records to settlement officer.  
CHAPTER  VI.—BOUNDRARIES AND BOUNDARY MARKS  
52. Determination of village boundaries.  
53. Effect to settlement of boundary.  
54. Construction and repair of boundary marks.  
55. Description of boundary marks.  
56. Responsibility for maintaining boundary marks.  
57. Deputy commissioner to have charge of boundary marks.  
58. Penalty for injuring boundary marks.  
CHAPTER  VII.—REALISATION OF LAND REVENE AND OTHER PUBLIC DEMANDS  
59. Land revenue to be first charge.  
60. Payment of land revenue.  
61. Arrear of land revenue.  3 
 SECTION S 
62. Recovery of arrears.  
63. Notice of demand.  
64. Distraint and sale of movable property.  
65. Sale of immovable property.  
66. Notice of sale.  
67. Sale  to be by auction.  
68. Prohibition to bid at auction.  
69. Sale of perishables.  
70. Sale not to be excessive.  
71. Deposit by purchaser of immovable property.  
72. Failure to make deposit.  
73. Setting aside sale.  
74. Confirmation of sale.  
75. Refunds.  
76. Cer tificate of purchase . 
77. Application of proceeds of sale.  
78. Liability of certified purchaser.  
79. Precautionary measures in certain cases.  
80. Recovery of other public demands.  
CHAPTER  VIII. —PROCEDURE OF REVENUE OFFICERS: APPEALS  AND REVISIONS  
81. Revenue officers to be courts.  
82. Place of hearing.  
83. Power to enter upon and survey land.  
84. Power to transfer case s. 
85. Power to take evidence, summon witness es, etc.  
86. Compelling attendance of witnesses.  
87. Hearing in absence of party.  
88. Adjo urnment of hearing.  
89. Power to order payment of costs.  
90. Use of force.  
91. Appearance s before and applications to revenue officers.  
92. Correction of error or omission.  
93. Appeals.  
94. Limitation of appeals.  
95. Revision.  
96. Review of orders.  4 
 SECTION S 
97. Stay of execution of orders.  
98. Power to make rules.  
PART III  
CHAPTER  IX.—RIGHTS OF LANDOWNERS  
99. Accrual of rights of landowners.  
100. Rights of landowners.  
101. Reservation of land for personal cultivation.  
102. Procedure for reservation of land.  
103. “Permissible limit” defined.  
104. Land deemed to be reserved for personal cultivation in certain cases.  
105. Non -resumable land.  
106. Right to lease.  
107. Land left uncultivated.  
108. Relinquishment.  
CHAPTER  X.—RIGHTS OF TENANTS  
109. Interest of tenants.  
110. Right to create a mortgage or charge.  
111. Right to make improvement s. 
112. Maximum rent.  
113. Payment of rent.  
114. Reasonable rent.  
115. Commutation of rent payable in kind.  
116. Receipt for payment of rent.  
117. Refund of rent recovered in  excess.  
118. Suspension or remission of rent.  
119. Eviction of tenant.  
120. Restoration of possession of land to tenant.  
121. Certain lands to be non -resumable land of tenant . 
122. Compensation for improvement s.  
123. Tenant may remove building s, works, e tc., not deemed improvements.  
124. Restoration of possession of land in certain other cases.  
125. Relief against termination of tenancy for act of waste.  
126. Surrender of land by tenant.  
127. Transfer of ownership of land to tenant.  
128. Compensation to  landowner.  
129. Payment of compensation to landowner . 
130. Tenant to pay compensation amount.  5 
 SECTION S 
131. Issue of certificate to tenants.  
132. First option to purchase.  
133. Power to make rules.  
PART IV  
CHAPTER  XI.—CEILING ON LAND HOLDINGS  
134. Exemption.  
135. Definitions.  
136. Ceiling on holdings.  
137. Submission of returns.  
138. Collection of information through other agency.  
139. Procedure for determination of excess land.  
140. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers.  
141. Exc ess land to vest in Government.  
142. Publication of the final list and consequences thereof.  
143. Compensation.  
144. Manner of payment of compensation.  
145. Limit of future acquisition of load.  
146. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases . 
147. Power of deputy commissioner to take possession of excess land.  
148. Offences and penalties.  
149. Finality of orders.  
150. Power to exempt, etc.  
CHAPTER  XII.—PREVENTION OF FRAGMENTATION  
151. Definitions.  
152. Restriction s on transfer, etc.  
153. Partition of holding.  
154. Transfers in contravention of this Chapter.  
155. Penalty.  
156. Power to make rules.  
PART V  
CHAPTER  XIII. —GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  
157. Recovery of amount s due as an arrear of and revenue.  
158. Special provision regarding Scheduled Tribe s. 
159. Jurisdiction of civil courts excluded.  
160. Act to over -ride contract and other laws.  
161. Court -fees. 6 
 SECTION S 
162. Village officers to be public servants.  
163. Power to exempt . 
164. General provision as to penalties.  
165. Protection of action taken in good fa ith. 
166. Delegation of powers.  
167. Power to remove difficulties.  
168. General power to make rules.  
169. Laying of rules before Parliament . 
170. Repeal and savings.  
 THE SCHEDULE . 
  7 
 THE MANIPUR LAND REVENUE AND LAND REFORMS ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1960  
[13th September 1960 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to land revenue in the Union territory  of 
Manipur and to provide for c ertain measures of land reform.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
CHAPTER  I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Manipur Land Revenue 
and Land Reforms Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory  of Manipur  except the hill areas thereof . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator  may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different areas and  for different provisions of 
this Act. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Manipur;  
(b) “agriculture ” includes horticulture, the raising of annual or periodical crops or garden 
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding and grazing and pisciculture;  
(c) “basic holding ” means la nd used for agricultural purposes which is equal to 2.5 acres  in area;  
(d) “commencement of this Act ”, in relation to any provision, means the date specified in respect 
of that provision in a notification under sub -section ( 3) of section 1;  
(e) “competent authority” , in relation to any provision , means any officer appointed by the 
Administrator  to be the competent authority for the purposes of that provision;  
(f) “deputy commissioner ” means the deputy commissioner of the district and includes any officer 
appointed by the Administrator  to exercise and perform all or any of the powers and functions of a 
deputy commissioner under this Act;  
(g) “family” , except in Chapter XI, means, in relation to a person, the wife or husband of such 
person, his children, grand -children, parents and brothers,  and in the case of a joint Hindu family, any 
member of such family;  
(h) “family holding ” means land used for agricultur al purpose s which is equal to 7.5 acres  in area;  
(i) “Government”  means the Central  Government;  
(j) “hill areas ” means such areas in the hill tracts of the Union territory  of Manipur as the 
Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be hill areas;  
(k) “holding”  means a parcel of land separately assessed to land revenue;  
(l) “improvement ”, in relation to any land, means any work which material ly adds to the value of 
the land and which is suitable to the land and consistent with the character thereof, and includes — 
(i) the construction of tanks, wells , water channels and other works for the storage, supply 
and distribution of water for agricultural purposes or for the use of man and cattle employed in 
agriculture;  
(ii) the construction of works for the drainage of land or for the protection of land from floods 
or from erosion or from other damage by water;  
(iii) the preparation of land  for irrigation;  8 
 (iv) the conversion of one -crop into two -crop land;  
(v) the reclaiming, c learing, enclosing, leve lling or terracing of land used for agricultural 
purposes;  
(vi) the erection on land or in the immediate vicinity thereof otherwise than on the village 
site, of a building or house for the occupation of the tenant, his family and servants or of a cattle 
shed, a storehouse or other construction for agricultural purposes or of any buildin g required for 
the convenient or  profitable use or occupation of the land; and  
(vii) the renewal or reconstruction of any of the foregoing works or such alterations therein or 
additions thereto as are not of the nature of ordinary repairs;  
(m) “land owner” , in relation to any land, means a person who acquires rights of ownership in 
respect of such land under sub -section ( 1) of section 99 and includes the successors -in-interest of such 
person;  
(n) “minor”  means a person who is deemed not to have attained majority under the Indian 
Majority Act, 1875  (9 of 1875) ; 
(o) “Official Gazette ” means the Manipur Gazette;  
(p) “pay”, “payable ”, and “payment ”, used w ith reference to rent, include  “deliver ”, “deliverable ” 
and “ delivery ”; 
(q) “person under disability ” means — 
(i) a widow;  
(ii) a minor;  
(iii) a woman who is unmarried or who, if married, is divorced or judicially separated from 
her husband or whose husband  is a person falling under ( iv) or ( v); 
(iv) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union;  
(v) a person incapable of cultivation by reason of physical or mental disability;  
(r) “personal cultivation ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions mea ns 
cultivation by a person on his own account — 
(i) by his own labour, or  
(ii) by the labour of any member of his family, or  
(iii) by servant s or by hired labour on wages payable in cash or in kind but not as a share of 
produce under his personal supervisio n or the personal supervision  of any member of his family;  
Explanation I.—Land shall not be deemed to be cultivated under the personal supervision of a 
person unless such person or member resides in the village in which the land is situated or in a nearby 
village, within a distance to be prescribed, during the major part of the agricultural season;  
Explanation II.—In the case of a person under disability, supervision by a paid employee on 
behalf of such person shall be deemed to be personal supervision;  
(s) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “public purpose ” includes a purpose connected with settlement of land with cultivators, tenant s 
ejected as a result of resumption, landless agricultural workers or co-operative farming societ ies; 
(u) “rent”  means whatever is lawfully payable, in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in 
kind, whether as a fixed quantity of produce or as a share of the produce, on account of the use or 
occupation of land or on account of any right in land  but shall not include land revenue;  
(v) “tenant ” means a person who cultivates or holds the land of another person under an 
agreement, express or implied, on condition of paying therefor rent in cash or in kind or delivering a 
share of the produce and includes a person who cultivates or holds land of an other person on payment 
of “lousal” or under the system generally known as ‘bhag’, ‘adhi’ or ‘barga’; 9 
 (w) “village ” means any tract of land which before the commencement of this Act was recogni sed 
as or was declared to be a village under any law for the ti me being in force or which may after such 
commencement be recogni sed as a village at any settlement or which the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a village;  
(x) “year” means the agricultural year commencing on such date as the Administrator  may, in the 
case of any specified area, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
PART II  
CHAPTER  II.—REVENUE DIVISIONS, REVENUE OFFICERS AND THEIR APPOINTMENT  
3. Power to create , alter or abolish districts, sub -divisions, etc. —(1) The Administrator  may, with 
the previous concurrence of the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, divide the territories 
to which this Act extends into one or more districts, and may similarly divide any district into                 
sub-divisions and tehsils, and may alter the limits of, or abolish , any district , sub-division or tehsi l. 
(2) The districts, sub -divisions and tehsils exiting at the commencement of this Act shall continue 
respectively to be the districts, sub -divisions and tehsils under this Act unless otherwise provided under     
sub-section  (1). 
4. Appointment of revenue  officers .—The Government or such officer as may be authori sed by the 
Government in this behalf, may appoint the following classes of revenue officers, namely :— 
(a) deputy commissioner;  
(b) additional deputy commissioner;  
(c) director  of settlement and land records;  
(d) sub-divisional officers;  
(e) extra -assistant commissioner s; 
(f) survey and settlement officers;  
(g) assistant survey and settlement officers;  
(h) sub-deputy collector s; 
(i) revenue inspectors;  
(j) amins;  
(k) such  other village officers and servants as may be appointed by rules  made under this Act.  
5. Deputy Commissioner and certain other revenue officers .—(1) Each district shall be placed 
under the charge of a deputy commissioner who shall be in charge of the reve nue administration of the 
district and exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the deputy commissioner under this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and shall exercise so far as is consistent therewith such other 
powers of superintend ence and control within the district and over the officers subordinate to him as may 
from time to time be prescribed.  
(2) The additional deputy commissioner shall exercise all such powers and perform all such duties of 
the deputy commissioner or other reve nue officer as the Administrator  may specify by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
(3) Each sub -division shall be placed under the charge of a sub -divisional officer.  
(4) The extra -assistant commissioner s shall exercise all such powers and perform all such duties of 
the deputy commissioner or other revenue officer as the Administrator  may specify by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
(5) Each tehsil shall be placed under the charge of a sub -deputy colle ctor. 
  10 
 (6) The duties and powers of the sub -divisional officers , the sub -deputy collectors and other revenue 
officers  shall be such as may be imposed or conferred on them by or under this Act or any other law in 
force for the time being or any general or special order of the Administrator  published in the Official 
Gazette.  
6. Settlement officers .—The officers specified in terms ( c), (f) and ( g) of section 4 shall have power 
to take cognizance of all matters connected with the survey of land and the settlement of revenue rates 
and the preparation and maintenance of land records and other registers and shall exercise all such powers 
and perform all such powers and perform all such duties as may be prescribed by any general or special 
order of the Administrator  published in the Official Gazette.  
7. Subordinat ion of revenue officers .—All revenue officers shall be subordinate to the 
Administrator and all revenue officers in the district or a sub -division shall be subordinate to  the deputy 
commissioner or the sub-divisional officer, as the case may be . 
8. Combination of offices .—It shall be lawful for the Administrator  to appoint one and the same 
person t o any two or more of the offices provided for in this Chapter, to make any a ppointment by virtue 
of office and also to confer on any officer of the Government  all or any of the powers and duties of any of 
the revenue officers including the deputy commissioner.  
9. Notification of appointment s.—All appointments made under this Chapt er except appointments 
of revenue inspectors  and village acco untants  and other village officers and servants shall be notified in 
the Official Gazette.  
10. Seals .—The Administrator  shall, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify  
the revenue officers who shall use a seal and also the size and description of the seal which each such 
officer shall use.  
CHAPTER  III.—LAND AND LAND REVENUE  
11. Title of Government to lands, etc. —(1) All lands, public roads, lanes and paths and bridges, 
ditches, dikes and fences on o  beside  the same, the beds of rivers, streams, nallahs,  lakes and tanks , and 
all canals and water courses, and all standing and flowing water , and all rights in or over the same or 
appertaining thereto, which are not the property of any person , are and are hereby declared to be the 
property of the Government.  
(2) Unless it is otherwise expressly provided in the terms of a grant made by the Gover nment, the 
right to mines, minerals and  mineral  products shall vest in the Government, and it shall have all the 
powers necessary for the proper enjoyment of such rights.  
(3) Where any property or any right in or over any property is claimed by or on behal f of the 
Government or by any person as against the Government and the claim is disputed, such dispute shall be 
decided by the deputy commissioner whose order shall subject to the provisions of the Act, be final.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made u nder sub -section ( 3) or in appeal or revision therefrom 
may institute a civil suit to contest the order within a period of six months from the date of such order, 
and the decision of the civil court shall be binding on the parties.  
12. Right to trees, fore sts, etc.—(1) The right to all trees, ju ngles or other natural products growing 
on land set apart for forest reserves and to all trees, brus h wood, jungle or other natural product , wherever 
growing, except in so far as the same may be the property of any person, vests in the Government, and 
such trees, brush wood, jungle or other natural product shall be preserved or disposed of in such manner 
as may be prescribed, keeping in view th e interests of the people in the area with regard to the user of the 
natural products.  
(2) All road-side trees which have been planted and reared by or under the orders or at the expense of 
the Government and all trees which have been planted and reared at  the expense of local authorities by the 
side of any road belonging to the Government vest in the Government.  
13. Assignment of land for special purposes .—Subject to rules made in this behalf under this Act, 
the deputy commissioner may set apart land belon ging to the Government for pasturage for the village 
cattle, for forest reserves or for any other purpose.  11 
 14. Allotment of land. —(1) The deputy commissioner may allot land belonging to the Government 
for agricultural purposes or for construction of dwelling houses, in accordance with such rules as may be 
made in this behalf under this Act; and such rules may provide for allotment of land to persons evicted 
under section 15.  
(2) The Administrator shall have power — 
(a) to allot any such land for the pu rpose of an industry or for any purpose of public utility on 
such conditions as may be prescribed, or  
(b) to entrust the management of any such land or any rights therein to the Gram Panchayat of the 
village established under any law for the time being in force.  
15. Unauthorised occupation of land .—(1) Any person who occupies or continues to occupy any 
land belonging to Government without lawful authority shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be 
summarily evicted therefrom by the competent authority and  any building or other construction erected or 
anything deposited on such land, if not removed within such reasonable time as such authority may from 
time to time fix for the purpose, shall be liable to be forfeited to the Government and to be disposed of in 
such manner as the competent authority may direct:  
Provided that the competent authority may, in lieu of ordering the forfeiture of any such building or 
other construction, order the demolition of the whole or any part thereof.  
(2) Such trespasser shall  also be liable by way of penalty to pay a sum which may extend to six times 
the annual assessment on such land as may be specified by the competent authority and such sum shall be 
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(3) Upon payme nt of the penalty referred to in sub -section ( 2), the trespasser shall have the right of 
tending, gathering and removing any ungathered crops.  
16. Liability of land to land revenue .—(1) All lands, to whatever purpose applied, are liable to 
payment of land revenue to the Government.  
(2) The Administrator  may exempt any land from the liability to such payment by means of a special 
grant or contract or in accordance with any law for the time being in force or the rules made under this 
Act. 
17. Alluvial land s.—All alluvial lands, newly formed  islands, or abandoned river be ds, which vest 
under any law for the time being in force in any h older of land shall be subject in  respect of liability to 
land revenue to the same privileges, conditions and restrictions as ar e applicable to the original holding by 
virtue of which such lands, islands or river beds vest in the said holder, but no revenue shall be leviable in 
respect of any such lands , islands or river beds unless the area of the same exceeds one acre . 
18. Land revenue in case of diluvion .—Every holder of land paying land revenue in respect thereof 
shall entitled, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, to a decrease of assessment if any 
portion thereof, not being less than one acre in extent, i s lost by diluvion.  
19. Assessment of land to land revenue .—(1) The assessment of land revenue on any land shall be 
made or deemed to have been made with respect to the use of the land — 
(a) for purposes of agriculture,  
(b) for industrial or commercial purp oses,  
(c) as sites for dwelling houses, and  
(d) for any other purpose.  
(2) Where land assessed for use for any one purpose is diverted to any other purpose, the land revenue 
payable upon such land shall, notwithstanding that the term for which the assessme nt may have been 
fixed has not expired, be liable to be altered and assessed at a different rate in accordance with rules made 
under this Act.  
  12 
 20. Diversion of land .—(1) If any person holding land for any purpose wishes to divert such land or 
any part thereof to any other purpose except agriculture, he shall apply for permission to the competent 
authority which may, subject to the provisions of this section and to the rules made under this Act, refuse 
permission or grant it on such conditions as it may think fit.  
(2) Permission to divert may be refused by the competent authority only on the ground that the 
diversion is likely to cause a public nuisance or that it is not in the interest of the general public or that the 
holder is unable or unwilling to co mply with the conditions that may be imposed under sub -section  (3). 
(3) Conditions may be imposed on diversion for the following objects and no others, namely, in order 
to secure the public health, safety and convenience, and in the case of land which is t o be used as building 
sites, in order to secure, in addition, that the dimensions, arrangement and accessibility of the sites are 
adequate for the health and convenience of occupiers or are suitable to the locality.  
(4) If any land has been diverted withou t permission by the holder or by any other person with or 
without the consent of the holder, the competent authority, on receiving information thereof, may impose 
on the person responsible for the diversion a penalty not exceeding one hundred rupees, and m ay proceed 
in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) as if an application for permission to divert had been 
made.  
(5) If any land has been diverted in contravention of an order passed or of a condition imposed under 
any of the foregoing sub -sections, the competent authority may serve a notice on the person responsible 
for such contravention, directing him, within a reasonable period to be stated in the notice, to use the land 
for its original purpose or to observe the condition; and such notice m ay require such person to remove 
any structure, to fill up any excavation, or to take such other steps as may be required in order that the 
land may be used for its original purpose, or that the condition may be satisfied. The competent authority 
may also impose on such person a penalty not exceeding one hundred rupees for such contravention, and 
a further penalty not exceeding four rupees for each day during which such contravention continues.  
Explanation. —“Diversion ” in this section means using land assessed to one purpose for any other 
purpose, but using land for the purpose of agriculture where it is assessed with reference to any other 
purpose shall not be deemed to be diversion.  
21. Remission or suspension of reve nue on failure of crops .—The Administ rator may, in 
accordance with the rules made in this behalf under this Act, grant a remission or suspension of land 
revenue in year s in which crops have failed in any area.  
22. Responsibility for payment of land revenue .—(1) The following persons shall be primarily 
liable for the payment of land revenue assessed on land, namely: — 
(a) the person to whom the land belongs; and  
(b) the  tenant or any other person in possession of the land, provided that such tenant or other 
person shall be entitled to credit from the owner of the land , for the amount paid by him.  
(2) Where there are two or more persons liable to pay land revenue under sub-section ( 1), all of them 
shall be jointly and severally liable for its payment.  
23. Receipt for land revenue .—Every revenue officer receiving  payment of land revenue shall, at 
the time when such payment is received  by him , give a written receipt for th e same.  
CHAPTER  IV.—SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT OF LAND REVENUE  
24. Definition s of ―revenue survey ‖, ―settlement ‖ and ―term of settlement ‖.—The operation s 
carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter in order to determine or revise the land 
revenue payable on lands in any local area called a “revenue survey ”, the results of the operations are 
called a “settlement ” and the period during whic h such results ar e to be in force is called the “ term of 
settlement ”. 
25. Inquiry in to profits of agriculture .—(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act, the Administrator  shall take steps to institute and shall cause to be constantly maintained, in 
accordance wit h rules made under this Act, an  inquiry into the profits of agriculture and into the value of 
land used for agricultural and non -agricultural purposes.  13 
 (2) For the purpose of determining the profits of agriculture, the followin g matters shall be taken into 
account in estimating the cost of cultivation, namely: — 
(a) the depreciation of stock and buildings;  
(b) the money equivalent of the labour and superviso n by the cultivator and his family;  
(c) all other expenses usually incurr ed in the cultivation of the land which is under inquiry; and  
(d) interest on the cost of buildings and stock, on all expenditure for seed and manure and on the 
cost of agricultural operation s paid for in cash.  
26. Revenue survey .—Whenever the Administrator  thinks it expedient so to do, he may, with the 
approval of the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct the revenue survey of any local 
area with a view to the settlement of the land revenue and to the preparation of a reco rd of rights 
connected therewith or the revision of any existing settlement or record of rights.  
27. Power to require assistance from landholders .—A survey officer deputed to conduct or take 
part in any revenue survey may, by special order or by general no tice to be published in the prescribed 
manner, require the attendance of holders of lands to assist in the measurement or classification of the 
lands to which the revenue survey extends and, when hired labour is employed for purpose s incidental to 
the reve nue survey, may assess and apportion the cost thereof on the lands surveyed, for collection as land 
revenue due on such lands.  
28. Survey numbers and villages .—Subject to the rules made in this behalf under t his Act, the 
survey officer may — 
(a) divide  the lands to which the revenue survey extends into survey numbers and group the 
survey numbers into villages; and  
(b) recogni se the existing survey numbers, reconstitute them or form new survey numbers.  
29. Division of survey numbers into sub -division s.—The survey officer may sub -divide survey 
numbers into as many sub -divisions as may be required in the manner prescribed.  
30. Determination of revenue -rates .—The Administrator  may at any time direct the determination 
or the revision of the revenue -rates for  all lands in any area of which a revenue survey has been made.  
31. Preparation of statistical and fiscal records .—It shall be t he duty of the survey officer or  the 
settlement officer on the occasion of making or revising a settlement of land revenue to pr epare a register 
to be called the “settlement register”, showing the area and assessment of each survey number, with any 
other particulars that may be prescribed, and other records in accordance with such orders as may from 
time to time be made in this behalf by the Administrator . 
32. Revenue -rates how determined .—For the pur pose of determining the revenue -rates, the 
settlement officer may divide any area into units and in forming such units, he shall have regard to the 
physical features, the agricu ltural and economic conditions and trade facilities and communications; and 
shall then determine the revenue -rates for different classes of lands in each unit in the manner and 
according to the principles prescribed and in particular, in the case of agricu ltural land, to the profits of 
agriculture, to the consideration paid for leases, to the sale prices of land and to the principal monies on 
mortgages and in the case of non -agricultural land, to the value of the land for the purpose for which it is 
held.  
33. Publication of table of revenue -rates.—(1) The settlement officer shall prepare a table of 
revenue rates in the prescribed form and publish it in the prescribed manner for the prescribed period.  
(2) Any person objecting to an y entry in the table of reve nue-rates may present a petition in writing to 
the settlement officer within the prescribed period and the settlement officer shall consider such 
objection s after giving a hearing to the objector.  
(3) The settlement officer sh all submit the table of revenue -rates to the Administrator  together with a 
summary of objections, if any, his decisions on such objections and a statement of the grounds in support 
of the proposals.  14 
 34. Confirmation of the table of revenue -rates .—(1) The Administrator  may confirm  the table of 
revenue -rates submitted to him by the settlement officer  with such modification s, if any, as he may 
consider necessary.  
(2) The table of revenue -rates confirmed under sub -section ( 1) shall be finally published in the 
Official Gazette.  
35. Rates of revenue to form part of settlement register .—The table of revenue -rates published 
under section 34 shall be incorporated in and form part of the settlement register of the village.  
36. Introduction of revenue -rates .—When the revenue -rates are det ermined under this Chapter in 
respect of any area, such rates shall take effect from the beginning of the year next after the date of final 
publication of the table of revenue -rates under section 34.  
37. Duration  of revenue -rates .—(1) When  the table of revenue -rates for any area has been finally 
published, the rates specified therein shall remain in force for a period of thirty years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) revenue -rates may be altered or revised in any year after the expiry of every ten years from the 
date on which the table of revenue -rates was introduced , in such manner and to such extent as may be 
prescribed;  
(b) When the circumstances of a local area are such that a fresh determination of the          
revenue -rates is in the opinion of the Administrator inexpedient, he may extend the term of settlement 
by such further period as he may think necessary.  
38. Assessment on holdings .—(1) The settlement officer shall calculate the assessment on each 
holding in accordance with the revenue -rates confirmed and finally published under section 34 and such 
assessment shall be the fair assessment . 
(2) The settlement officer shall have the power to make fair assessment on all lands whatsoever to 
which the revenue survey extends, whether such lands are held with liability to pay full land  revenue or 
land revenue at concessional rates or are held revenue -free. 
(3) The fair assessment of all lands shall be calculated in accordance with rules made in this behal f 
and having regard to the following principles, namely :— 
(a) no regard shall be had to any claim to hold land on privileged terms;  
(b) regard shall be had in the case of agricultural land to the profits of agriculture, to the 
consideration paid for leases  to the sale prices of land and to the principal monies on mortgages, and 
in the case of non -agricultural land, to the value of the land for the purpose for which it is held;  
(c) where any improvement has been effected at any time in any holding held for the purpose of 
agriculture by or at the expense of the holder thereof, the fair assessment of such holding shall be 
fixed as if the improvement had not been made.  
39. Additional assessment for water advantages .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Chapter, the Administrator  may direct that any land in respect of which the rate of revenue has been 
determined shall be liable to be assessed to additional land  revenue during the term of settlement for 
additiona l advantages accruing to it from water received on account of irrigation works or improvements 
in existing irrigation works completed after the table of revenue -rates came into force and not effected by 
or at the expense of the holder of the land.  
40. Cont inuance of survey operations and rates in force at commencement of                                 
Act.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, all survey operations commenced under any 
law for the time being in force and continuing at the comme ncement of this Act shall be deemed to have 
been commenced and to be continuing under the provisions of this Chapter, and all revenue -rates in force 
at such commencement shall be deemed to have been determined and introduced in accordance with the 
provisio ns of this Chapter and shall remain in force until the introduction of revised revenue -rates;       
and such revised revenue -rates may be introduced at any time, notwithsta nding anything contained in      
section 37.  15 
 41. Power of deputy commissioner to correct errors, etc. —(1) The power s and duties exercisable 
by the officers referred to in section 6 may also be exercised, during the term of settlement, by the deputy 
commissioner or such other revenue officer as may be specified by the Administrator  for the purpose by 
notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The deputy commissioner may at any time during the term of settlement correct any error in the 
area or the assessment of any survey number or sub -division due to a mistake of survey o r arithmetical 
miscalculation:  
Provided that no arrear of land revenue shall become payable by reason of such correction.  
CHAPTER  V.—LAND RECORDS  
42. Preparation of record of rights .—It shall be the duty of the survey officer to prepare a record of 
rights for each village showing the area of each survey number and other particular s and any other record 
or register, in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
43. Publication of the record of rights .—(1) When a record of rights has been prepared, the survey 
officer shall publish a draft of the record in such manner and for such period as may be prescribed and 
shall receive and consider an y objections which may be  made to any entry t herein or to any omission 
there from during the period of such publication.  
(2) When all objections have been considered and disposed of in accordance with the rules made in 
this behalf, the survey officer shall cause the record to be finally published in t he prescribed manner.  
(3) Every entry in the record of rights as finally published shall, until the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be correct.  
44. Jurisdiction of civil courts. —The civil courts shall have jurisdiction to decide any dispute to 
which the  Government is not a party relating to any right or entry which is recorded in the record of 
rights.  
45. Correction of bona  fide mistake in register .—The survey officer may, on application made to 
him in this behalf or on his own motion, within one year from the date of final publication of the record of 
rights, correct any entry in such record which he is satisfied has been made owing to a bona  fide mistake.  
46. Register of mutation s.—(1) There shall be maintained for every village a register of mutations in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person acquiring by succession, survivorship, inheritance, partition, purchase, mortga ge, gift 
or ot herwise any right in land or , where such person acquiring the right is a minor or otherwise 
disqualified, his guardian or other person having charge of his property, shall report his acquisition of 
such right to the competent authority within three months from the date of such acquisition and such 
authority shall give at once a written acknowledgement in the prescribed form for such report to the 
person making it.  
(3) The competent authority shall enter the substance of every report made to it under sub-section ( 2) 
in the register of mutations and also make an entry therein respecting the acquisition of any rig ht of the 
kind mentioned in sub -section ( 2) which it has reason to believe to have taken place and of which a report 
has not been made under the  said sub -section and, at the same time, shall post up a complete copy of the 
entry in a conspicuous place in the village and shall give written intimation to all persons appearing from 
the record of rights or the register of mutations to be interested in the mutations and to any other person 
whom it has reason  to believe to be interested therein.  
(4) Should any objection to any entry made under sub -section ( 3) in the register of mutations be made 
either orally or in writing to the competent authority, the particulars shall be entered in the register of 
disputed cases and the competent authority shall at once give a written acknowledgement in the 
prescribed form for the objection to the person making it.  
(5) The objections made under sub -section ( 4) shall be  decided on the basis of possession by the 
competent authority and orders disposing of objections entered in the register of disputed cases shall be 
recorded in the register of mutat ions by the competent authority.  16 
 (6) After the entries in the register of mutations have been tested and found correct, the entries shall 
be transferred to the record of rights and shall be certified by such officer as may be prescribed in this 
behalf.  
47. Penalty for neglect to furnish information .—The deputy commissioner may, if he is of opinion 
that any person has wilfully neglected to make the report required by section 46 within the prescribed 
period , impose on such person a penalty not exceeding twenty -five rupees.  
48. Assistance in preparation of maps .—Subject to the rules  made under this Act ,— 
(a) any revenue officer may , for the purpose of preparing or revising any map or plan required for 
or in connection with any record or register under this Chapter, exercise any of the powers of the 
survey officer under section 27 exc ept the power of assessing the cost of hired labour; and  
(b) any revenue officer not below the rank of sub-divisional officer may assess the cost of  the  
preparation or revision of such maps or plans and all expenses incidental thereto and such of costs and 
expenses shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
49. Certified copies .—Certified copies of entries in the record of rights may be granted by such 
officers and on payment of such fees as may prescribed.  
50. Maps and other r ecords open to inspection .—Subject to such rules and on payment of such 
fees, if any, as may be prescribed, all maps and land records shall be open to inspection by the public 
during office hours, and certified extracts therefrom or certified copies thereo f may be given to all persons 
applying for the same.  
51. Power to transfer duty of maintaining maps and records to settlement officer .—When a local 
area is under settlement, duty of maintaining the maps and records may, under the orders of the 
Administrato r, be transferred from the deputy commissioner to the settlement officer.  
CHAPTER  VI.—BOUNDRARIES AND BOUNDARY MARKS  
52. Determination of village boundaries .—The boundaries of villages, survey numbers,               
sub-divisions and fields shall be fixed and all disputes relating thereto shall be determined by survey 
officers or by such other officers as may be appointed by the Administrator  for the purpose, in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf.  
53. Effec t of settlement of boundary .—(1) The settlement of a boundary under this Chapter shall be 
determinative — 
(a) of the proper position of the boundary line or boundary marks, and  
(b) of the rights of the landholders on either side of the boundary fixed in respect of the land 
adjudged to appertain, or not to appertain, to their respective holdings.  
(2) Where a boundary has been so fixed, the deputy commissioner may at any time summarily e vict 
any landholder who is wrongfully in possession of any land which has been adjudged in the settlement of 
a boundary not to appertain to his holding or to the holding of any person through or under whom he 
claims.  
54. Construction and repair of boundary  marks .—It shall be lawful for any survey officer 
authori sed in this behalf to specify or cause to be constructed, laid out, maintained or repaired, boundary 
marks of villages or survey numbers or sub -divisions and to assess all charges incurred thereby on the 
holders or others having an interest therein.  
55. Descr iption of boundary marks .—The boundary marks shall be of such description and shall be 
constructed, laid out, maintain ed or repaired in such manner and shall be of such dimensions and 
materials as may, subject to rules made under this Act, be determined by  the deputy commissioner or 
other officer appointed for the purpose.  
56. Responsibility for maintaining boundary marks .—Every land holder shall be responsible for 
the maintenance and good repair of the boundary marks of his holding and for any charge reason ably 
incurred on account of the same by the revenue officers in case of alteration, removal or disrepair. It shall 
be the duty of the village officers and servants to prevent the destruction or una uthorised alteration of the 
village boundary mark s. 17 
 57. Deputy commissioner to have charge of boundary marks .—After the introduction of survey 
and settlement in a district, the charge of the boundary marks shall devolve on the deputy commissioner , 
and it shall be his duty to take measures for their construction, laying out, maintenance and repair.  
58. Penalty for injuring boundary marks .—Any person wilfully erasing , removing or injuring a 
boundary mark shall be liable to such penalty not exceeding fifty rupees as the competent authority may 
impose.  
CHAPTER  VII.—REALISATION OF LAND REVENE AND OTHER PUBLIC DEMANDS  
59. Land revenue to be first charge .—Land revenue assessed on any land shall be the first charge 
on that land  and on the  crops, rent s and p rofits thereof.  
60. Payment of land revenue .—Land revenue shall be payable at such times , in such installments, to 
such persons, and at such places, as may be prescribed.  
61. Arrear of land revenue .—(1) Any  installment of land revenue or part thereof which is not paid 
on the due date shall become an arrear of land revenue and the persons responsible for the payment 
become defaulters.  
(2) A statement of account certified by the sub-deputy collector shall, for  the purpose of this Chapter , 
be conclusive evidence of the existence of the arrear, of its amount and of the person who is the  defaulter : 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prejudice the right of such person to make payment 
under protest and to question the correctness of the account in separate proceedings before the competent 
authority.  
62. Recovery of arrears .—An arrear of land revenue may be recovered by any one or more of the 
following processes, namely: — 
(a) by serving a written notice of demand on the defaulter;  
(b) by distraint and sale of the defaulter ’s movable property, including the produce of the land;  
(c) by the attachment and sale of the defaulter ’s immovable property.  
63. Notice of demand .—The form and  contents of the notice of demand and the officers by whom 
such notice shall be issued shall be such as may be prescribed.  
64. Distraint and sale of movable property .—(1) The distraint and sale of the movable property of 
a defaulter shall be made by such o fficers or class of officers , in such manner and in accordance with such 
procedure, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to authori sed the distraint or sale of any property 
which, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , is exempt from attachment or sale in 
execution of a decree or of any article set aside exclusively for religious use.  
65. Sale of immovable property .—(1) When the deputy commissioner is of opinion that the 
processes referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 62 are not sufficient for the recovery of an arrear, he 
may, in addition to or instead of any of those processes, cause the land in respect of which such arrear is 
due to be attached and sold in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The deputy commissioner may also cause the right, title and interest of defaulter in any other 
immovable property to be similarly attached and sold.  
66. Notice of sale .—(1) Before effecting the sale of any land or other immovable property under the 
provisions of this Chapter, the deputy commissioner or other officer empowered in this behalf shall issue 
such notices and proclamations , in such fo rm, in such manner and contain ing such particulars, as may be 
prescribed; the notices and proclamations shall also be published in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A copy of every notice or proclamation issued sub -section ( 1) shall be served on the defaulter.  
67. Sale to be by auc tion.—All sales of property, movable or immovable, under this Chapter shall be 
by public auction held in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  18 
 68. Prohibition to bid at auction .—No officer having any duty to perform in connection with any 
such s ale and no person employed by or subordinate to such officer shall, either directly or indirectly, bid 
or acquire any property except on behalf of the Government.  
69. Sale of perishables .—Perishable articles shall be sold by auction with the least possible  delay 
and such shall be finally concluded by the office conducting the sale.  
70. Sales not to be excessive .—Every sale of property, movable or immovable, under the provisions 
of this Chapter shall, as far as may be practicable, be proportionate to the amount of the arrear of land 
revenue to be recovered together with the interest thereon and the expenses of attachment and sale.  
71. Deposit by purchaser of immovable property .—In all cases of immovable property, the party 
who is declared to be the purchas er shall be required to deposit immediately 25 per  cent. of the amount of 
his bid, and the balance within fifteen days of the date of sale.  
72. Failure to make deposit .—(1) In default of the payment of deposit referred to in section 71, the 
property shall be put up for re -sale and the expenses incurred in connection with the first sale shall be 
borne by the defaulting bidder.  
(2) In default of payment of the balance of the bid amount within the period prescribed in section 71, 
the deposit after defraying therefrom the expenses of the sale shall be forfeited to the Governme nt and the 
property shall be re -sold.  
(3) Where the proceeds of the re -sale are less than the price bid by such defaulting purchaser, the 
difference shall also be recoverable from him in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
73. Setting aside sale .—Where immovable property has been sold under this Chapter, the defaulter, 
or any person owning such property or holding an interest  therein , may, at any time, within thirty days of 
the date of sale or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as the deputy commissioner may 
for suffic ient cause allow, apply in the prescribed manner to the deputy commissioner to have the sale set 
aside — 
(a) on the ground of some material irregularity or  mistake or fraud resulting in substantial loss or 
injury to him, or  
(b) on his depositing in the deputy commissioner ’s office the amount of the arrear specified in the 
proclamation of sale, the cost of the sale and for payment to the purchase r a sum equal to five per  
cent. of the purchase money.  
74. Confirmation of sale .—If, on the expiration of 30 day s from the date of sale of any immovable 
property or of the further period, if any, allowed under section 73, no application has been made for 
setting aside the sale, or if any such application has been made and rejected, the deputy commissioner 
shall make  an order confirmi ng the sale unless, for reasons to be recorded, the deputy commissioner sets 
aside the sale notwithstanding that no application therefor has been made.  
75. Refunds .—(1) The deputy commissioner shall order the refund and payment to the        
purchaser, of — 
(a) the amounts deposited by him under section 71 ; and 
(b) the sum equal to 5 per  cent. of the purchase money deposited under clause ( b) of section 73;  
if the sale is not confirmed or is set aside.  
(2) The deputy commissioner shall or der the refund and payment of all monies deposited under          
clause ( b) of section 73 to the person who made the deposit, if the sale is confirmed : 
Provided that the deputy c ommissioner may set off the whole or any part of any such monies against 
any arrear of land revenue or any other amount recoverable as an arrear of land revenue, which may be 
outstanding against the person who made the deposit.  
  19 
 76. Certificate of purchase .—When a sale held under this Chapter is confirmed, the deputy 
commissioner shall put the person declared to be the purchaser in possession of the property and shall 
grant him a certificate in the prescribed form to the effect that he has purchased the property specified 
therein , and such certificate shall be deemed to  be a valid transfer of such property.  
77. Application of proceeds of sale .—The proceeds of the sale of any property under this Chapter 
shall be applied in defraying the expenses of the sale which shall be determined in the prescribed manner 
and the balanc e shall be applied to the payment of the arrear s on account of which the sale was held and 
the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person whose property has been sold.  
78. Liability of certified purchaser .—The person who has purchased any land and to who m a 
certifi cate of purchase has been granted shall not be liable for the land revenue in respect of the land for 
any period prior to the date of the sale.  
79. Precautionary measures in certain cases .—When the crop of any land or any portion of the 
same is sold, mortgaged or otherwise disposed of, the deputy commissioner may, if he thinks it necessary, 
prevent its being removed from the land until the demand for the current year in respect of the said l and is 
paid, whether the date fixed for the payment of the same has arrived or not.  
80. Recovery of other public demands .—The following monies may be recovered under this Act in 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue , namely: — 
(a) rent, fees and roya lties due to the Government for  us e or occupation of land or water or any 
product of land;  
(b) all monies falling due to the Government under any grant, lease or contract which provides 
that they shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue;  
(c) all sums declared by this Act or any other law for the time being in force to be recoverable as 
an arrear of land revenue.  
CHAPTER  VIII. —PROCEDURE OF REVENUE OFFICERS: APPEALS AND REVISIONS  
81. Revenue officers to be courts .—(1) A revenue officer , while exercising power under this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force to inquire into or to decide any question arising for 
determination between the Government and any person or between parties to any proceedings, shall be a 
revenue court. 
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to limit or otherwise af fect the inherent power of the revenue 
court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the 
process of the revenue court. 
82. Place of hearing .—Except for reasons to be recorded in writing, no revenue officer shall inquire 
into or hear any case at any place outside the local limits of his jurisdiction:  
Provided that a sub-divisional officer may inquire into or hear any case at the headquarters of the 
district to which he is appointed.  
83. Power to enter upon and survey land .—All revenue officers and persons acting under their 
orders may , enter upon and survey any land and demarcate boundaries and do all other acts necessary for 
the purpose of disch arging their duties under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and in 
so doing, shall cause no more damage than the circumstances of the case may require.  
84. Power to transfer case s.—(1) The Administrator  may transfer any case or class of cases arising 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force from any revenue officer to any other revenue 
officer competent to deal with it.  
(2) The deputy commissioner or a sub-divisional officer may transf er any case or class of cases 
arising under this Act or any other law for the time being in force for inquiry or decision from his own file 
or from the file of any revenue officer subordinate to him to the file of any other revenue officer 
subordinate to him competent to deal with such case or class of cases.  
  20 
 85. Power to take evidence, summon witness, etc. —(1) Every revenue officer not lower in rank 
than a sub-deputy collector acting as a revenue court shall have power to take evidence and to summon 
any person whose attendance he considers necessary, either as a party or as a witness or to produce any 
document, for the purpose of any inquiry which such officer is legally empowered to make; and all 
persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in pe rson or by an authori sed agent as such officer 
may direct, and to produce such documents as may be required.  
(2) Every summons shall be in writing, signed and sealed by the officer issuing it and shall be in such 
form and be served in such manner as may be  prescribed.  
86. Compelling attendance of witnesses .—If any person on whom a summons to attend as witness 
or to produce any document has been served fails to comply with the summons, the officer by whom the 
summons has been issued under section 85 may — 
(a) issue a bail able warrant of arrest;  
(b) order him to furnish security for appearance; or  
(c) impose upon him a fine not exceeding rupees twenty.  
87. Hearing in absence of party .—(1) If, on the date fixed for hearing a case or proceeding, a 
revenue officer finds that a summon s or notice was not served on any party due to the failure of the 
opposite party to pay the requisite process fees for such service, the case or proceeding may be dismissed 
for default of payment of such process fees.  
(2) If any p arty to a case or proceeding before a revenue officer does not appear on the date fixed for 
hearing, the case or proceeding may be heard and determined in his absence or may be dismissed for 
default . 
(3) The party against whom any order is passed under sub-section ( 1) or ( 2) may apply, within thirty 
days from the date of such order, to have it set aside on the ground that he was prevented by sufficient 
cause from paying the requisite process fees or from appearing at the hearing ; and the revenue officer 
may, after notice to the opposite party and after making such inquiry as he consider s necessary, set aside 
the order passed.  
88. Adjournment of hearing .—(1) A revenue officer may, from time to time, for reasons to be 
recorded, adjourn the hearing of a case  or proceeding before him.  
(2) The date and place of an adjourned hearing shall be intimated at the time of the adjournment to 
such of the parties and witnesses as are present.  
89. Power to order payment of costs .—A revenue officer may direct the parties to pay the cost 
incurred in any case before him and also apportion the cost among the parties in such manner and to such 
extent as he may think fit.  
90. Use for force .—Where any order is passed under the provisions of this Act directing any person 
to deliv er possession of land or directing the eviction of any person from land , such order shall be 
executed by the competent authority in such manner as may be prescribed and it shall be lawful for such 
authority, in accordance with rules to be prescribed, to ta ke such steps and use or cause to be used such 
force as may be reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the order.  
91. Appearance s before and applications to revenue officers .—All appearances before, 
applications to and acts to be done before, any  revenue officer under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force may be made or done by the parties themselves or by their authori sed agents or by any 
legal practitioner:  
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the revenue officer so direct s, be made by the party in 
person . 
92. Correction of error or omission .—Any revenue officer by whom an order was passed in a case 
or proceeding may, either on his own motion or on the application of a party, correct any error or 
omission not affecting a material part of the case or proceeding , after such notice to the parties as he may 
consider necessary.  21 
 93. Appeals .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, an appeal shall lie from every original order 
passed under this Act ,— 
(a) if such an order is passed by an officer subordinate to the sub-divisional officer, to the       
sub-divisional officer;  
(b) if such an order is passed by  the sub -divisional officer,  to the deputy commissioner;  
(c) if such an order is passed by the deputy commissioner , to the Administrator;  
(d) if such an order is passed by an assistant survey and settlement officer, to the survey and 
settlement officer or to a revenue officer notified by the Administrator  in the Official Gazette to be 
the appellate authorit y; and  
(e) if such an order is passed by a survey and settlement officer, to the director of settlement and 
land records or to a revenue officer notified by the Administrator  in the Official Gazette to be the 
appellate authority.  
(2) A second appeal shall lie against any order passed in first appeal, — 
(a) if such an order i s passed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), to the deputy commissioner;  
(b) if such an order is passed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), to the Administrator ; 
(c) if such an order is  passed under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), to the director of settlement and 
land records or to a revenue officer notified by the Administrator  in the Official Gazette to be the 
second appellate authority; and  
(d) if such an order is passed under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1), to the Administrator . 
94. Limitation of appeals .—(1) No appeal shall lie ,— 
(a) in the case of first appeal, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of the order appealed 
against; and  
(b) in the case of a second appeal, after the expiry of sixty days from the date of the order 
appealed against.  
(2) In computing the above periods, the time required to obtain copies of the order appealed against 
shall be excluded.  
95. Revision .—The Administrator  or the deputy commissioner may , at any time, either on his own 
motion or on the application of any party, call for the records of any proceedings before any revenue 
officer subordinate to him for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the le gality or the propriety of any 
order passed by such revenue officer, and may pass such order in reference thereto as he thinks fit:  
Provided that he shall not vary or reverse any order affecting any right between private person s 
without having given to the  partie s interested notice to appear and  be heard . 
96. Review of orders .—A revenue officer may, either on his own motion or on the application of any 
party interested, review any order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors -in-office and pass such  
order in refe rence thereto as he thinks fit:  
Provided that a revenue officer subordinate to the deputy commissioner shall, before reviewing any 
order under this section, obtain the permission of the deputy commissioner and the deputy commissi oner 
shall, b efore reviewing an  order passed by any of his predecessors -in-offic er, obtain the permission of the  
Administrator . 
(2) No order affecting any question of right between private persons shall be reviewed except on the 
application of a party to the proceeding s or except after no tice to the other party, and no application for 
review of such order shall be entertained unless it is made within ninety days from the date of the order.  
(3) No order shall be reviewed except on the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) disc overy of new and important matter of evidence; or  22 
 (ii) some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record; or  
(iii) any other sufficient reason.  
(4) For the purpose s of this section, the deputy commissioner shal l be deemed to be the          
successor -in-office of any revenue officer who has left the district or who has ceased to exercise powers 
as a revenue officer and to whom there is no successor in the district.  
(5) An order which has been dealt with in appeal or on revision shall not be r eviewed by any officer 
subordinate to the appellate or revisional authority.  
97. Stay of execution of orders .—(1) A revenue officer who has pa ssed any order or  his      
successor -in-office may, at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed for app eal, direct the stay 
of execution of such order for such period as he thinks fit provided that no appeal has been filed.  
(2) Any authority before whom a case is pending in appeal or revision may direct the stay of 
execution of the order appealed from or under revision for such period as it may think fit.  
(3) The revenue officer or other authority directing such stay of execution of any order may impose 
such condition, or order such security to be furnished, as he or it may think fit.  
98. Power to make rul es.—(1) The Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of appointment of revenue officers , survey officers and settlement officers, and 
other village officers and servants, their powers and duties, the official seals, if any, to be used by 
them and the size and description of the seals;  
(b) the deputy commissioner ’s powers of supe rintendence and control over other  officers;  
(c) the officers who should hear and decide disputes regarding rights in or over any property 
claimed by or against the Government and the procedure to be followed by them;  
(d) the di sposal of Government lands by assignment or grant to individuals or to public purposes 
and the terms and conditions subject to which such assignment s or grants may be made;  
(e) the preservation and disposal of trees, brush wood jungle and other natural pro ducts on 
Government land and the recovery of the value of  trees or other natural product  unauthorisedly 
appropriate d by persons;  
(f) the procedure for summary eviction of trespassers on Government land;  
(g) the alteration and revision of the land revenue i n cases of alluvion or diluvion or of diversion 
of land for purposes other than agriculture;  
(h) the grant of permission to use agricultural land for non -agricultural purposes;  
(i) the determination of additional rates for use of water;  
(j) the  circumstances in which remission or suspension of revenue may be made and the rate of 
such remission or suspension;  
(k) the form of receipt for payment of land revenue;  
(l) the conduct of surveys and settlements of land revenue;  
(m) the manner of estimati ng the cost of cultivation and other expenses in relation to the inquiry 
into profits of agriculture;  
(n) the division of survey numbers into sub -divisions and the assessment of sub -divisions;  
(o) the statistical, fiscal and other records and registers to be prepared and maintained under this 
Part; 23 
 (p) the manner in which the costs and expenses incidental to revenue survey or the construction, 
repair and maintenance of boundary marks shall be determined and appointed between persons who 
are liable to bear t he same;  
(q) the fixing, construction, laying out, maintenance and repair of boundary marks , and the 
settlem ent of dispute s relating thereto;  
(r) the division of areas into units for determining the revenue -rates and the preparation of the 
table of revenue -rates;  
(s) the preparation and the preliminary and final publication of the record of rights and the table 
of revenue -rates ; 
(t) the hearing and disposal of objections to any entry or o mission in the table of revenue -rates, 
the record of rights, and the register of mutations ; 
(u) the manner and extent of alteration or revision of revenue -rates during the term of settlement;  
(v) the correction of bona fide  errors and mistakes in the revenue records, registers and maps 
prepared under this Part; 
(w) the mann er in which the a verage yield of crops of land shal l be ascertained;  
(x) the manner of holding inquiries by revenue officers under this Part; 
(y) the application of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , to cases 
and proceedings b efore a revenue court;  
(z) the form of summons and other processes, notices, orders and proclamations to be issued or 
made by revenue officers and the manner of their service;  
(aa) the procedure for the attachment and sale of property and the confirmation and the setting 
aside of sales of immovable property under Chapter VII;  
(bb) the manner of publication of notices and proclamations of attachment and sale of property;  
(cc) the manner in which the cost and expenses incidental to the attachment and sale of property 
shall be determined;  
(dd) the manner of payment of deposit and of the purchases money of property sold for arrears of 
land revenue;  
(ee) the circumstances in which precautionary measures for securing the land revenue under 
section 79 may be taken;  
(ff) the procedure for the transfer of cases from one revenue officer to another;  
(gg) the manner of preferring appeals or application s for revision or review, the documents to 
accompany the memorandum of appeal or such application and the fee, if any, li able therefor;  
(hh) the grant of certified copies and the payment of fees for inspection and grant of certified 
copies of revenue records and registers;  
(ii) the mode of execution of any orders directing any person to deliver possession of land or to be 
evicted from land, including the use of force for securing compliance with such order;  
(jj) any other matter that is to be  or may be prescribed.  
PART III  
CHAPTER  IX.—RIGHTS OF LANDOWNERS  
99. Accrual of rights of landowners .—(1) Every person who, at the commencement of this Act, 
holds any land from the Government for agricultural purposes, whether as a settlement -holder or as a 
pattadar  and his successors -in-interest shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), become the 
owner thereof as and from such commencement.  
(2) No rights shall accrue under sub -section ( 1) in respect of lands which — 
(i) are a part of the bed of a river, a  nallah , a stream or a public tank, or  24 
 (ii) have been acquired by the Government for any purpose according to the provisions of any law 
in force for the time being relating to acquisition of land, or  
(iii) have been used at any time during the five years i mmediately preceding the commencement 
of this Act for any public, community or village purpose, or  
(iv) are declared by the Administrator  by notification in the Official Gazette as reserved or 
required for any public, community or village purpose.  
(3) Objections to the accrual of rights under sub -section ( 1) may be filed before the competent 
authority within such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed by any person who has 
interest or claims to have an interest in the land either in his i ndividual capacity or as a member of the 
village or community.  
(4) Should any objection be made under sub -section ( 3), the competent authority shall inquire into the 
objection in such manner as may be prescribed and decide the same.  
(5) Subject to the prov isions of this Act, the decision of the competent authority shall be final.  
(6) Every person who, at the commencement of this Act, holds land from the Government for a 
purpose other than agriculture shall, subject to sub -section ( 2), be entitled to the set tlement of that land on 
such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person to the sub -soil rights in respect of the land, of 
which he has become the landowner under sub -section ( 1), of which has been settle d with him under     
sub-section ( 6). 
100. Rights of landowners .—(1) Every person who has become a landowner under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 99 shall — 
(a) have permanent , heritable and transferable rights in the land;  
(b) be entitled by himself, his servants, tenants, agents or other representatives to erect farm 
buildings, construct wells or tanks or make any other improvements thereon for the better cultivation 
of the land or its convenient use;  
(c) be entitled to plant trees on the land, to enjoy t he products thereof and to fell , utilise or dispose 
of the timber of any trees on the land.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle a landowner to use his land to the detriment of any 
adjoining land which is not his or in contravention of the provisio ns of any other law for the time being in 
force applicable to such land . 
101. Reservation of land for personal cultivation. —(1) Every landowner who, at the 
commencement of this Act, owns land in excess of a basic holding shall be entitled to apply to the 
competent authority for the reservation for his personal cultivation of any parcel or parcels of his land 
leased to tenants.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in the prescribed form and shall be made in the 
prescribed manner within a per iod of one year from such commencement.  
Explanation. —In the case of a person under disability, the application shall be made by his guardian 
or his authori sed agent, as the case may be.  
102. Procedure for reservation of land. —(1) On receipt of an applicati on made under section 101, 
the competent authority shall issue notice together with a copy of the application to each of the tenants 
holding land from the applicant requiring the tenant to submit his objections, if any, within a period of 
ninety days from the date of service of such notice or within such further period as the competent 
authority may allow.  
(2) A tenant on whom a notice has been served under sub -section (1) shall furnish to the competent 
authority within the period specified details of lands  owned by him or held as tenant of any other 
landowner and of lands which he selects for retention by him.  25 
 (3) The competent authority shall, after considering the objections and the details, if any, furnished by 
the tenants and after making such inquiry a s it may consider necessary, determine the land or lands not 
exceeding the permissible limit, which in its opinion having regard to all the circumstances of the case 
may be reserved for personal cultivation of the landowner and the lands which each of his tenants may be 
allowed to retain.  
103. ―Permissible limit‖ defined. —(1) In section 102, “ permissible limit ” means an area of land 
which a landowner may resume from tenants for personal cultivation, that is to s ay,— 
(a) in the case of a person under disability, 25 acres ; 
(b) in the case of any other person who — 
(i) owns a basic holding or less, the entire area owned by him;  
(ii) owns more than a basic holding but not exceeding a family holding, one -half of the area 
leased t o tenants or the area by which the land under his personal cultivation falls short of a basic 
holding, whichever is greater;  
(iii) owns more than a family holding — 
(1) if he has no land, or any land which is less than a family holding under his personal 
cultivation, one -half of the area leased to the tenant but not exceeding the area by which land 
under his personal cultivation falls short of a family holding, provided  that the tenant is left 
with not less than a basic holding and provided further that a landowner shall in any case be 
entitled to resume an area by which land under his personal cultivation falls short of a basic 
holding; and  
(2) if he has family holding or more under his personal cultivation, the area leased to any 
tenant in excess of a family holding b ut not exceeding the area by which land in his personal 
cultivation falls short of 25 acres.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of determining the permissible li mit of a landowner under this         
sub-section, any no -resumable land which he may hold as a tenant shall also be taken into account.  
(2) Any transfer of land made on or after the 6 th day of March, 1956, shall be disregarded in 
computing the permissible  limit.  
104. Land deemed to be reserved for personal cultivation in certai n cases.—In the case of a 
person who, at the commencement of this Act, does not own land in excess of a basic holding, all lands 
owned by him and held by tenants shall be deemed to h ave been reserved for his personal cultivation.  
Explanation. —Any transfer of land made on or after the 6th day of March, 1956, shall be disregarded 
in determining the extent of land owned by a person at the commencement of this Act.  
105. Non -resumable  land.—The competent authority shall declare every land which, under           
sub-section ( 3) of section 102, a tenant is allowed to retain to be the non -resumable land of the tenant.  
106. Right to lease .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  this Act, a landowner may lease out his land to 
another person on such rent not exceeding the maximum rent referred to in section 112 as may be agreed 
upon between him and such person.  
(2) Every lease of land made after the commencement of this Act shall be for a pe riod of five years 
and at the end of the said period, and thereafter at the end of each period of five years, the tenancy shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) be deemed to be renewed for a further period of five years on 
the same terms and c onditions, except to the extent that a modification thereof consistent with this Act is 
agreed to by both parties.  
(3) In respect of any lease made after the commencement of this Act, a landowner who is a member 
of the Armed Forces of the Union, on his dis charge from service or posting to the reserve, may by giving 
the tenant three months’ notice in writing before the expiry of any year, and any other landowner may by 
giving the tenant one year’s notice in writing before the expiry of any term of five years , terminate the 
tenancy if the landowner requires the land bona fide  for personal cultivation by him.  26 
 107. Land left uncultivated .—(1) Where the deputy commissioner is satisfied that any land has 
remained uncultivated for a period not less than two consecutive years otherwise than in accordance with 
rules made in this behalf under this Act, and that it is necessary for the purpose of ensuring the full and 
efficient use of the land for agriculture to do so, he may after making such inquiry as may be p rescribed 
lease out the land in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
(2) Any lease made under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be lease made by the landowner under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 106.  
108. Relinquishment .—(1) Subject to any rules th at may be made under this Act , a landowner may 
relinquish his rights in respect of any land in his possession in favour of Government by giving a notice in 
writing to the competent authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed, not less than three  
months before the close of any year and thereupon , he shall cease to be a landowner in respect of that land 
from the year next following the date of notice:  
Provided that relinquishment of only a part of a holding or of a holding which, or part of which, is 
subject to an encumbrance or a charge, shall not be valid.  
(2) If any person relinquishes his rights to a land under sub -section ( 1), the way to which lies through 
other land retained by him, any future holder of the land relinquished shall be entitled to a right of way 
through the land retained.  
CHAPTER  X.—RIGHTS OF TENANTS  
109. Interest of tenants .—(1) The interest of a tenant in any land held by him as such shall be 
heritable  but, save as otherwise provided in this Act, shall not be transferable.  
(2) No tenant shall be evicted from his land except as provided in this Act.  
110. Right to create a mortgage or charge .—It shall be lawful for a tenant to create a simple 
mortgage or create a charge on his interest in the land leased to him in favour of the Government or a     
co-operative society in consideration of any loan advanced to him by the Government or such society; and 
in the event of his making default in the repayment of such loan in accordance with its terms, it shall be 
lawful for the Government or the society , as the case may be, to cause his interest in the land to be 
attached and sold and the proceeds applied in payment of such loan.  
111. Right to make improvement s.—A tenant may, with the permission in writing of the landowner, 
or if permission is refused without sufficient r eason or not given within two months, after obtaining the 
order of the competent authority in the prescribed manner , make at his own expense any improvement to 
the land held by him, but shall not become liable to pay a higher rate of rent on account of any  increase of 
production or of any change in the nature of the crop raised, as a consequence of such improvement.  
112. Maximum rent .—The rent payable by a tenant in respect of any land held by him shall not 
exceed ,— 
(a) where the rent is payable in kind  as a share of the produce, one -fourth of the produce of such 
land or its value estimated in the prescribed manner if plough  cattle for the cultivation of such land is 
supplied by the landowner and one -fifth of such produce or its value as so estimated the plo ugh cattle 
is not supplied by the landowner;  
(b) in any other case, four times the land revenue payable in respect of the land.  
113. Payment of rent .—(1) The rent payable by a tenant shall, subject to the provisions of        
section 112, be the rent agreed upon between him and the landowner or where there is no such agreement, 
the reasonable rent.  
(2) The rent shall be paid at such times and in such manner as may have been agreed upon or in the 
absence of such agreement, as may be prescribed . 
114. Reasonable rent .—(1) The competent authority may, on application made to it in this behalf by 
the landowner or the tenant, determine the reasonable rent for any land.  27 
 (2) The form of application under sub -section ( 1) and the procedure to be followed by the co mpetent 
authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) In determining the reasonable rent, the competent authority shall have regard to — 
(a) the rental value of lands used for similar purposes in the locality;  
(b) the profits of agriculture of similar lands in the locality;  
(c) the price of crops and commodities in the locality;  
(d) the improvements, if any, made to the land by the landowner or the tenant ; 
(e) the land revenue payable in respect of the land; and  
(f) any other factor which may be prescribed.  
(4) Where the reasonable rent for any land has been determined under this section, it shall not be 
altered for a period of five years except on any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the quality of the land has deteriorated by flood or other natural causes;  
(b) that there has been an increase in the produce of the land on account of improvements made to 
it at the expense of the landowner;  
(c) that  the land has been partially or wholly rendered unfit for cultivation.  
(5) Nothing in sub -section s (1) to ( 4) shall affect the right of the Government to make an order 
directing the determination of the reasonable rent of lands in any specified area.  
115. Commutation of rent payable in kind .—(1) In any case in which rent is payable in kind, the 
landowner or the tenant may apply in writing to the competent authority in the prescribed form and 
manner, for commuting the rent into money rent.  
(2) On receipt of such application, the competent authority shall, after giving notice to the other party, 
determine the money rent payable for the land in accordance with the following provisions but not 
exceeding the maximum rent specified in section 112.  
(3) In determining the money rent, regard shall be had to — 
(a) the average money rent payable by tenant s for land of similar description and with similar 
advantages in the vicinity;  
(b) the average value of the rent actually received by the landowner durin g the three years 
preceding the date of application ; 
(c) the average prices of crops and commodities in the locality during the three years preceding 
the date of application ; 
(d) the improvements, if any, made to the land by the landowner or the tenant; an d 
(e) any other factor which may be prescribed.  
116. Receipt for payment of rent .—Every landowner shall give or cause to be given a receipt for the 
rent received by him or on his behalf in such form as may be prescribed duly signed by him or his 
authori sed agent.  
117. Refund of rent recovered in excess .—If any landowner recovers from a tenant rent in excess of 
the amount due under this Act, he shall forthwith refund the excess amount so recovered and shall also be 
liable to punishment as provided in this Ac t. 
118. Suspension or remission of rent .—(1) Where a landowner has obtained from or been granted 
by the Government any relief by way of suspension or remission , whether in whole or in part, of the land 
revenue payable in respect of his land, he shall be bo und to give and the tenant concerned shall be entitled 
to receive from the landowner a corresponding or proportionate relief by way of suspension or remission 
of rent payable in respect of such land.  28 
 (2) The nature and extent of the relief which a landowne r is bound to give and which the tenant is 
entitled to receive under sub -section ( 1) shall be determined in accordance with the rules made under this 
Act. 
(3) No suit shall lie and no decree of a civil court shall be executed for the recovery by a landowne r of 
any rent the payment of which has been remitted, or during the period for which the payment of such rent 
has been suspended, under this section.  
(4) The period during which the payment of rent is suspended under this section shall be excluded in 
compu ting the period of limitation prescribed for any suit or proceeding for the recovery of such rent.  
(5) If any landowner fails to suspended or remit the payment of rent as provided in sub -section ( 1), he 
shall be liable to refund to the tenant the amount re covered by him in contravention of the provisions of 
this section and shall also be liable to punishment as provided in this Act.  
119. Eviction of tenant .—(1) No person shall evicted from any land held by him as tenant except 
under the order of the competent authority made on any of the following grounds , namely: — 
(a) that the land has been reserved for personal cultivation of the landowner under section 102, or 
is deemed to have been reserved for personal cultivation of the landowner under section 1 04; 
(b) that a notice has been given to the tenant under sub -section ( 3) of section 106;  
(c) that the tenant has intentionally and wilfully  committed such acts of waste as are calculated to 
impair materially or permanently the value or utility of the land for agricultural purposes;  
(d) that the tenant  has failed to pay rent within a period of three months after it falls due:  
Provided that the  competent authority may, if it thinks fit, grant further time not exceeding six 
months for payment of the rent;  
(e) that the tenant, not being a person under disability, has after the commencement of this Act, 
sub-let the land without the consent in writi ng of the landowner.  
(2) No order for eviction of a tenant shall be executed till the standing crops, if any, on the land are 
harvested.  
(3) Where any order for eviction has been made against a tenant on the ground specified in clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1), then, notwithstanding such ord er, the tenant shall, until he is provided with alternative 
land in accordance with the rules made in this behalf, be entitled to retain possession of — 
(i) the entire land held by him as a tenant, in any case where the area  of tenancy together with any 
other land held by him does not exceed 1 .25 acres in area; and   
(ii) so much of the land held by him as a tenant as together with any other land held by him does 
not  exceed the limit of 1 .25 acres in are a, in any case where t he area of the tenancy together with the 
other land held by him e xceeds th e said limit:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to a tenanat who holds land under any person 
who is a member of the Armed Forces of the Union.  
(4) Where any land has been reserved for the personal cultivation of a landowner by an order made 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 102, no suit or application for the eviction of the tenant in respect of such 
land under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall lie after the expiry of five years from the commencement of 
this Act or one year from the date of the said order, whichever is later:  
Provided that where any such landowner is a person under disability, such suit or application may be 
instituted or made within a period of five years from the date when the disability ceases.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the disability of a person shall cease — 
(a) in the case of a widow, if she remarries, on the date of her remarriage or if any person 
succeeds to the widow on her death, on the date of  her death;  
(b) in the case of a minor, on the date of his attaining majority;  29 
 (c) in the case of a woman who is unmarried or who is divorced or judicially separated from her 
husband, on the date of her marriage or remarriage, as the case may be, or in the case of a woman 
whose husband is a person falling unde r clause ( d) or (e), on the date on which the disab ility of the 
husband ceases;  
(d) in the case of a perso n who is a member of the Armed F orces of the Union, on  the date of his 
discharge from service or of his posting to the reserve;  
(e) in the case of a person suffering from a physical or menta l disability, on the date on which the 
disability ceases to exist.  
120. Restoration of possession of land to tenant. —Whe re a person who has taken possession of any 
land by evicting tenant therefrom on the ground that the land had been reserved for personal cultivation 
by him fails to cultivate such land personally within one year from the d ate on wh ich he took possession 
thereof or ceases to cultivate such land personally in any year during a period of four years next 
following, the tenant shall be entitled to be restored to possession of the land from which he was evicted.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section, land shall not be deemed to be under the persona l 
cultivation of a person (not being a person under disability ) unless such person or a member of his family 
engages himself in the principal agricultural operations.  
121. Certain lands to be non -resumable  land of  tenant.—If a landowner fails to — 
(a) apply for reservation of any land within the period prescribed in section 101, and the land is 
not deemed to have been reserved under section 104, or  
(b) file a suit or application for the eviction of the tenant from any land reserved under           
section 102 within the period prescribed in sub -section ( 4) of section 119, or  
(c) cultivate or ceases to cultivate the land and the tenant is restored to possession of the land 
under section 120,  
the compe tent authority m ay suo motu  and shall, on application, after making such inquiry as may be 
prescribed, declare the land to be the non -resumable land of the tenant.  
122. Compensation for improvement s.—(1) A tenant who has made any improvement at his own 
expense on the land  leased to him shall, if he is to be evicted under the provisions of this Chapter, be 
entitled to receive compensation before he is so evicted for such improvement as in the opinion of the 
competent authority , is reasonable.  
(2) The compensation payable to  a tenant under sub -section ( 1) shall be determined in accordance 
with the value of such improvement s on the date of eviction, and in determining such compensation, 
regard shall be had to the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the amount by which the value of  the land has increased by reason of the improvement;  
(b) the condition of the improvement at the date of the determination of the value thereof and the 
probable duration of its effect ; 
(c) the labour  and capital involved in the making of the improvement; and  
(d) the advantage s secured by the tenant in consideration of the improvement made by him.  
(3) In any case in which compensation is payable to a tenant under this section, the competent 
authority m ay direct that — 
(a) the whole or any part of any loan which the tenant has taken on the security of his interest in 
the land under section 110 and which is outstanding shall be deducted from such compensation and 
paid to the Government or the co -operative society, as the case may be;  
(b) any arrear of rent due by the tenant to the landowner and the costs, if any, awarded to the 
landowner shall be adjusted against the compensation.  30 
 123. Tenant may remove building s, works, etc ., not deemed improvements .—A tenant against 
whom an order of eviction has been passed, shall be entitled to remove within such time as is deemed 
reasonable by the competent authority any work of improvement which can be s evere d from the land and 
which the tenant desires to remove , or any building or construction or work (which is not an 
improvement) in respect of which the landowner is not willing to pay the compensation.  
124. Restoration of possession of land in certain other cases .—(1) Where a tenant of any land has, 
on or after the 6th day of March, 19 56, surrendered , or been evicted from, such land, and the surrender or 
eviction could not have taken place if this Act had been in force on the date of such surrender  or eviction, 
the competent authority may, suo motu or on application made by the tenant, restore him to possession of 
the land which he surrendered or from which he was evicted unless some other tenant not being a member 
of the landowner ’s family, had bona fide  been admitted to possession of such land.  
(2) The competent authority shall, before making an order under sub -section ( 1), make such inquiry 
as may be prescribed.  
125. Relief against termination of tenancy for act of waste .—Where a tenancy is sought to be 
terminated on the ground that the tenant has materially impa ired the value or utility of the land for 
agricultural purposes, if the damage to the land admits of being repaired or if pecuniary compensation 
would afford adequate relief, no proceeding for eviction shall lie against the tenant unless and until the 
landowner has served on the tenant a notice in writing specifying the damage complained of and the 
tenant has failed within a period of one year from the service of such notice to repair the damage or to pay 
compensation therefor.  
126. Surrender of land by ten ant.—(1) After the commencement of this Act, no tenant shall 
surrender any land held by him as such, and no landowner shall enter upon the land surrendered by the 
tenant, without the previous permission in writing of the competent authority.  
(2) Such permi ssion shall be granted if, after making such inquiry as may be prescribed, the 
competent authority is satisfied that the proposed surrender is bona fide  and in case the surrender is by a 
person who was holding the land as tenant immediately before the commencement of this Act, the 
permissible limit of the landowner concerned is not exceeded by such surrender; in other cases, the 
permission shall be refuse d. 
(3) Where permission is refused in any case, and the tenant gives a declaration in writing 
relinquishing his rights in the land, the competent authority shall, in accordance with the rules made in 
this behalf, lease out the land to any other person who shall acquire all the rights of the tenant who 
relinquished his rights.  
127. Transfer of ownership of land to tenant .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
ownership of any land which is declared to be the non -resumable land of a tenant unde r section 105, or 
section 121 shall stand transferred from the landowner thereof to the tenant with effect from the date of 
such declaration,  and the tenant shall become the owner of such land and be liab le to pay land revenue 
therefor : 
Provided that where , on an application made in this behalf by any person at any time before the 
declaration is made under section 105 or under section 121, the competent authority is satisfied that such 
person holds land not exceeding a family holding, whether as a lando wner or otherwise , and that his 
income is derived mainly from such land, t he competent authority may, by order, provide that the transfer 
of ownership of the land shall take effect on the expiry of a period of five years from the date of such 
declaration.  
128. Compensation to landowner .—(1) In respect of every land the ownership of which stands 
transferred to the tenant under section 127, the landowner shall be entitled to compensation which shall 
consist of the aggregate of the following amount s, this is to sa y,— 
(a) an amount equal to thirty times the full land revenue payable for the land or, if the land is held 
revenue -free or at a concessional rate, thirty times the amount of land revenue payable for similar 
lands in the locality;  
(b) the value of trees, if  any, planned by the landowner.  31 
 Explanation. —Where any improvement has been made on the land at the expense of the landowner at 
any time subsequent to the last settlement, the land revenue for the purpose of this section shal l be the 
land revenue payable f or similar lands in the locality.  
(2) The land revenue payable for similar lands in the locality and the value of trees referred to in    
sub-section ( 1) shall be determined in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Every landowner entitled to compensation under this section shall , within a period of six months 
from the date of the declaration  referred to in section 127, apply to the competent authority in the 
prescribed manner for determining the compensation.  
129. Payment of compensation to landowner .—(1) The compens ation to which a landowner is 
entitled under section 128 shall be paid to him by the Government in the first instance, and it ma y be paid 
in cash, in lump sum or in annual instalment s not exceeding ten or in the form of bonds which may be 
negotiable or non -negotiable but transferable.  
(2) From the date of the declara tion referred to in section 127, the landowner shall be entitled to 
interest at the rate of 2½ per cent . per annum on the compensation or such portion thereof as remain s 
unpaid.  
(3) Any mo rtgage of, or encumbrance on, the land of which the ownership is transferred to the tenant 
under section 127 shall be a valid charge on the amount of compensation payable to the landowner.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section s (1) to ( 3), where the person entitled to 
compensation under section 128 is a charitable or religious institution, the compensation shall, instead of 
being assessed under that section, be assessed as a perpetual annuity equal to the reasonable rent for the 
land, less t he land revenue payable on such land. The amount so assessed shall be paid to such institution 
in the prescribed manner.  
130. Tenant to pay compensation amount .—(1) Every  tenant to whom ownership of any land has 
been transferred under section 127 shall be liable to pay to the Government in respect of that land 
compensation as determined under section 128.  
(2) The compensation shall be payable in cash, in lump sum or in suc h number of annual instalments 
not exceeding twenty as may be prescribed. Interest at the rate of 2½ per cent . annum shall be payable on 
the compensation or such portion thereof as remains unpaid.  
(3) The compensation payable under this section shall be a charge on the land.  
(4) The compensation or any instalment thereof shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear 
of land revenue.  
131. Issue of certificate to tenants .—When the compensation or the first instalment of the 
compensation, as the case ma y be, has been paid by the tenant, the competent authority may suo motu  and 
shall, on application made to it in this behalf, issue to the tenant a certificate in the prescribed form 
declaring him to be the owner of the land specified therein.  
132. First op tion to purchase .—(1) If a landowner at any time intends to sell his land held by a 
tenant, he shall give notice in writing of his intention to such tenant and offer to sell the land to him. In 
case the letter intends to purchase the land, he shall intimate in writing his readiness to do so within two 
months from the date of receipt of such notice.  
(2) If there is any dispute about the reasonable price payable for the land, either the landowner or the 
tenant may apply in writing to the competent auth ority for d etermining the reasonable price ; and the 
competent authority, after giving notice to the other party and to all other persons interested in the land 
and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, shall fix the reasonable price of the land which  shall be the 
average of the price s obtaining for similar lands in the locality during the ten years immediately preceding 
the date on which the application is made.  
(3) The tenant shall deposit with the competent authority the amount of the price determin ed under 
sub-section ( 2) within such period as may be prescribed.  32 
 (4) On deposit of the entire amount of the reasonable price, the prescribed authority shall issue a 
certificate in the prescribed form to the tenant declaring him to be the purchase r of the land; the 
competent authority shall also direct that the reasonable price deposited shall be paid to the landowner.  
(5) If the tenant does not exercise the right of purchase in response to the notice given to him by the 
landowner under sub -section ( 1) or f ails to deposit the amount of the price as required by sub -section ( 3), 
such tenant shall forfeit his right of purchase, and the landowner shall be entitle d to sell such land to any 
other person.  
(6) The forfeiture of the right to purchase any land under t his section shall not affect the other rights 
of tenant in such land.  
133. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator  may, b y notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form of notices to be issued under this Part and the manner of their service;  
(b) the manner of holding inquiries under this Part; 
(c) the circumstances in which and th e period for which land used for agricultural purposes may 
be left uncultivated;  
(d) the conditions subject to which lands may be leased by the deputy commissioner under       
section 107 ; 
(e) the form of applications to be made under this Part, the authorities to whom they may be made 
and the procedure to be followed by such authorities in disposing of the applications ; 
(f) the determination of the value of the produce of land, the profits of agriculture, and the rental 
values of land, for t he purposes of this Part; 
(g) the time and  manner of payment of rent by the  tenant;  
(h) the form of receipt for rent to be given by the landowner ; 
(i) the factors to be taken into account in determining reasonable rent for land and in commuting 
rent in kin d into money rent;  
(j) the nature and the extent of relief to the tenant in cases of suspension or remission of land 
revenue by the Government;  
(k) the determination of compensation for improvements to tenants who are evicted from land;  
(l) the grant of pe rmission to surrender land;  
(m) the determination of the amount of compensation payable to the landowner in respect of the 
non-resumable lands of tenants;  
(n) the form of certificates to be granted to tenants;  
(o) the determination of the price to be paid by tenant for land in respect of which the first option 
to purchase is exercised;  
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
PART IV  
CHAPTER  XI.—CEILING ON LAND HOLDINGS  
134. Exemption .—The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to land owned by the Government 
or a local authority.  
135. Definitions .—For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “ceiling limit ”, in relation to land, means the limit fixed under section 136 ; 
(b) “family ”, in relation to a person, means the person, the wife or husband, as the case may be, 
and the dependent children and grandchildren, of such person;  33 
 (c) “land” does not include land used for non -agricultural purposes.  
136. Ceiling on holdings .—No person  either by himself, or , if he has a family , together with any 
other member of his family (hereinafter referred to as the person representing the family) shall, whether 
as a landowner or as a tenant or as a mortgagee with possession or otherwise, or partly in one capacity 
and partly in another, hold land in excess of twenty -five acres in the aggregate:  
Provided that , where the number of members of the family of such person exceeds five, he may hold 
five addition al acres for each member in excess of five , so however as not to exceed fifty acres  in the 
aggregate . 
Explanation .—In the case of a company, an association or any other body of individuals, the ceiling 
limit shall be twenty -five acres.  
137. Submission of returns .—Every person representing a family who at the commencement of this 
Act holds, or has at any time during the period between the 15th day of January, 19 59 and such 
commencement held, land in excess of the ceiling limit shall submit to the competent authority, in such 
form and within such time as may be prescribed, a return giving the particulars of all land held by him 
and indicating therein the parcels of land, not exceeding the ceiling limit, which he desires to retain:  
Provided that in the case of joint -holding, all co -share rs may submit the return jointly indicating the 
parcels of land, not exceeding the aggregate of their individual ceiling limits which  they desire to retain . 
Explanation. —In the case of a person under disability, the return shall be furnished by hi s guardian or 
authori sed agent, as the case may be.  
138. Collection of information through other agency .—If any person who under section 137 is 
required to submit a return, fails to do so, the competent authority may collect the necessary information 
through such  agency as may be prescribed.  
139. Procedure for determination of excess land .—(1) On receipt of any return under section 137 
or infor mation under section 138 or otherwise, the competent authority shall, after giving the persons 
affected an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, and having 
regard to the provisions of section 14 0 and section 141 a nd of any rules that may be made in this behalf, it 
shall determine — 
(a) the total area of land held by each person representing the family ; 
(b) the specific parcels of land which he may retain ; 
(c) the land held by him in excess of the ceiling limit;  
(d) whether such excess land is held by him as a landowner or as a tenant or as a mortgage with 
possession;  
(e) the excess land in respect of which the tenant or the mortgage e with possession may acquire 
the rights o f the landowner of the mortgagor, as the case may be ; 
(f) the excess land which may be restored to a landowner or a mortgagor;  
(g) the excess land which shall vest in the Government; and  
(h) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) For the purposes of d etermining the excess land under this section, any land transferred at any 
time during the period between the 15 th day of January, 1959 and the commencement of this Act shall, 
notwithstanding such transfer, be deemed to be held by the transferor.  
(3) The c ompetent authority shall prepare a list in the prescribed form containing the particulars 
determined by it under sub -section ( 1) and shall cause every such list to be published in the Official 
Gazette and  also in such other manner as may be prescribed.  34 
 140. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers .—(1) Where any person holding land in 
excess of the ceiling limit at any time during the period between the 15 th day of January, 1959, and         
the 9 th day of December, 1959, has transferred during such period any part of his land to any othe r person 
under a registered deed for valuable consideration, the excess land to be de termined under se ction 139 
shall, to the extent possible, be selected out of the  land held at the commencement of this Act by the 
transferor in excess of a family holding and no land shall be selected out of the land transferred.  
(2) Where any person holding land in excess of the ceiling limit at any time — 
(a) during the period between the 15 th day of January, 1959 and the 9 th day of December, 1959, 
has transferred during such period any part of his land to any other person in any manner other than 
under a registered deed for valuable consideration, or  
(b) during the period betw een the 9 th day of December, 1959  and the commencement of this Act 
has transferred during such period any part of his land to any other person in any manner whatsoever,  
the excess land to be determined under section 139 shall be selected out of the lands h eld at the 
commencement of this Act by the transferor and the transferee in the same proportion as the land held by 
the transferor bears to the land transferred and where no land is held by the transferor, out of the land 
transferred.  
(3) Where excess land  is to be selected out of the lands of more than one transferee, such land shall be 
selected out of the lands held by each of the transferees in the same proportion as the area of the land 
transferred to him bears to the total area of the lands transferred  to all the transferees.  
(4) Where any excess land is selected out of the land transfer red, the transfer of such land shall be 
void.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the excess land to be selected sh all in no case 
include the homestead land of a person.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, “homestead land” means the land on which the 
homestead (whether used by the owner or let out on rent) stands together with any courtyard, compound 
and attached garden, not exceeding one ac re in the aggregate.  
141. Excess land to vest in Government .—(1) Where any excess land of a landowner is in his actual 
possession, the excess land shall vest in the Government.  
(2) Where any excess land of a landowner is in the possession of a person holdi ng the same as a 
tenant or as a mortgage e and the excess land together with any other land held by such person exceeds his 
ceiling limit, the land in excess of the ceiling limit shall vest in the Government.  
(3) Where any excess land of a landowner is in the possession of a person holding the same as a 
tenant or as a mortgage e and such person is allowed to retain the excess land or a part thereof as being 
within his ceiling limit, that person shall acquire the rights of the landowner or of the mortgagor, a s the 
case may be, in respect of such excess land or part thereof on payment of compensation, if any, as 
hereinafter provided, but if that person refuses to pay such compensation, the excess land or part thereof 
shall vest in the Government.  
(4) Where ther e is any excess land of a tenant or of a mortgagee with possession, the excess land shall 
vest in the Government : 
Provided that, in any case where the excess land or any part thereof held by a person as landowner or 
mortgagor together with any other land h eld by such person does not exceed the ceiling limit, the excess 
land or such part thereof as does not exceed the ceiling limit shall be restored to the possession of that 
person on an application made by him in this behalf to the competent authority withi n such time as may 
be prescribed and in the case where the possession of such land is restored to the mortgagor, the mortgage 
in respect of such land shall be deemed to be a simple mortgage.  
142. Publication of the final list and consequences thereof .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an entry 
in the list published under sub -section ( 3) of section 139 may, within thirty days from the date of 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette, file objections thereto before the deputy commissioner.  35 
 (2) The deputy commissioner or any other officer authori sed in this behalf by the Administrator  may, 
after considering the objections and after giving the objector or his representative s an opportunity of 
being heard in the matter, approve or modify the list.  
(3) The list  as approved or modified under sub -section ( 2) shall then be published in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as may be prescribed and subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
list shall be final.  
(4) With effect from the date of publicati on of the list in the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 3),— 
(a) the excess land shall stand transferred to and vest in the  Government free of all   
encumbrances ; or 
(b) the possession of the excess land shall stand restored to the landowner or the mortgag or, as the 
case may be; or  
(c) the rights of the landowner or the mortgagor in respect of the excess land shall stand 
transferred to the tenant or the mortgage e, as the case may be . 
143. Compensation .—(1) Where any excess land of a landowner vests in the Government , there shall 
be paid by the Government to the landowner compensation , subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), 
of an amount equal to  twenty times the net annual income fro m such land.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -section  (1), the net annual income from any land shall be 
deemed to be one -fifth of the value of the average yearly gross produce of the land, calculated in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where such excess land or any part thereof is in the possession of a te nant, the compensation 
payable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the land shall be apportioned between the landowner and the 
tenant in such proportion as may be determined by the competent authority in the prescribed manner, 
having regard to their respec tive shares in the net income from such land.  
(3) In addition to the compensation payable in respect of any excess land under sub -section ( 1), there 
shall also be paid compensation in respect of any structure of building constructed on such land and any 
trees planted thereon, and such compensation shall be determined by the competent authority in the 
prescribed manner, having regard to the market value of any structure or building or the value of such 
trees, and such compensation shall be paid to the person  who has constructed the structure or building or 
planted the trees . 
(4) Where any excess land in respect of which compensation is payable is subject to any mortgage or 
other encumbrance, the amount due under the mortgage or other encumbrance in respect of  such excess 
land, or where a transfer of an y excess land is void by virtue of sub -section ( 4) of section 140, the 
consideration money paid by the transferee in respect of such excess land, shall be a charge on the 
compensation payable in respect of the ex cess land to the person who has created the mortgage or 
encumbrance or, as the case may be, to the transferor.  
(5) Where a tenant acquires the rights of  a landowner in respect of any excess land, the compensation 
payable by him in respect of that land shal l be equal to the amount which the landowner would have been 
paid as compensation under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) if the land had vested in the Government; 
and the amount shall, in the first instance, be paid to the landowner by the Government  and shall be 
recovered from the tenant in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) Where a mortgage e in possession acquires the rights of the mortgagor in respect of any excess 
land under sub -section ( 3) of section 141, the compensation payable by the mortga gee in respect of that 
land shall be such sum of money, if any, as may be due to the mortgagor after setting off the mortgage 
debt against the market value of such excess land.  
(7) Where any excess land of a religious  or charitable institution vests in the  Government , such 
institution shall, in lieu of compensation payable under  sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or                   
sub-section ( 3), be paid an annuity equal to the net annual income of the excess land and such net annual 
income shall be det ermined by the competent authority in the prescribed manner.  36 
 (8) The competent authority shall, after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, make an order 
determining the amount of compensation payable to any person under this section.  
144. Manner of  payment of compensation .—(1) The compensation payable under section 143 shall 
be due from the date of publication of the list under sub -section ( 3) of section 142 and may paid in cash, 
in a lump sum or in instalments, or in bonds.  
(2) Where the compensati on is payable in bonds, the bonds may be made not  transferable  or 
transferable by endorsement or in any other manner but all such bonds shall be redeemed within such 
period , not exceeding twenty years from the date of issue , as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where  there is any delay in the payment of compensation o r where the compensation is paid either 
in instalments or in bonds, it shall carry interest at the rate of two and a half per cent . per annum from the 
date on which it falls due.  
145. Limit of future acqu isition of load .—No person representing a family shall acquire in any 
manner whatsoever, whether by transfer, exchange, lease, agreement or succession , any land whe re such 
acquisition has the effect of making the total area of the land held by him exceed the ceiling limit; and any 
such land in excess of the ceiling limit shall be treated as excess land of the transferee and provisions of 
section 139 to 144  shall, as fa r as may be, apply to such excess land.  
146. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases .—Where a person representing a family 
holds land not exceeding the ceiling limit, but subsequently the land held exceeds the ceiling limit, then , 
notwithstandin g anything contained in this Chapter, such person shall not be required to surrender any 
part of the land on the ground that it is excess land, if such excess is due to a decrease in the number of 
members of the family.  
147. Power of deputy commissioner to  take possession of excess land .—After the publication of 
the list of excess land s under sub -section ( 3), of section 142, and after demarcation in the prescribed 
manner of such lands where necessary , the deputy commissioner may take possession of any excess land 
and may use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary for the purpose . 
148. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever being bound to submit a return under section 137 fails to 
do so, without reasonable cause, within the prescribed time, or s ubmits a return which he knows or has 
reason to believe to be false, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever contravenes any lawful order made under this Chapter or otherwise obstructs any person 
from lawfully taking possession of any land shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
149. Finality of orders .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made under this Chapter 
shall be final.  
150. Power to exempt, etc .—(1) The Admi nistrator  may, on an application made to him in this 
behalf within three months from the commencement of this Act, exempt from the operation of             
section 136 — 
(a) any land which is being used for growing tea, coffee  or rubber  including lands used or 
required for use for purposes ancillary to, or for the extension of, the cultivation of tea, coffee  or 
rubber to be determined in the prescribed manner;  
(b) any sugarcane farm  operated by a sugar factory;  
(c) any speciali sed farm w hich is being used for cattle breeding, dairy or wool raising;  
(d) any person who holds a compact block land exceeding the ceiling limit which — 
(i) is being used as an orchard from before the 1 st day of January, 1958, or  
(ii) is being used as a farm in which heavy investment or permanent structural improvements 
have been made and which, in the opinion of the Administrator, is being so efficiently managed 
that its break up is likely to bring a fall in production:  37 
 Provided that whe re such person holds the compact block of land together with any other land, he 
shall be permitted to elect to retain either the compact block of land, notwithstanding that it exceeds the 
ceiling limit, or the other land not exceeding the ceiling limit;  
(e) any land which is being held by a co -operative society,  provided that where a member of any 
such society holds a share in such land, his share shall be taken into account in determin ing his ceiling 
limit:  
Provided that the Administrator  may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of 
three months , if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application in time.  
(2) Where any land in respect of which e xemption has been granted to a person under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) is tran sferred to another person, the A dministrator may, on an application made to him 
within three months  from the date of the transfer, exempt the transferee from the operation of section 136 
and section 145 and the pr ovisions of the said clause shall, as far as may be, apply to the grant of such  
exempt ion. 
(3) Where the Administrator is of opinion that the use of land for any specified purpose is expedient 
or necessary in the public interest, he may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, make a declaration to 
that effect and on the issue of such notification, any person may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 145 acquire land in excess of the ceiling limit for being used for such specified purpose and such  
person shall, within one month form the date of such acquisition, send intimation thereof to the competent 
authority.  
(4) Where any land in respect of which exemption has been granted under su b-section (1) or           
sub-section  (2) or sub -section (3) ceases to be used, or is not, within the prescribed time, used, for the 
purpose for which exemption had been granted, the Administrator may, after giving the persons affected 
an opportunity of being heard, withdraw such exemption.  
CHAPTER  XII. —PREVENTION OF FRAGMENTATION  
151. Definitions .—For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “holding” means the aggregate area of land held by a person as a landowner;  
(b) “fragment” means a holding of less than two and a half acres in area ; 
(c) “land” has the same meaning as in Chapter XI . 
152. Restriction s on transfer, etc .—(1) No portion of a holding shall be transferred by way of sale, 
exchange, gift, bequest or mortgage with possession, so as to create a fragment:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall n ot apply to a gift made in favour of the 
Bhoodan movement initiated by Acharya  Vinoba  Bhave.  
(2) No portion of a holding shall be transferred by way of lease, where as a result of such lease, — 
(i) the lessor shall be left with less than two and a half acres, or  
(ii) the total area held by the lessee  exceeds the limit  of a family holding . 
(3) No fragment shall be transferred to a person who does not have some land under personal 
cultivation, or to a person who holds, or by reason of such transfer shall hold, land in excess of the limit  
of a family holding . 
153. Partition of holding .—(1) No holding shall be partitioned in such manner as to create a 
fragment.  
(2) A fragment shall not be partitioned unle ss as a result of such partition its portions get merged in 
holdings of two and a half acres or more or in fragments so as to create holdings of two and a half acres or 
more ; 38 
 (3) Whenever, in a suit for partition, the court finds that the partition of a ho lding will result in the 
creation of a fragment, the court shall , instead of proceeding to divide the holding , direct the sale of the 
same and distribute the proceeds thereof among the co -sharers.  
(4) Whenever a holding is put up for sale under  sub-section  (3), a co -share r shall have the first option 
to purchase the holding at the highest bid; if there are two or more co -sharers claiming the first option, 
that co -sharer who offers the highest consideration shall be preferred.  
154. Transfers in contravention  of this Chapter .—(1) Any transfer, partition or lease of land made 
in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter shall be void.  
(2) No document of transfer , partition or lease shall be registered unless declarations in writing are 
made, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, by the parties thereto before the competent 
registering authority under the Indian Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908) , regarding lands held by each 
prior to the transaction and the land which shall come to hold thereafter.  
(3) No registering authority shall register under the Indian Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908),  any 
document of transfer , partition or lease of land if, from the declaration s made under sub -section ( 2), it 
appears that the transaction has been effected in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter.  
155. Penalty .—The parties to any transfer , partition or lease made or entered into in contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable with fine which extend to one hundred rupee s. 
156. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which and the period within which a return under section 137 may be submitted;  
(b) the agency through which information may be collected under section 138;  
(c) the manner of holding enquiries under this Part; 
(d) the matters which may be determined under sub -section ( 1) of section 139 and the manner of 
determination of excess lands under this Part; 
(e) the form in which a list under sub -section ( 3) of section 139 or  sub-section ( 3) of section 142 
may be prepared and the manner of publication of such list;  
(f) the period within which an application for registration of excess land may be made under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 141;  
(g) the manner of apport ionment of compensation between the landowner and the tenant under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 143 ; 
(h) the manner of assessment of the market value of any structure of building or trees under      
sub-section ( 3) of section 143 ; 
(i) the manner of recovery o f the compensation payable the tenant under sub -section ( 5) of     
section 143;  
(j) the manner of determining under sub -section ( 6) of section 143 the market value of any excess 
land over which a mortgage e in possession acquires the rights of the mortgagor;  
(k) the manner of determination of the net annual income of any excess land for the purpose of 
payment of compensation under section 14 3; 
(l) the manner of payment of compensation  including the number of  instal ments in which the 
compensation may be paid or recovered and the period within which bonds may be redeemed;  
(m) the manner of demarcation of any excess land under section 147;  
(n) the matters which may be determined by the Administrator  in granting an exemption under 
section 150 including the form in which applications and intimations may be made or given , under 
section 150;  39 
 (o) the from of declarations under section 154;  
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
PART V  
CHAPTER  XIII. —GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  
157. Recovery of amount s due as an arrear of and revenue .—Without prejudice to any other 
provision of this Act, any amount due to the Government, whether by way of costs, penalty or otherwise, 
and any other amount which is ordered  to be paid to or recovered by the Government, under this Act shall 
be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
158. Special provision regarding Scheduled Tribes .—No transfer of land by a person who is a 
member of the Scheduled Tribes s hall be valid unless — 
(a) the transfer is to another member of the Scheduled Tribes; or  
(b) where the transfer is to a person who is n ot a member of any such tribe, it is made with the 
previous permission in writing of the deputy commissioner; or 
(c) the transfer is by way of mortgage to a co -operative society.  
159. Jurisdiction of civil courts excluded .—No suit or other proceedings shall , unless otherwise 
expressly provided for in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, lie or be instit uted in any 
civil court with respect to any matter arising under the provided for by this Act : 
Provided that if in a dispute between parties a question of title is involved, a civil suit may be brought 
for the adjudication of such question . 
160. Act to override contract and other laws .—Save as other wise provided , the provisions of this 
Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained as any other law, custom or 
usage or agreement or decree or order of court.  
161. Court –fees.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Court -fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870 ) every 
application, appeal or other proceeding un der this Act shall bear a court -fee stamp of such value as may 
be prescribed.  
162. Village officers to be public servants .—Every amin  and every other village officer appointed 
under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860 ). 
163. Power to exempt .—With the previous approval of the Government, the Administrat or may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette exempt any class of lands from all or any of the provision of this Act.  
164. General provision as to penalties .—Whoever  contravenes any provision of this Act for which 
no penalty has been otherwise provided for therein shall be punis hable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
165. Protection of action taken in good fa ith.—No suit, prosecution o r other proceedi ngs shall lie — 
(a) against any officer of the Government for anything in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act ; 
(b) against the Government for any damage caused or likely to caused or any injury suffered or 
likely to be suffered by anything, in good faith, done or intended to be done under this Act.  
166. Delegation of powers .—The Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
delegate to any officer or authority subordinate to him any of the powers conferred on him or on  any 
officer subordinate to him by this Act, other than the power to make rules, to be exercised subject to such 
restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the said notification . 
167. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to any provision of this 
Act, the Government may , as occasion requires, take any action not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act which may appear to it necessar y for the purpose of removing t he difficulty.  40 
 168. General power to make rules .—Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Administrator  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules generally 
to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
169. Laying of rules before Parliament .—Every rule mad e under this Act shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it is made before  each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty  
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making  any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rules sh ould not be made, the rule shall th ereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect , as the case may be; so however that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
the rule.  
170. Repeal and savings .—(1) On and from the date on which any of the provisions of This Act are 
brought into force in any area in the Union territory of Manipur, the enactments specified in the Schedule 
or so much thereof as relate to the matters covered by the provisions so brought i nto force shall stand 
repealed in such area.  
(2) The repeal of any enactment or part thereof by sub -section ( 1) shall not affect, — 
(a) the previous operation of such enactment or anyth ing duly done or suffered there under ; 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under such enactment;  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
such enactment;  
(d) any investigation legal proceeding or remedy i n respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid , 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted or enforced and any such 
penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be impose d as if such enactment or part thereof had not been 
repealed.  
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), any appointment, rule, order, notification or 
proclamation made or issued, any lease, rent, right or liability granted, fixed, acquire d or incurred and any 
other thing done or action taken under any of the enactments or parts thereof repealed under                    
sub-section ( 1) shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act brought into force, 
be deemed t o have been made , issued, granted, fixed , acquired, incurred, done or taken under this Act and 
shall continue to be in force until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
(4) Any custom or usage prevailing at the time any of the pro visions of this Act are brought into force 
in any area in Union territory  of Manipur and having the force of law therein shall, if such custom or 
usage is repugnant to or inconsistent with such provision, cease to be operative to the extent of such 
repugnancy or inconsistency.  
 
  41 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See Section 170 ( 1)] 
1. The Assam  Land and Revenue Regulation , 1886 (Assam Act I of 1886), as extended to the Union 
Territory of Manipur by notification under section 2 of the Union Territories (Laws)                             
Act, 195 0 (30 of 1950).  
2. The Bombay Vidardha Region Agricu ltural Tenants (Protection from Eviction and Amendment of 
Tenancy Laws) Act, 1957 (Bombay Act IX of 195 8), as extended to the Union territory of Manipur by 
notification under section 2 of the Union Territories (Law s) Act , 1950 (30 of 1950).  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Orphanages and other Charitable Homes (Supervision and Control) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE ORPHANAGES AND OTHER CHARITABLE HOMES (SUPERVISION AND 
CONTROL) ACT, 1960  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act not to apply to certain institutions.  
4. Effect of Act on instruments governing recognised homes.  
CHAPTER II  
THE BOARD OF CONTROL AND ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  
5. Board of Control, its constitution, etc.  
6. Term of office and casual vacancies.  
7. Functions of the Board.  
8. Power of the Board to give directions to manager of a recognised home.  
9. Power of inspection.  
10. Funds of the Board.  
11. Staff of the Board.  
12. Delegation of powers.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF HOMES  
13. Homes not to be run without certificate.  
14. Application for certificate . 
15. Grant or refusal of certificate.  
16. Contents of certificate.  
17. Revocation of certificate.  
18. Appeals.  
19. Surrender of certificate and its effect.  
 
 2 
 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF RECOGNISED HOMES  
SECTIONS  
20. Managing committee.  
21. Duty of manager.  
22. Discharge of inmates of home.  
23. Reports regarding deaths of inmates.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Penalties.  
25. Sanction for prosecutions.  
26. Persons performing functions under Act to be public servants.  
27. Protection of acts done in good faith.  
28. Power of State Government to exempt homes.  
29. Power of State Government to make rules.  
30. Power of the Board to make regulations.  
31. Repeals and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE ORPHANAGES AND OTHER CHARITABLE HOMES (SUPERVISION AND 
CONTROL) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1960  
[9th April , 1960.]  
 
An Act to provide for the supervision and control of orphanages, homes for neglected women 
or children and other like institutions and for matters connected  therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Orphanages and 
other Charitable Homes (Supervision and Control) Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date  as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “Board ” means the Board of Control established under sect ion 5;  
(b) “certificate ” means the certificate of recog nition granted under section 15 ;  
(c) “child ” means a boy or girl who has not completed the age of eighteen years;  
(d) “home ” means an institution, whether called an orphanage, a home for neglected w omen 
or children, a widows ’ home, or by any other name, maintained or intended to be maintained for 
the reception, care, protection and welfare of women or children;  
(e) “manager ” means a member of the managing committee appointed as such by the 
committ ee under section 20 ;  
(f) “managing committee ” means the committee of manage ment referred to in section 20 ;  
(g) “recognised home ” means a home in respect of which  a certificate has been granted ;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made  under this Ac t;  
(i) “woman ” means a female who has completed the age of eighteen years.  
3. Act not to apply to certain institutions .―Nothing in this Act shall apply to ― 
(a) any hostel or boarding house attached to, or controlled or recognised  by, an educational 
institution ; or  
(b) any protective home established under the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and 
Girls Act, 1956 (10 4 of 1956); or  
(c) any reformatory, certified or other school, or any home or workhouse, governed by any 
enactment for the time being in force.  4 
 4. Effect of Act on instruments governing recognised homes .―The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwit hstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any instrument governing a 
recognised home.  
CHAPTER II  
THE BOARD OF CONTROL AND ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  
5. Board of Control, its constitution, etc .―(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a Board of Control for the supervision and control of homes in the 
State.  
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: ― 
(a) three members of the State Legislature to be  elected by the members thereof; provided  that 
where the State Legislature consist of two Houses, two members shall be elected by the members 
of the Legislative Assembly from among themselves and one member shall be elected by the 
members of the Legislativ e Council from among themselves ;  
(b) five members of the managing committees in the State, to be elected by such committees 
from among themselves, each such committee having one vote only for this pur pose; 
(c) the officer in charge of social welfare work in the State, to be nominated by the Stat e 
Government;  
(d) six members to be nominated by the State Government, of whom not more than one shall 
be a member of Parliament from the State and not less than three shall be women.  
(3) If for any reason the officer referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) is unable to attend any 
meeting of the Board, he may depute any officer subordinate to him to attend such meeting.  
(4) The Chairman of the Board shall be elected by the members of the Board from among 
themselves:  
Provided that at the time of the f irst constitution of the Board, one of the members of the Board 
shall be nominated by the State Government to be its Chairman.  
6. Term of office and casual vacancies .―(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term 
of office of a member of the Boa rd shall be five years from the date of his election or nomination or 
until his successor has been duly elected or  nominated, whichever is longer :  
Provided that the term of office of a member elected under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, or of a member of Parliament nominated under clause ( d) of                
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the House of 
the State Legislature which elected him, the ma naging committee or Parliament, as the case may be.  
(2) A member may at any time resign his office by giving notice in writing to the State 
Government and on such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by that Government, the 
seat of such memb er shall become vacant.  
(3) A casual vacancy in the Board shall be filled by fresh election or  nomination, as the case may 
be; and the term of office of a member elected or nominated to fill such vacancy shall be the 
remainder of the term of the member in  whose place he is elected or nominated.  
(4) Members of the Board shall be eligible for re -election or re -nomination.  5 
 (5) No act done or proceeding taken by the Board shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board.  
7. Functions of the Board .―(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to supervise and control 
generally all matters relating to the management of homes in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act; and exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed by  or 
under this Act.  
(2) In the performance of its functions under this Act, the Board shall be found by such directions 
as the State Government may give to it.  
8. Power of the Board to give directions to manager of a recognised home .―Subject to the 
direct ions, if any , given under sub -section ( 2) of section 7, the Board may, from time to time, give 
such general or special directions to the manager of a recognised home as it thinks fit for the efficient 
management of the home and the manager shall comply wit h such directions.  
9. Power of inspection .―Any member of the Board, or any officer of the Board authorised in 
writing by it in this behalf, by general or special order, may enter at all reasonable times any home for 
the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this Act or of any rules, re gulations, directions 
or orders thereunder are being complied with and may require the production, for his inspection, of 
any document, book, register or record kept therein and ask for any information relating to the 
working of the home:  
Provided that no  such member or officer shall enter any home or part thereof where there are 
females, except in the presence of two respectable women of the locality.  
10. Funds of the Board .―The funds of the Board shall consist of ― 
(a) contributions, subscriptions, donations or bequests m ade to it by any person ; and  
(b) grants made to it by the State Government or any local or other public body.  
11. Staff of the Board .―Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in this 
behalf, the Board may, for the purpose of enabling it to perform efficiently its functions or exercise its 
powers under this Act, appoint such officers or other employees as it may think fit and determine thei r 
functions and conditions of service.  
12. Delegation of powers .―Subject to the control of the State Government, the Board may, by 
general or special order in writing and subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be 
specified therein, delegate to the Chairman or any other member or any officer thereof such of its 
powers and functions under this Act, as it may deem necessary, for the efficient carrying on of its 
administration.  
CHAPTER III  
RECOGNITION OF HOMES  
13. Homes not to be run without certificate .―After the commencement of this Act, no person 
shall maintain or conduct any home except under, and in accordance with, the conditions of a 
certificate of recognition granted under this Act.  
14. Application for certificate .―Every person desiring to maintain or conduct a home shall 
make an application for a  certificate of recognition to the Board in such form and containing such 
particulars as may be prescribed:  6 
 Provided that a person maintaining or conducting a home at the commencement of this Act shall 
be allowed a period of three months from such commenc ement to make an application for such 
certificate.  
15. Grant or refusal of certificate .―(1) On receipt of an application under section 14, the Board 
after making such inquiry as it considers necessary, may, by order in writing, either grant a certificate 
or refuse to grant it.  
(2) No order refusing to grant a certificate shall be made until  an opportunity is given to the 
applicant to be heard in the matter and where a certificate is refused, the grounds for such refusal shall 
be communicated to the applicant in the prescribed manner.  
(3) No fee shall be charged for the grant of a certificat e. 
(4) A certificate shall not be transferable.  
16. Contents of certificate .―(1) The certificate shall specify ― 
(a) the name and location of the recognised home;  
(b) the name of the  manager thereof ; 
(c) the nature of the home, whether for women generally or for widows or for children 
generally or for orphans or f or one or more of these classes ; 
(d) the number of inmates to be taken by the home;  
(e) the minimum standards regarding boarding, lodging, clothing, sanitation, health and 
hygiene which, having regard to the conditions of the locality in which the recognised home is 
situate d and its resources, should be complied with in the home;  
(f) the standard of education or training to be provided for the inmates of the home, in case the 
education or train ing of its inmates is undertaken; and  
(g) such other conditions and particulars as  may be prescribed:  
Provided that there shall be deem ed to be included in the certi ficate granted in respect of a home 
for females a condition t o the effect that the person in charge thereof, whether called superintendent or 
by any other name, shall ordina rily be a woman.  
(2) The Board shall not, ordinarily, permit any recognised home to admit as inmates, persons of 
different sexes, but may do so for reasons to be recorded and subject to such conditions and 
limitations as may appear to it to be in the publi c interest.  
(3) Without the previous written consent of the Board, no recog nised home shall ― 
(a) change its name or location as specified in t he certificate in respect of it ; or 
(b) alter the purpose of any service specified therein.  
17. Revocation of cert ificate .― (1) The Board may, without prejudice to any other penalty to 
which a person to whom a certificate has been granted may be liable under this Act, revoke the 
certificate ― 
(a) if it is satisfied that the home is not being conducted in accordance wit h the con ditions laid 
down in the certificate ; or 7 
 (b) the management of the home is being persistently carried on in an unsatisfactory manner 
or is being carried on in a manner highly prejudicial to the moral and phy sical well -being of the 
inmates ; or 
(c) the home has, in the opinion of the Board, otherwise rendered itself unsuitable for that 
purpose:  
Provided that no order of revocation shall be made under this sub -section until an opportunity 
is given to the person to show cause why the certificate should  not be revoked;  
and in every case of revocation, the grounds therefor shall be com municated to the person in the 
prescribed manner.  
(2) Where a certificate in respect of a home is revoked under sub -section ( 1), such home shall 
cease to function ― 
(a) whe re an appeal has not been preferred under section 18 against the order of revocation, 
immediately on the expiration of the pe riod prescribed for such appeal ; 
(b) where such appeal has been preferred, but the order of revocation is upheld, from the date 
of the appellate order.  
(3) On any home ceasing to function under sub -section ( 2), the Board may direct that any woman 
or child who is an inmate of such home shall be ― 
(a) restored to the custody of her or his parent, husband or lawful guardian, as the case may 
be, or  
(b) transferred to another recognised home, or  
(c) entrusted to the care of any other fit person:  
Provided that no woman shall be entrusted to the car e of any person other than a woman.  
18. Appeals .―Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board refusing to grant a certificate or 
revoking a c ertificate may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, prefer an 
appeal to the State Governme nt or to such authority as may be specified by it against such refusal or 
revocation:  
Provided that the State Government or the authority so specified, as the case may be, may admit 
an appeal after the expiry of the period so prescribed, if it is satisfie d that the applicant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.  
19. Surrender of certificate and its effect .―(1) The manager of a home, if specially authorised 
in this behalf by resolution of the managing committee, may, on giving six months' notice in writing 
to the Board of his intention so to do, apply for the withdrawal of the certificate granted in respect of 
that home and on the expiration of the said period from the date of notice, the certificate shall, unless 
before that time the notice is withdrawn, cease to have effect ; and the home shall cease to function.  
(2) No woman or child shall be received into  any such hom e after the date of such notice ; but 
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the obligatio n of the manager to comply with  all  
the requirements of this Act and the rules, regulations, directions and orders thereunder until the 
certificate ceases to take effect under sub -section ( 1). 8 
 CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT OF RECOGNISED HOMES  
20. Managing committee .―(1) There shall be a managing committee in charge of the 
management of every recognised home and the members of the managing committee  shall appoint a 
member thereof to be the manager of such home for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The constitution, powers and  functions of the managing com mittee and the term of office of 
the members thereof shall be such as may be provided in the constit ution pertaining to such home.  
21. Duty of manager .―It shall be the duty of the manager to comply with all the requirements of 
this Act and the rules, regulations, directions and orders thereunder in respect of every woman or 
child admitted into the recognised home until the woman is rehabilitated or the c hild completes the 
age of eighteen years or until the certificate ceases to have effect.  
22. Discharge of inmates of home .―(1) Subject to the regulations, if any, made by the Board, if 
the managing committee of a home is satisfied that an inmate of the hom e has become fit to earn his 
or her livelihood or is otherwise fit to be discharged from the home, the manager may discharge such 
inmate.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no female inmate of a home shall be 
discharged or given in marriage or entrusted to the care of any other person unless such female has 
made a declaration before the Board or an officer specified by it in this behalf that she consents to 
such discharge, marriage or entrustment, as the case may be, and, if the inma te to be given in marriage 
is a minor, unless the Board or officer, as the case may be, has, after recording the reasons in writing, 
given its or his approval thereto.  
23. Reports regarding deaths of inmates .―The manager shall, immediately after the occurr ence 
of any death among the inmates of the home, send a written report thereof to the Board explaining the 
cause of death to the best of his knowledge.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Penalties .―Any person who fails to comply with any of the provisions of th is Act or of any 
rule, regulation, direction or order thereunder or any of the conditions of a certificate shall be 
punishable in the case of a first offence with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with 
fine which may extend to two hundred an d fifty rupee s or with both, and in the case  of a second or 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees or with both.  
25. Sanction for prosecutions .―No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except with the 
previous sanction of the District Magistrate or the Chief Presidency Magistrate, as the case may be.  
26. Persons performing functions under Act to be public servants .―The members of the 
Board and every person empowered by the Board to exercise any of its powers under this Act shall be 
deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).  
27. Protection of acts done in good faith .―No suit, prosec ution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person who performs any function under this Act for anything done or intended to be 
done in good faith under this Act or any rule, regulation direction or order thereunder.  9 
 28. Power of State Government  to exempt homes .―(1) If, after consult ation with the Board, 
the State  Government is satisfied that the circumstances in relation to any class of homes or any home 
are such that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and 
for reasons to be specified therein, exempt, subject to such conditions, restrictions or limitations, if 
any, as it may think fit to impose, such class of homes or home, as the case may be, from the 
operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or regulation made there under.  
(2) Every notification issued under this section granting an exemption shall be reviewed in 
consultation with the Board at intervals not exceeding two years, but nothing herein contained shall 
affect the power of the  State Government to amend, vary or rescind any such notification at any time 
in consultation with the Board.  
29. Power of State Government to make rules .―(1) The State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the pu rposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections, to the Board unde r clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 5 and the election of the Chairman;  
(b) the disqualifications for membership of the Board and the procedure to be followed in 
removing a member who is or becomes subject to any disqualification;  
(c) the funds of t he Board ; 
(d) the travelling and other allowances to b e drawn by members of the Board ; 
(e) the appointment of staff for enabling the Board to perform its functions efficiently under 
this Act and their recruitment and conditions of service;  
(f) the calling of returns and other information by the State Government from the Bo ard and 
the managing committees ; 
(g) the form in which an application for certificate of recognition may be made, the particulars 
to be contained in such application and the form in which,  and the conditions subject to which, 
such certificate may be granted ; 
(h) the maintenance of registers and accounts by the Boar d and the audit of its accounts ; 
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) All rules made under this Act s hall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before the 
State Legislature.  
30. Power of the Board to make regulations .―(1) The Board may, with the previous approval 
of the State Gove rnment, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent 
with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for enabling it to perform its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the fol lowing matters, namely: ― 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Board, the procedure to be followed in regard to 
the transaction of business at such meetings and the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business a t such meetings ; 10 
 (b) the maintenance of the minutes of m eetings of the Board and the transmission of copies 
thereof to the State Government;  
(c) the appointment of sub -committees and local committees and of persons by the Board for 
the purpose of assisting it in performing its functions under this Act;  
(d) the supervision and control of the management of recognised homes;  
(e) the inspection of homes;  
(f) the calling of returns and other information by the Board from managing committees;  
(g) the reception, care, treatment, maintenance, protection, training, welfa re, instruction, 
control and discipline  of inmates in recognised homes;  
(h) visits to, and communication with, inmates of recognised homes and the grant of 
permission to such inmates to absent themselves for short periods;  
(i) the discharge of inmates from  recognised homes, their transfer from one recognised home 
to another and the reports to be sent by managers to the Board;  
(j) any other matter in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Board, ne cessary for 
the efficient super vision and contr ol of homes.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend, vary or rescind any 
regulation which it has approved ; and thereupon the regulation shall have effect accordingly, but 
without prejudice to the exercise of the powers  of the Board under sub -section ( 1). 
31. Repeals and savings .―(1) As from the date of the coming into force in any State of this Act, 
the Women's and Children's Institutions (Licensing) Act, 1956 (105 of 1956), or any other Act 
corresponding to this Act in  force in that State immediately before such commencement, shall stand 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any direction 
given, any register or rule or order made or any restriction imposed) under the said Act shall, in so far 
as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act , be deemed to have been 
done or taken under the provisions aforesaid, as if they were in force when such thing was done or 
such action was taken, and shall continue in force accordingly until supe rseded by anything done or 
any action taken under this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Preference Shares (Regulation of Dividends) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE P REFERENCE SHARES (REGULATION OF D IVIDENDS) ACT, 1960  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Regulation of dividends on preference shares in certain cases . 
4. Special provisions in relation to companies where a portion of their income is not chargeable to 
income -tax. 
4A. Deduction of income -tax. 
5. Over -riding effect of Act . 
6. Act not to apply to participating preference dividends . 
7. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE PREFERENCE SHARES (REGULATION  OF D IVIDENDS)  ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 63 OF 1960  
[28th December , 1960.]  
An Act to regulate dividends on preference shares of certain companies.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—This Act may be called the Preference Shares (Regulation of 
Dividends) Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir except to the extend to which the 
provision of this Act  relate to the regulation of dividends on preference shares of banking and insurance 
companies and financial corporations.  
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) the provision of this Act shall, in their 
application to the Union territ ory of Pondicherry, have effect subject to the modifications specified in the 
Schedule. ] 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a)“Companies Act, ” means the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(b) “company ” means an Indian company as defined in 2[clause ( 26) of section 2 of the Income -
tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and includes a company referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( 17)] of the 
said section which has made arrangements for the declaration and payment of dividends within Indian 
in accordance with the rules made under the said Act;  
(c) “preference share ” means a share which 3*** carries, as respects dividends, a preferential  right 
to be paid a fixed amount or an amount calculated at a fixed rate;  
(d) “previous year ” has the same meaning as in the 4[Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) ]; 
(e) “stipulated dividend ”, in relation to a preference share, means the fixed amount or the amount 
calculated at fixed rate which the holder of such share has a preferential right to be paid as dividend;  
(f) all other word and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Companies 
Act shall have the meanings respectively assign ed to them in that Act.  
3. Regulation of dividends on preference shares in certain cases .—(1) Where the stipulated 
dividend in respect of a preference share of a company 5[issued and subscribed f or before the 1st April, 
1960 ],— 
(a)is specified to be free of income -tax and no deduction is made therefrom on account of the 
income -tax payable by the company, or  
(b) was being paid before the 1st April, 1960, without any deduction therefrom on account of the 
income -tax payable by the company, notwithstanding the  absence of any specification that the 
dividend would be free of income -tax, 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 2 6 of 1968, s. 3  and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 24 -5-1968).  
2. Subs. by  Act 10 of 1965, s. 72, for “clause ( 7A) of section 2 of the Indian Income -tax Act, 1922 and includes a company 
referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( 5A)” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
3. The words, figures and letters “having been issued and subscribed for befor e the 1 st day of April, 1960” omitted by s. 72, ibid. 
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
4. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “  Indian Income -tax Act, 1922  (11 of 1922) ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
5. Ins. by s. 72, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  3 
 every such share shall, as respects dividends declared after the commencement of this Act, carry a 
preferential right to be paid without any deduction aforesaid such amount as wou ld exceed the stipulated 
dividend by thirty per cent . thereof.  
(2) Where the stipulated dividend in respect of preference share of a company issued and subscribed  
for after the 31st March, 19591[and before the 1st April, 1960 ] is free of income -tax, and the company, 
besides paying the stipulated dividend to the holder such share, pays to Government on his behalf any 
sum on account of income -tax payable thereon, then, every such share shall, as respects dividends 
declared after the commencement of this Act, carry a preferential right to be paid free of income -tax such 
amount as together with the sum aforesaid would exceed the stipulated dividend by thirty per cent . 
thereof.  
(3) Where the stipulated divide nd in respect of a prefer ence share of a company1[issued and 
subscribed  for before the 1st April, 1960 ]— 
(a) is specified to be subject to income -tax and a deduction is made therefrom on account of the 
income -tax payable by the company, or  
(b) was being paid before the 1st April, 1960, subject to a deduction therefrom on account of the 
income -tax payable by the company, notwithstanding the absence of any specification that the 
dividend would be subject to income -tax, then every such share shall, as respects dividends declared 
after the commencement of this Act, carry a preferential right to be paid subject to the deduction 
aforesaid such amount as would exceed the stipulated dividend by eleven percent .thereof.  
 (4) Where a company has in relation to a preference share 1[issued and s ubscribed for before the 1st 
April, 19 60] declared,— 
(a) after the 31st March, 1959, and before he 1st July, 1960, a dividend in respect of a previou s 
year relevant to its assessment year 1960 -61 or a subsequent assessment year, or  
(b) after the 30th June,  1960 , and before the commencement of this Act, a dividend in respect of 
any previous year,  
it shall declare, in respect of the said previous year, an additional dividend of such amount as, together 
with the dividend already declared, would exceed the sti pulated dividend — 
(i)by thirty per cent .of the stipulated dividend in the cases referred  to in sub -section ( 1), or 
(ii) by eleven per cent . of the stipulated dividend in the cases referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), sub-section ( 3) and sub -section ( 4), any reference therein to 
the stipulated dividend shall, in respect of a preference share issued and subscribed for on or before the 
31st March, 1959, be construed as a reference to the stipulated dividend as on that day . 
(6) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that any reference in this section 1[and section  4A] 
to deduction made fro m a dividend “on account of income -tax payable b y the company ” does not include 
any amount deducted by the company from the dividend under 2[section 194 of the Income -tax Act, 
1961(43 of 1961) ]. 
4. Special provisions in relation to companies where a portion of their income is not chargeable 
to income -tax.—3[Where any preference share of  a company has been issue d and subscribed for before 
the 1st April, 1960, and any portion of the profits and gain s of the company ] in respect of t he relevant 
period is exempt fro m income -tax under the 4[Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) ], by reason of such  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1965, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1-4-1965).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid,.for “sub -section ( 3D) of section 18 of the Indian Income -tax Act, 1922  (11 of 1922) ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
3. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
4. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “Indian Income -tax Act,  1922 (11 of 1922)” (w.e.f 1 -4-1965).  4 
 portion being agricultural income, then, for the purpose of the increase in the dividend in relation to any 
such preference share under the provisions of section 3, the increase of thirty per cent . or eleven per cent . 
referred to therein shall be taken to be such proportion of the said thirty per cent . or eleven per cent . as the 
case may be, as the total amount of the profits and gain s of the company excluding the portion of the 
profits and gains which is so exempt in respect of the relevant period bears to  the total amount of the 
profits and gains thereof in respect of that period.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “relevant period ”, in relation to the profits and  gains of 
a company, shall mean — 
(a) the previous years relevant to such of the three assessment years as immediately precede the 
assessment year ending on the 31st March, 1961, and in each of which the net result of the 
computation of profits and gains of the company has not been loss or where there are only two such 
years, such two years, or where there is only one such year, such one year; or  
(b) in any case where clause ( a) is not applicable, the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year ending on the 31st March, 1961 or a subsequent assessment year immediately following 
therea fter in which the net result of the computation of profits and gains has not been a loss.  
1[4A. Deduction of income -tax.—Where the stipulated dividend in respect of a preference share of a 
company— 
(a) is specified to be subject to income -tax and a deduction is made therefrom on account of the 
income -tax payable by the company, or  
(b) is being paid subject to a deduction therefrom on account of the income -tax payable by the 
company, not withstanding the absence of any specification that the dividend w ould be subject to 
income -tax,  
2[such deduction made by the company f rom any divide nd declared after the 28th day of February, 1966 
shall in no case exceed twenty -seven and a half per cent . of the aggregate of— 
(i) the stipulated dividend, and  
(ii) an amount equal to eleven per cent . of the stipulated dividend as specified in sub -section ( 3) 
of section 3. ]] 
5. Over -riding effect of Act .—(1)The provisions of  this Act shall have effect not withstanding 
anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in the memorandum or articles 
of a company or in any agreement between the company and its shareholders or in any resolution passed 
by the company in a general meeting or by its Board of directors.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in this Act, a company may, in the manner provided in 
section 106 of the Companies Act, increase the amount of dividend in respect of a preference shall 
beyond the limit specified in section 3 or section 4 of this Act.  
6. Act not to apply to participating preference dividends .—Nothing contained in 3[section 3 or 
section 4 ] shall apply to such part of any dividend on preference shares as is referred to in clause ( i) of the 
Explanation to sub -section ( 1) of section 85 of the Companies Act.  
7. Power to ma ke rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1965, s. 72 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1966, s. 52, for certain words, figures, letters and brackets (w.e.f. 1 -4-1966).  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1965, s. 72, for “this Act” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  5 
 session or in two successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modif ied form or 
be of no effect, as t he case may be , so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  6 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 1( 3)] 
Modifications of the Act in its application to the Union territory of Pondicherry  
1. Section s 3 and 4 shall be omitted.  
2. In section 4A, for the word s, brackets, letters and figures “twenty -seven and a half per cent . of the 
aggregate of ( i) the stipulated dividend, and ( ii) an amount  equal to eleven per cent . of the stipulated 
divide nd as specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 3 ”, the following  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Twenty -seven and a half per cent . of the stipulated dividend:  
Provided that i n a case where the preference shares in respect of which the dividend is declared or 
paid form part of the preference share capital of a company which, in respect of the greater part of its 
total income, is entitled to a deduction from tax chargeable form i t under the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 
of 1961), under a notification issued by the Central Government under section 294A of that Act, the 
reference to twenty -seven and a half per cent . of the stipulated dividend shall be construed as a 
reference to — 
(i) wher e the stipulated divide nd in respect of such preference share is declared or paid in 
respect of the previous year relevant to the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1965, the said twenty -seven and a half per cent .as reduced by forty -five p er cent . thereof;  
(ii) where such dividend is declared or paid in respect of the previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commenc ing on the 1st day of April, 1966 , the said twenty -seven and a half per 
cent.as reduced by twenty -five per cent . thereof;  
(iii) where such dividend is declared o r paid in respect of the previou s year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1967, or the 1st day of April, 1968, or the 
1st day of April, 1969, the said twenty -seven and a half per cent .as reduced by ten per cent . 
thereof.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that  any reference in this section to 
deduction made from a dividend on account of the income -tax payable by the company does not 
include any amount deducted by the company from that dividend under section 194 of the Income -
tax, 19 61 (43 of 1961) .”. 
3. In section 5, sub -section ( 2) shall be omitted.  
4. Section 6 shall be omitted. ] 
 
                                                           
1.  Added by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 24 -5-1968).  
--------------------------The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Duties of persons having charge of animals.  
CHAPTER II  
ANIMAL  WELFARE  BOARD  OF INDIA   
4. Establishment of Animal  Welfare Board of India.  
5. Constitution of the Board.  
5A. Reconstitution of the Board.  
6. Term of office and conditions of service of members of the Board.  
7. Secretary and  other employees of the Board.  
8. Funds of the B oard.  
9. Functions of the Board .  
10. Power of Board to make regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY  
11. Treating animals cruelly.  
12. Penalty for practising phooka  or doom dev . 
13. Destruction of suffering animals.  
CHAPTER IV  
 EXPERIMENTATIO N ON ANIMALS  
14. Experiments on animals.  
15. Committee for control and supervision of experiments on animals.  
15A. Sub -committees.  
16. Staff of the Committee.  
17. Duties of the Committee and power of the Committee to make rules relating to experiments 
on animals.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Power of entry and inspection.  
19. Power to prohibit experiments on animals.  
20. Penalties.  
CHAPTER V  
PERFORMING ANIMALS  
21. “Exhibit ” and “train” defined.  
22. Restriction on exhibition and training of performing animals.  
23. Pr ocedure for registration.  
24. Power of court to prohibit or restrict exhibition and training of performing animals.  
25. Power to enter premises.  
26. Offences . 
27. Exemptions . 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Saving as respects manner of killing prescribed by  religion.  
29. Power of court to deprive person convicted of ownership of  animal.  
30. Presumption as to guilt in certain cases.  
31. Cognizability of offences.  
32. Power of search and seizure.  
33. Search warrants.  
34. General power of seizure for examinat ion. 
35. Treatment and care of animals.  
36. Limitation of prosecutions.  
37. Delegation of powers.  
38. Power to make rules.  
38A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
39. Persons authorised under section 34 to be public servants.  
40. Indemnit y. 
41. Repeal of Act 11 of 1890.  
 
 3 
 THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS  ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1960  
[26th December , 1960.]  
An Act to prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals and for that 
purpose to amend the law relating to the  prevention of cruelty to animals.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ―  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on s uch date as the Central Govern ment may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates1 may be appointed for different States and for the 
different provisions contained in this Act.   
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context other wise requires, ― 
(a) “animal ” means any living creature other than a human being;  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 19 61, vide Notification No.S.O.823, dated the 1st April, 1961,  in respect of the State of Punjab and the Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Island ,  see Gazette of India 1961, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st September, 1961, vide Notification No. S.O.  2061, dated the 25th August, 1961,  for Chapters I and II in respect of the 
States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union territories  of Delhi, Manipur and T ripura,  see Gazette of India, 1961, Part II,               
sec. 3(ii).  
2nd October, 1961, vide Notific ation No. S.O. 2286, dated 15 th September 1961,  Chapters I and II in  respect of the  Union 
territory of Himachal Pradesh, Gazette of India, P art II, sec.  3(ii).  
26th January, 1962, vide Notification No. S.O. 21, dated 28th December, 1961, provisions of Chapters I and II in respect 
of the State of Rajasthan, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
15th July, 1963 , vide Notification No.  S.O. 2000, dated  11th July, 1963, Chapter IV in  respect of the States of Assam, 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal and in respect of the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal  Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, see Gazette of 
India, Part II, sec. 3 (ii).  
20th November, 1963 , vide Notification No. S.O. 3160 , dated 29th  October, 1963, Chapters III and VI in respect of the 
States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras , Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and in  respect of  the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura,       
see Gazette of India. Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 
24th May, 1977, vide Notif ication No. S.O. 1902, dated 24th May 1977 , provisions of Chapter V in respect of all the 
States and  the Union territories to which this Act extends (except the State of Jammu and Kashmir).  
This Act has been extended to  Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 19 63, s. 3 and Sch. and comes into force in Pondicherry 
vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963). and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 
1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) .  4 
 1[(b) “Board ” means the Board established under section 4, and as reconstituted from time to 
time under section 5A;]  
(c) “captive animal ” means any animal (not being a dome stic animal) which is in captivity or 
confinement, whether permanent or temporary, or which is subjected to any appliance or 
contrivance for the purpose of hindering or preventing its escape from captivity or confinement or 
which is pinioned or which is or  appears to be maimed;  
(d) “domestic animal ” means any animal which is tamed or which has been or is being 
sufficiently tamed to serve some purpose for the use of man or which, although it neither has been 
nor is being nor is intended to be so tamed, is o r has become in fact wholly or partly tamed;  
(e) “local authority ” means a municipal committee, district board or other authority for the 
time being invested by law with the control and administration of any matters within a specified 
local area;  
(f) “owner”, used with reference to an animal, includes not only the owner but also any other 
person for the time being in possession or custody of the animal, whether with or without the 
consent of the owner;  
(g) “phooka ” or “doom dev ” includes any process of i ntroducing air or any substance into the 
female organ of a milch animal with the object of drawing off from the animal any secretion of 
milk;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “street ” includes any way, road, lane, squar e, court, alley, passage or open space, whether a 
thoroughfare or not, to which the public have access.  
3. Duties of persons having charge of animals .―It shall be the duty of every person having the 
care or charge of any animal to take all reasonable measures to ensure the well -being of such animal 
and to prevent the infliction upon such animal of unnecessary pain or suffering.  
CHAPTER II  
 2[ANIMAL  WELFARE BOARD  OF INDIA ] 
4. Establishment of Animals Welfare Board of India .―(1) For the promotion of animal 
welfare generally and for the purpose of protecting animals from being subjected to   unnecessary 
pain or suffering, in particular, there shall be estab lished by the Central Government, as soon as may 
be after the commencement of this  Act, a Board to be called the 3[Animal Welfare Board of India].  
(2) The Board shall be a body cor porate having perpetual succes sion and a common seal with 
power, subject to  the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and may by its 
name sue and be sued.  
5. Constitution of the Board .―(1) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely: ― 
(a) the Inspector -General of Forests, Government of India, ex officio ;  
(b) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner to the Government of India, ex officio ;  
                                                           
1.  Subs.  by Act 26 of 1982, s.  2, for cla use (b) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2.  Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for “Animal Welfare Board”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
3. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for “Animal Welfare Board”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
 5 
 1[(ba) two persons to represent respectiv ely the Ministries of the Central Government dealing 
with home affairs and education, to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(bb) one person to represent the Indian Board for Wild Life, to be appointed by the Central 
Government;  
(bc) three persons wh o, in the opinion of the Central Government, are or have been actively 
engaged in animal welfare work and are well -known humanitarians, to be nominated by the 
Central Government;]  
(c) one person to represent such association of veterinary practitioners as  in the opinion of the 
Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be elected by that association in the 
prescribed manner;  
(d) two persons to represent practitioners of modern and indigenous systems of medicine, to 
be nominated by the Cen tral Government;  
2[(e) one person to represent each of such two municipal corporations as in the opinion of the 
Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be elected by each of the said 
corporations in the prescribed manner;]  
(f) one per son to represent each of such three organisations actively interested in animal 
welfare as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be 
chosen by each of the said organisations in the prescribed manner;  
(g) one pers on to represent each of such three societies dealing with prevention of cruelty to 
animals as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be 
chosen in the prescribed manner;  
(h) three persons to be nominated by the Ce ntral Government;  
(i) six members of Parliament, four to be elected by the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and 
two by the Council of States (Rajya Sabha).  
(2) Any of the persons referred to in clause ( a) or 3[clause ( b) or clause ( ba) or clause ( bb)] of 
sub-section ( 1) may depute any other person to attend any of the meetings of the Board.  
4[(3) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the Board to be its Chairman 
and another member of the Board to be its Vice -Chairman.]  
5[5A. Reconsti tution of the Board .―(1) In order that the Chairman and other members of the 
Board hold office till the same date and that their terms of office come to an end on the same date, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, reconstit ute, as soon as may be after 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act, 1982 (26 of 1982)  comes into force, the 
Board.  
(2) The Board as reconstituted under sub -section ( 1) shall be reconstituted from time to time on 
the expiration of every thir d year from the date of its reconstitution under sub -section ( 1).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 26 of 1982,  s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for  clause ( e) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “clause ( b)” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
5. Ins. by s.  6, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  6 
 (3) There shall be included amongst the members of the Board reconstituted under                              
sub-section ( 1), all persons who immediately before the date on which such reco nstitution is to take 
effect, are members of the Board but such persons shall hold office only for the unexpired portion of 
the term for which they would have held office if such reconstitution had not been made and the 
vacancies arising as a result of the ir ceasing to be members of the Board shall be filled up as casual 
vacancies for the remaining period of the term of the Board as so reconstituted:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in relation to any person who ceases to be a 
member o f the Board by virtue of the amendment made in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 by                         
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of section 5 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment)  
Act, 1982 (26 of 1982)].  
1[6. Term of office and conditio ns of service of members of the Board .―(1) The term for 
which the Board may be reconstituted under section 5A shall be three years from the date of the 
reconstitution and the Chairman and other members of the Board as so reconstituted shall hold office 
till the expiry of the term for which the  Board has been so reconstituted.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),―  
(a) the term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by 
virtue of which he is such a member;  
(b) the term of office of a member elected or chosen under clause ( c), clause ( e), clause ( f), 
clause ( g), clause ( h) or clause ( i) of section 5 to represent any body of persons shall come to an 
end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the body which elected him or in respect of which he 
was chosen;  
(c) the term of office of a member appointed, nominated, elected or chosen to fill a casual 
vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of office of the member in whose place he is 
appointed, nominated, elected or chosen;  
(d) the Central Government may, at any time, remove for reasons to be recorded in writing a 
member from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
proposed removal and any vacancy caused by such removal shall be treated as casual vacancy for 
the purpose of clause ( c).  
(3) The members of the Board shall receive such allowances, if any, as the Board may, subject to 
the previous approval of the Central Government, provide by regulations made in this behalf.  
(4) No act done or  proceeding taken by the Board shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board and in particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, during the period interveni ng between the expiry of the 
term for which the Board has been reconstituted under section 5A and its further reconstitution under 
that section, the ex officio  members of the Board shall discharge all the powers and functions of the 
Board.]  
7. Secretary an d other employees of the Board. ―(1) The Central Government shall appoint 
2*** the Secretary of the Board.  
(2) Subject to such rules as may  be made by the Central Govern ment in this behalf, the Board 
may appoint such number of other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s.7, for section 6 (w.e.f. 30-7-1982).  
2. The words “ one of its officers to be” omitted by s.  8, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  7 
 powers and the discharge of its functions and may determine the terms and conditions of service of 
such officers and other employees by regulations made by it with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.   
8. Funds of the Board .―The funds of the Board shall consist of grants made to it from time to 
time by the Government and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts and the like 
made to it by any local authority or by any other person.  
9. Functions of the Board .―The functions of the Board shall be ― 
(a) to keep the law in force in India for the prevention of cruelty to animals under constant 
study and advise the Government on the amendments to be undertaken in any such law from time 
to time;  
(b) to advise the Cen tral Government on the making of rules under this Act with a view to 
preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals generally, and more particularly when they 
are being transported from one place to another or when they are used as performing animals or 
when they are kept in captivity or confinement;  
(c) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person on improvements in the 
design of vehicles so as to lessen the burden on draught animals;  
(d) to take all such steps as the Board may th ink fit for 1[amelioration of animals] by 
encouraging, or providing for, the construction of sheds, water -troughs and the like and by 
providing for v eterinary assistance to animals ;  
(e) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person in th e design of              
slaughter -houses or in the maintenance of slaughter -houses or in connection with slaughter of 
animals so that unnecessary pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is eliminated in the 
pre-slaughter stages as far as possible, and animals are killed, wherever necessary, in as humane a 
manner as possible;  
(f) to take all such steps as the Board may think fit to ensure that unwanted animals are 
destroyed by local authorities, whenever it is necessary to do so, either instantaneou sly or after 
being rendered insensible to pain or suffering ;  
(g) to encourage, by the grant of fin ancial assistance or otherwise 2[the formation or 
establishment of pinjrapoles , rescue homes, animal shelters, sanctuaries and the like] where 
animals and bi rds may find a shelter when they have become old and useless or when they need 
protection;  
(h) to co -operate with, and co -ordinate the work of, associations or bodies established for the 
purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals or fo r the protection of animals 
and birds;  
(i) to give financial and other assistance to animal welfare organisations functioning in any 
local area or to encourage the formation of animal welfare organisations in any local area which 
shall work under the gene ral supervision and guidance of the Board;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s. 9, for “ameliorating the  condition of beasts of burden” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “the formation of pinjra poles , sanctuaries and the like”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  8 
 (j) to advise the Government on matters relating to the medical care and attention which may 
be provided in animal, hospitals and to give  financial and other assistance to animal hospitals 
whenever the Board thin ks it necessary to do so;  
(k) to impart education in relation to the humane treatment of animals and to encourage the 
formation of public opinion against the infli ction of unnecessary pain or su ffering to animals and 
for the promotion of animal welfare by  means of lectures, books, posters, cinematog raphic 
exhibitions and the like ;  
(l) to advise the Government on any matter connected with animal welfare or the prevention 
of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.  
10. Power of Board to make regulations .―The Board may, subject to the previous approval of 
the Central Government, make such regulations as it may think fit for the administration of its affairs 
and for carrying out its functions.  
CHAPTER III  
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY  
11. Treating animals cr uelly .―(1) If any person ― 
(a) beats, kicks, over -rides, over -drives, over -loads, tortures or otherwise treats any animal so 
as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes or, being the owner permits, any animal 
to be so treated; or  
(b) 1[empl oys in any work or labour or for any purpose any animal which, by reason of its age 
or any disease],  infirmity, wound, sore or other cause, is unfit to be so employed or, being the 
owner, permits any such unfit animal to be so employed;  
(c) wilfully and u nreasonably administers any injurious drug or injurious substance to 2[any 
animal] or wilfully and unreasonably causes or attempts to cause any such dr ug or substance to be 
taken by 2[any animal] ; or  
(d) conveys or carries, whether in or upon any vehicle or not, any animal in such a manner or 
position as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering; or  
(e) keeps or confines any animal in any cage or other receptacle which does not measure 
sufficiently in height, length and breadth to permit the animal a  reasonable oppor tunity for 
movement; or  
(f) keeps for an unreasonable time any animal chained or tethered upon an unreasonably short 
or unreasonably heavy chain or cord ; or  
(g) being the owner, neglects to exercise or cause to be exercised reasonably an y dog 
habitually chained up or kept in close confinement; or  
(h) being the owner of 3[any animal] fails to provide such animal with sufficient food, drink 
or shelter; or  
(i) without reasonable cause, abandons any animal in circumstances which render it l ikely that 
it will suffer pain by reason of starvation or thirst; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s.10 , for certain words  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “ any domestic or captive animal”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “any captive anima l” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  9 
 (j) wilfully permits any animal, of which he is the owner, to go at large in any street while the 
animal is affected with contagious or infectious disease or, without reasonable excuse p ermits any 
diseased or disabled animal, of which he is the owner , to die in any street ; or  
(k) offers for sale or, without reasonable cause,  has in his possession any animal which is 
suffering pain by reason of mutilation, starvation, thi rst, overcrowding  or other ill -treatment; or  
1[(l) multilates any animal or kills any animal (including stray dogs) by using the method of 
strychnine injections in the heart or in any other unnecessarily cruel manner; or]  
2[(m) solely with a view to providing entertainmen t— 
(i) confines or causes to be confined any animal (including tying of an animal as a bait in 
a tiger or other sanctuary) so as to make it an object of prey for any other animal; or  
(ii) incites any animal to fight or bait any other animal; or]  
(n) 3*** organises, keeps, uses or acts  in the management of, any place for animal fighting or 
for the purpose of baiting any animal or permits or offers any place to be so used or receives 
money for the admission of any other person to any place kept or used for any such purposes; or  
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals are released 
from captivity for the purpose of such shooting;  
he shall be punishable, 4[in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be les s than ten rupees 
but w hich may extend to fifty  rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed 
within three years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five rupees 
but which may extend to one hundred rup ees or with imprisonment for a term which may exten d to 
three months, or with both ].  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), an owner shall be deemed to have committed an offence if 
he has failed to exercise reasonable care and supervision with a view to  the prevention of such 
offence:  
Provided that where an owner is convicted of permitting cruelty by reason only of having failed to 
exercise such care and supervision, he shall not be liable to imprisonment without the option of a fine.  
(3) Nothing in th is section shall apply to ―  
(a) the dehorning of cattle, or the castration or branding or nose -roping of any animal, in the 
prescribed manner; or  
(b) the destruction of st ray dogs in lethal chambers or 5[by such othe r methods as may be 
prescribed] ; or  
(c) the extermination or destruction of any animal under the authority of any law for the time 
being in force; or  
(d) any matter dealt with in Chapter IV; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s. 10, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( m)  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3. The words “for the purposes of his business”  omitted by s.10, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
4. Subs. b y s. 10, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “by other metho ds with a minimum of suffering” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  10 
 (e) the commission or omission of any act in the course of the destruction or the preparation 
for destruction of any animal as food for mankind unless such destruction or preparation was 
accompanied by the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering . 
12. Penalty for practising phooka  or doom dev .―If any person performs upon any cow or other 
milch animal the operation called phooka or 1[doom dev  or any other operation (including injection of 
any substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal] or permits such 
operatio n being performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which th e operation was performed 
shall be forfeited to the Government.  
13. Destruction of suffering animals .―(1) Where the owner of an animal is convicted of an 
offence under section 11, it shall be lawful for the court, if the court is satisfied that it would be cruel 
to keep the animal alive, to direct that the animal be destroyed and to assign the animal to a ny suitable 
person for that purpose, and the person to whom such animal is so assigned shall, as soon as possible, 
destroy such animal or cause such animal to be destroyed in his presence without unnecessary 
suffering, and any reasonable expense incurred i n destroying the animal may be ordered by the court 
to be recovered from the owner as if it were a fine:  
Provided that unless the owner assents thereto, no order shall be made under this section except 
upon the evidence of a veterinary officer in charge of  the area.  
(2) When any magistrate, commissioner of police or district superintendent of police has reason to 
believe that an offence under section 11 has been committed in respect of any animal, he may direct 
the immediate destruction of the animal, if i n his opinion, it would be cruel to keep the animal alive.  
(3) Any police officer above the rank of a constable or any person authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf who finds any animal so diseased or so severely injured or in such a 
physical c ondition that in his opinion it cannot be removed without cruelty, may, if the owner is 
absent or refuses his consent to the destruction of the animal, forthwith summon the veterinary officer 
in charge of the area in which the animal is found, and if the v eterinary office certifies that the animal 
is mortally injured or so severely injured or in such a physical condition that it  would be cruel to keep 
it ali ve, the police officer or the person  authorised, as the case may be  may, after obtaining orders 
from a magistrate, destroy the animal injur ed or cause it to be destroyed 2[in such manner as may be 
prescribed].  
(4) No appeal shall lie from any order of a magistrate for the destruction of an animal.  
CHAPTER IV  
 EXPERIMENTATION ON ANIMALS  
14. Experiments o n animals .―Nothing contained in this Act shall render unlawful the 
performance of experiments (including experiments involving operations) on animals for the purpose 
of advancement by new discovery of physiological knowledge or of knowledge which will be useful 
for saving or for prolonging life or alleviating suffering or for combating any disease, whether of 
human beings, animals or plants.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s. 11, for “ doom dev ” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Ins. by  s.12, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  11 
 15. Committee for control and supervision of experiments on animals .―(1) If at any time, on 
the advice of the Board, the Centra l Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the 
purpose of controlling and supervising experiments on animals, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Committee consisting of such number of officials and non -officials , as it may 
think fit to appoint thereto.  
(2) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the Committee to be its 
Chairman.  
(3) The Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure in relation to the performance 
of its duties.  
(4) The funds of the Committee shall consist of grants made to it from time to time by the 
Government and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts and the like made to it by 
any person.  
1[15A. Sub -committees .―(1) The Committee may constitu te as many sub -committees as it 
thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Committee or for inquiring into or 
reporting and advising on any matter which the Committee may refer.  
(2) A sub -committee shall consist exclusively of the members of the Committee.]  
16. Staff of the Committee .―Subject to the control of the Central Government, the Committee 
may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be necessary to enable it to exercise 
its powers and perform its duties, and may determine the remuneration and other terms and conditions 
of service of such officers and other employees.  
17. Duties of the Committee and power of the Committee to make rules relating to 
experiments on animals. ―(1) It shall be the duty of the Committee to take all such measures as may 
be necessary to ensure that animals are not subjected to unnecessary pain or suffering before, during 
or after the performance of experiments on them, and for that purpose it may, by notification in the 
Gazette of India and subject to the condition of previous publication , make such rules as it may think 
fit in relation to the conduct of such experiments.  
2[(1A) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the registration of persons or institutions carrying on experiments on animals;  
(b) the reports and other information which shall be for warded to the Committee by persons 
and institutions carrying on experiments on animals.]  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made by the 
Committee shall be designed to secure the following objects, namely: ―  
(a) that in cases where experiments are performed in any institution, the responsibility 
therefor is placed  on the person in charge of the institution and that, in cases where experiments 
are performed outside an institution by individuals, the individuals are qualified in that behalf and 
the experiments are perform ed on their full responsibility ;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1982, s.  13 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Ins. by s.  14, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  12 
 (b) that exp eriments are performed with due care and humanity, and that as far as possible 
experiments involving operations are performed under the influence of some anaesthetic of 
sufficient power to prevent the animals feeling pain;  
(c) that animals which, in the c ourse of experiments under the influence of anesthetics, are so 
injured that their recovery would involve serious suffering, are ordinarily destroyed while still 
insensible ; 
 (d) that experiments on animals are avoided w herever it is possible to do so ; as for example, 
in medical schools, hospitals, colleges and the like, if other teaching devices such as books, 
models, films and the like may equally suffice;  
(e) that experiments on larger animals are avoided when it is possible to achieve the same 
results by experiments upon small laboratory animals like guinea -pigs, rabbits, frogs and rats;  
(f) that, as far as possible, experiments are not performed merely for the purpose of acquiring 
manual skill;  
(g) that animals intended for the performance of experim ents are properly looked after both 
before and after experiments;  
(h) that suitable records are maintained with respect to experiments performed on animals.  
(3) In making any rules under this section, the Committee shall be guided by such directions as 
the Central Government (consistently with the objects for which the Committee is set up) may give to 
it, and the Central Government is hereby authorised to give such directions.  
(4) All rules made by  the Committee shall be binding on all individuals perfor ming experiments 
outside institutions and on persons in charge of institutions in which experiments are performed.  
18. Power of entry and inspection .―For the purpose of ensuring that the rules made by it are 
being complied with, the Committee may authorise any of its officers or any other person in writing to 
inspect any institution or place where experiments are being carried on and report to it as a result of 
such inspection, and any officer or person so authorised may ― 
(a) enter at any time considered reasonable by him and inspect any institution or place in 
which experiments on animals are being carried on; and  
(b) require any person to produce any  record kept by him with respect to experiments on 
animals.  
19. Power to prohibit experiments on animals .―If the Committee is satisfied, on the report of 
any officer or other person made to it as a result of any inspection under section 18 or otherwise, th at 
the rules made by it under section 17 are not being complied with by any person or institution 
carrying on experiments on animals, the Committee may, after giving an opportunity to the person or 
institution of being heard in the matter, by order, prohib it the person or institution from carrying on 
any such experiments either for a specified period or indefinitely, or may allow the person or 
institution to carry on such experiments subject to such special conditions as the Committee may think 
fit to impos e. 
20. Penalties. ―If any person ― 
(a) contravenes any order made by  the Committee under section 19 ; or  
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by t he Committee under that section ;  13 
 he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupe es, and, when the 
contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution, the person in charge of the 
institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly.  
CHAPTER V  
PERFORMING ANIMALS  
21. “Exhibit” and “train” defined .―In this Chapter, “exhibit ” means exhibit at any 
entertainment to which the public are admitted throu gh sale of tickets and “train” means train for the 
purpose of any such ex hibition, and the expressions “exhibitor ” and “trainer ” have respectively the 
corresponding meanings.  
22. Restriction on exhibition and training of performing animals .―No person shall exhibit or 
train― 
 (i) any performing animal unless he is registered in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter;  
(ii) as a performing animal, any animal which the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify as an animal which shall not be exhibited or trained as a performing 
animal.  
23. Procedure for registration .―(1) Every person desirous of exhibiting or training any 
performing animal shall, on making an application in the prescribed form to the prescribed authority 
and on payment of the prescribed fee, be registered under this Act unless he is a person who, by 
reason of an order made by the court under this Chapter, is  not entitled to be so registered.  
(2) An application for registration under this Chapter shall contain such particulars as to the 
animals and as to the general nature of the performances in which the animals are to be exhibited or 
for which they are to b e trained as ma y be prescribed, and the parti culars so given shall be entered in 
the register maintained by the prescribed authority.  
(3) The prescribed authority shall give to every person whose name appears on the register kept 
by them, a  certificate of  registra tion in the prescribed form containing the particulars entered in the 
register.  
(4) Every register kept under this Chapter shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection on 
payment of the prescribed fee, and any person shall, on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to 
obtain copies thereof or make extracts therefrom.  
(5) Any person whose name is entered in the register shall, subject to the provisions of any order 
made under this Act by any court, be entitled, on making an application  for the purpose, to have the 
particulars entered in the register with respect to him varied, and where any such particulars are so 
varied, the existing certificate shall be cancelled and a new certificate issued.  
24. Power of court to prohibit or restrict  exhibition and training of performing 
animals .―(1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of any magistrate on a complaint made by a 
police officer or an officer authorised in writing by the prescribed authority referred to in section 23, 
that the trainin g or exhibition of any performing animal has been accompanied by unnecessary pain or 
suffering and should be prohibited or allowed only subject to conditions,  the court may make an order 
against the person in respect of whom the complaint  is made, prohi biting the training or exhibition or 
imposing such conditions in rela tion thereto, as may be specified by the order.  14 
 (2) Any court by which an order is made under this section shall cause a copy of the order to be 
sent, as soon as may be after the order is m ade, to the prescribed authority by which the person against 
whom the order is made is registered, and shall cause the particulars of the order to be endorsed upon 
the certificate held by that person, and that person shall produce his certificate on being so required by 
the court for the purposes of endorsement, and the prescribed authority to which a copy of an order is 
sent under this section shall enter the particulars of the order in that register.  
25. Power to enter premises .―(1) Any person authorised in writing by the prescribed authority 
referred to in section 23 and any police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector may ― 
(a) enter at all reasonable times and inspect any premises in which any performing animals 
are bei ng trained or exhibited or kept for training or exhibition, and any such animals found 
therein; and  
(b) require any person who, he has reason to believe, is a trainer or exhibitor of performing 
animals to produce his certificate of registration.  
(2) No pe rson or police officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled under this section to 
go on or behind the stage during a public performance of performing animals.  
26. Offences .―If any person ― 
(a) not being registered under this Chapter, exhibits or trains a ny performing animal;  or 
(b) being registered under this Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal with respect to 
which, or in a manner with respect to which, he is not r egistered; or  
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be used for the 
purpose by reason of a notification issued under  clause ( ii) of section 22 ; or 
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to  in section 25 in the 
exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspecti on; or 
(e) conceals any animal with a view t o avoiding such inspection ; or 
(f) being a person registered under this Act, on being duly required in pursuance of th is Act to 
produce his certi ficate under this Act, fails without reasonable excuse so to  do; or  
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when n ot entitled to be so registered ; 
he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or w ith 
imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both.  
27. Exemptions .―Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to ― 
(a) the training of animals for bona fide  military or police purposes or the exhibitio n of any 
animals so trained; or  
(b) any animals kept in any zoological garden or by any society or association which ha s for 
its principal  object the exhibition of animals for educational or scientific purposes.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Saving as respects manner of killing prescribed by religion .―Nothing contained in this 
Act shall render it an offence to kill any ani mal in a manner required by the religion of any 
community.  15 
 29. Power of court to deprive person convicted of ownership of animal .―(1) If the owner of 
any animal is found guilty of any offence under this Act, the court, upon his conviction thereof, may, 
if it thinks fit, in addition to any other punishment, make an order that the animal with respect to 
which the offence was committed shall be forfeited to Government and may, further, make such order 
as to the disposal of the animal as it thinks fit under the  circumstances.  
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless it is shown by evidence as to a previous 
conviction under this Act or as to the character of the owner or otherwise as to the treatment of the 
animal that the animal, it left with the owner,  is likely to be exposed to further cruelty.  
(3) Without prejudice to t he provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the court may also order that 
a person convicted of an offe nce under this Act shall, either  permanently or during such period as is 
fixed by the order, be prohibited from having the custody of any animal of any kind whatsoever, or, as 
the court thinks fit, of any animal of any kind or species specified in the order.  
(4) No order under sub -section ( 3) shall be made unless ― 
(a) it is shown by evidence as to a previous conviction or as to the character of the said person 
or otherwise as to the treatment of the animal in relation to which he has been convicted that an 
animal in the custody of the said person is likely to be e xposed to cruelty ; 
(b) it is stated in the complaint upon which the conviction was made that it is the intention of 
the complainant upon the conviction of the accused to request that an order be made as aforesaid; 
and 
(c) the offence for which the convicti on was made was committed in an area in which under 
the law for the time being in force a licence is necessary for the keeping of any such animal as 
that in respect of which the conviction was made.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  any law for the time being in force, any 
person in respect of whom an order is made under sub -section ( 3) shall have no right to the custody of 
any animal contrary to the provisions of the order, and if he contravenes the provisions of any order, 
he shall  be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
(6) Any court which has made an order under sub -section ( 3) may at any time, either on its own 
motion or on app lication made to it in this behalf, rescind or modify such order.  
30. Presumption as to guilt in certain cases .―If any person is charged with the offence of 
killing a goat, cow or its progeny contrary to the provisions of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of              
section 11, and it is proved that such person had in his possession, at the time the offence is alleged to 
have been committed, the skin of any such animal as is referred to in this section with any part of the 
skin of the head attached thereto , it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that such animal 
was killed in a cruel manner.  
31. Cognizability of offences .―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898), an offence punishable under clause ( l), clause ( n) or clause ( o) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence wit hin the meaning of 
that Code.  
32. Power of search and seizure .―(1) If a police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector or 
any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf has reason to believe that an offence 
under clause ( l) of sub -section  (1) of section 11 in respect of any such animal as is referred to in 16 
 section 30 is being, or is about to be, or has been, committed in any place, or that any person has in 
his possession the skin of any such animal with any part of the skin of the head at tached thereto, he 
may enter and search such place or any place in which he has reason to believe any such skin to be, 
and may seize such skin or any article or thing used or intended to be used in the commission of such 
offence.  
(2) If a police officer no t below the rank of sub -inspector, or any person authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf, has re ason to believe that phooka  or 1[doom dev  or any other operation of 
the nature referred to in section 12] has just been, or is being, performed on any  animal within the 
limits of his jurisdiction, he may enter any place in which he has reason to believe such animal to be, 
and may seize the animal and produce it for examination by the veterinary officer in charge of the area 
in which the animal is seized . 
33. Search warrants .―(1) If a magistrate of the first or second class or a presidency magistrate 
or a sub -divisional magistrate or a commissioner of police or district superintendent of police, upon 
information in writing, and after such inquiry as he th inks necessary, has reason to believe that an 
offence under this Act is being, or is about to be, or has been committed in any place, he may either 
himself enter and search or by his warrant authorise any police officer not below the rank of                    
sub-inspector to enter and search the place.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), relating to searches shall, 
so far as those provisions can be made applicable, apply to searches under this Act.  
34. General power of seizure for examination .―Any police officer above the rank of a 
constable or any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf, who has reason to believe 
that an offence against this Act has been or is being, committed in re spect of any animal, may, if in his 
opinion the circumstances so require, seize the animal and produce the same for examination by the 
nearest magistrate or by such veterinary officer as may be prescribed, and such police officer or 
authorised person may, when seizing the animal, require the person in charge thereof to accompany it 
to the place of examination.  
35. Treatment and care of animals .―(1) The State Government may, by general or special 
order, appoint infirmaries for the treatment and care of animals in respect of which offences against 
this Act have been committed, and may authorise the detention therein of any animal pending its 
produ ction before a magistrate.  
(2) The magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence against this Act has been instituted 
may direct that the animal concerned shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary, until it is fit to 
perform its usual work or is  otherwise fit for discharge, or that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole , or, if the 
veterinary officer in charge of the area in which the animal is found or such other veterinary officer as 
may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this Act certi fies that it is incurable or cannot be 
removed without cruelty, that it shall be destroyed.  
(3) An animal sent for care and treatment to an infirmary shall not, unless the magistrate directs 
that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole  or that it shall be destroy ed, be released from such place except 
upon a certificate of its fitness for discharge issued by the veterinary officer in charge of the area in 
which the infirmary is situated or such other veterinary officer as may be authorised in this behalf by 
rules m ade under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s.15 , for “ doom dev ” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  17 
 (4) The cost of transporting the animal to an infirmary or pinjrapole , and of its maintenance and 
treatment in an infirmary, shall be payable by the owner of the animal in accordance with a scale of 
rates to be prescribed by the distric t magistrate, or, in presidency -towns, by the commissioner of 
police:  
Provided that when the magistrate so orders on account of the poverty of the owner of the animal 
no charge shall be payable for the treatment of the animal.  
(5) Any amount, payable by an  owner of an animal under sub -section ( 4) may be recovered in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(6) If the owner refuses or neglects to remove the animal within such time as a magistrate may 
specify, the magistrate may direct that the animal be  sold and that the proceeds of the sale be applied 
to the payment of such cost.  
(7) The surplus, if any, of the proceeds of such sale shall, on application made by the owner 
within two months from the date of the sale, be paid to him.  
36. Limitation of pro secutions .―A prosecution for an offence against this Act shall not be 
instituted after the expiration of three months from the date of the commission of the offence.  
37. Delegation of powers .―The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gaze tte, direct that all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, may, subject to such 
conditions as it may think fit to impose, be also exercisable by any State Government.  
38. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification  in the Official 
Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central 
Government may make rules prov iding for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the 1*** conditions of service of members of the Board, the allowances payable to them 
and the manner in which they may exercise their powers and discharge their functions;  
2[(aa) the manner in which the persons to represent municipal corporations ar e to be elected 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;]  
(b) the maximum load (including any load occasioned by the weight of passengers) to be 
carried or drawn by any animal;  
(c) the conditions to be ob served for preventing the over -crowding of animal;  
(d) the period during which, and the hours between which, any class of animals shall not be 
used for draught purposes;  
(e) prohibiting the use of any bit or harnes s involving cruelty  to animals ; 
 2[(ea) the other methods of destruction of stray dog s referred to in clause ( b) of                     
sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(eb) the methods by which any animal which cannot be removed without cruelty may be 
destroyed under sub -section ( 3) of section 13;]  
                                                           
1. The words “terms and” omitted by Act 26 of 1982, s.16  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2.  Ins. by s.16, ibid.  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  18 
 (f) requiring persons carrying on the busi ness of a farrier to be licensed and registered by such 
authority as may be prescribed an d levying a fee for the purpose ; 
(g) the precautions to be taken in the capture of animals for purposes of sale, export or for any 
other purpose, and the different app liances or devices that ma y alone be used for the purpose ; and 
the licensing of such capture and the levying of fees for such licences;  
(h) the precautions to be taken in the transport of animals, whether by rail, road, inland 
waterway, sea or air and the manner in which and the cages or other receptacles in which they 
may be so transported.  
(i) requiring persons owning or in charge of premises in which animals are kept or milked to 
register such premises, to comply with such conditions as may be laid down  in relation to the 
boundary walls or surroundings of such premises, to permit their inspection for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any offence under this Act is being, or has been, committed therein, and to 
expose in such premises copies of section 12  in a language or languages commo nly understood in 
the locality;  
(j) the form in which applications for registration under Chapter V may be made, the 
particulars to be contained therein, the fees payable for such registration and the authorities to 
whom  such applications may be made;  
1[(ja) the fees which may be charged by the Committee constituted under section 15 for the 
registration of persons or institutions carrying on experiments on animals or f or any other 
purpose;]  
(k) the purposes to which fines re alised under this Act may be applied, including such 
purposes as the maintenance of infirmaries, pinjra poles  and veterinary hospitals;  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of , any rules made under this section, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[38A. Rules and regulations to be laid before  Parliament .―Every rule made by the Central 
Government or by the Committee constituted under section 15 and every regulation made by the 
Board shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total perio d of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in t he rule or regulation 
as the case may be, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, h owever, that any such modification or annulment, shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1982, s.16  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Sub-section ( 4) omitted by s.16, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3.  Ins. by s.  17, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  19 
 39. Persons authorised under section 34 to be public servants .―Every person authorised by 
the State Gove rnment under section 34 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
40. Indemnity .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person who 
is, or who is deemed to be , a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
41. Repeal of Act 11 of 1890 .―Where in pursuance of a notification under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 1 any provision of this Act comes into force in any State, any provision of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1890  (11 of 1890) , which corresponds to the provision so coming into force, 
shall thereupon stand repealed.  
 
--------------------------The Tripura Excise Law (Repeal) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE TR IPURA EXCISE LAW (REPEAL) ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 53 OF 1960  
[23rd December, 1960.]  
An Act to provide for the repeal of the Tripura Excise Act.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act  may be called the Tripura Excise Law (Repeal) Act , 1960.  
2. Repeal of Tripura Excise Law. —On and from the date on which the Bengal Excise                  
Act, 1909 (Bengal Act V of 1909) is extended by notification under section 2 of the Union Territories 
(Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950), to the Union territory of Tripura, the Tripura Excise Act of 1296 T.E. 
(Abkari Ain) shall stand repealed.  
3. Savings. —(1) The repeal of the Tripura Excise Act of 1296 T.E. (Abkari Ain) by section 2 shall 
not affec t— 
(a) the previous operation of the said Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said Act; or  
(c) any penalty , forfeiture or punishment incurred in resp ect of any offence committed against the 
said Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respe ct of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability,  penalty, forfeiture of punishment as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation , legal proce eding or remedy may  be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the said Act had not been repealed.  
(2) Subject t o the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), any thing done or any action taken 
(including any appointment or delegation made, notification, instruction or direction issued, permit , ijara 
or licence granted ) under the  Act repealed by section 2 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of the Act extended by notification as provided in that section to the Union 
territory of Tripura, and shall continu e to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything 
done or any action taken under the Act last me ntioned above.  
 
 
--------------------------The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960--------------------------
1 THE TRIPURA LAND REVENUE AND LAND REFORMS ACT, 1960   
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PART  I 
CHAPTER  I.—PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
CHAPTER  II—REVENUE DIVISIONS, REVENUE OFFICERS AND THEIR APPOINTMENT  
3. Power to create, alter or abolish districts, sub -divisions, etc.  
4. Appointment of revenue officers.  
5. Collector and certain other revenue officers.  
6. Settlement officers.  
7. Subordination of revenue officers.  
8. Combination of offices.  
9. Notification of appointments.  
10. Seals.  
CHAPTER  III.—LAND AND LAND REVENUE  
11. Title of Government to lands, etc.  
12. Right to trees, forests, etc.  
13. Assignment of land for special purposes.  
14. Allotment of land.  
15. Unauthorised occupation  of land.  
16. Liability of land to land revenue.  
17. Alluvial lands.  
18. Land revenue in case of diluvion.  
19. Assessment of land revenue.  
20. Diversion of land.  
21. Remission or suspension of revenue on failure of crops.  
22. Responsibility for payment of land revenue.  
23. Receipt for land revenue.  
CHAPTER  IV.—SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT OF LAND REVENUE  
24. Definitions of “revenue survey”, “settlement” and “term of settlement”.  
25. Inquiry into profits of agriculture.  
26. Revenue sur vey. 2 SECTIONS  
27. Power to require assistance from landholders.  
28. Survey numbers and villages.  
29. Division of survey numbers into sub -divisions.  
30. Determination of revenue -rates.  
31. Preparation of statistical and fiscal records.  
32. Revenue -rates how determined.  
33. Publication of table of revenue -rates.  
34. Confirmation of the table of revenue -rates.  
35. Rates of revenue to form part of settlement register.  
36. Introduction of revenue -rates.  
37. Duration of revenue -rates.  
38. Assessment on holdings.  
39. Additional as sessment for water advantages . 
40. Continuance of survey operations and rates in force at commencement of Act.  
41. Power of Collector to correct errors, etc.  
CHAPTER  V.—LAND RECORDS  
42. Preparation of record of rights.  
43. Publication of the record of rights.  
44. Jurisdiction of civil courts to decide disputes.  
45. Correction of bona fide  mistake in register.  
46. Register of mutations.  
47. Penalty for neglect to afford information.  
48. Assistance in preparation of maps.  
49. Certified copies.  
50. Maps an d other records open to inspection.  
51. Power to transfer duty of maintaining maps and records to settlement officer.  
CHAPTER  VI.—BOUNDARIES AND BOUNDARY MARKS  
52. Determination of village boundaries.  
53. Effect of settlement of boundary.  
54. Construction and repair of boundary marks.  
55. Description of boundary marks.  
56. Responsibilities for maintaining boundary marks.  
57. Collector to have charge of boundary marks.  
58. Penalty for injuring boundary marks.  
CHAPTER  VII.—REALISATION OF LAND REVENUE AND  OTHER PUBLIC DEMANDS  
59. Land revenue to be first charge.  3 SECTIONS  
60. Payment of land revenue.  
61. Arrear of land revenue.  
62. Recovery of Arrears.  
63. Notice of demand.  
64. Distraint and sale of movable property.  
65. Sale of immovable property.  
66. Notice of sale.  
67. Sale to be by auction.  
68. Prohibition to bid at auction.  
69. Sale of perishables.  
70. Sales not to be excessive.  
71. Deposit by purchaser of immovable property.  
72. Failure to make deposit.  
73. Setting aside sale.  
74. Confirmation of s ale. 
75. Refunds.  
76. Certificate of purchase.  
77. Application of proceeds of sale.  
78. Liability of certified purchaser.  
79. Precautionary measures in certain cases.  
80. Recovery of other public demands.  
CHAPTER  VIII.—PROCEDURE OF REVENUE OFFICERS : APPEALS AND REVISIONS  
81. Revenue officers to be courts.  
82. Place of hearing.  
83. Power to enter upon and survey land.  
84. Power to transfer cases.  
85. Power to take evidence, summon witnesses, etc  
86. Compelling attendance of witnesses.  
87. Hearing in abs ence of party.  
88. Adjournment of hearing.  
89. Power to order payment of costs.  
90. Use of force.  
91. Appearances before and applications to revenue officers.  
92. Correction of error or omission.  
93. Appeals.  
94. Limitation of appeals.  
95. Revision.  4  
SECTIONS  
96. Review of orders.  
97. Stay of execution of orders.  
98. Power to make rules.  
PART III  
CHAPTER  IX—RIGHTS OF RAIYATS IN LAND  
99. Rights of raiyats.  
100. Reservation of land for personal cultivation.  
101. Procedure for reservation of lands.  
102. “Permissible limit ” defined.  
103. Land deemed to be reserved for personal cultivation in certain cases.  
104. Non -resumable land.  
105. Right to lease.  
106. Land left uncultivated.  
107. Relinquishment.  
CHAPTER  X.—RIGHTS OF UNDER -RAIYATS  
108. Interest of under -raiyats.  
109. Right to create a mortgage or charge.  
110. Right to make improvements.  
111. Maximum rent.  
112. Payment of rent.  
113. Reasonable rent.  
114. Commutation of rent payable in kind.  
115. Receipt for payment of rent.  
116. Refund of rent recove red in excess.  
117. Suspension or remission of rent.  
118. Eviction of under -raiyat.  
119. Restoration of possession of land to under -raiyat.  
120. Certain lands to be non -resumable land of under -raiyat.  
121. Compensation for improvements.  
122. Under -raiyat may remove building, works, etc., not deemed improvements.  
123. Restoration of possession of land in certain other cases.  
124. Relief against termination of tenancy for act of waste.  
125. Surrender of land by under -raiyat.  
126. Transfer of ownership of lan d to under -raiyats.  5 SECTIONS  
127. Compensation to raiyat.  
128. Payment of compensation to raiyat.  
129. Under -raiyat to pay compensation amount.  
130. Issue of certificate to under -raiyats.  
131. First option to purchase.  
132. Power to make rules.  
PART IV  
CHAPTER  XI.—ACQUISITION OF ESTATES AND OF RIGHTS OF INTERMEDIARIES THEREIN  
133. Definitions.  
134. Notification vesting estates in the State . 
135. Consequences of notification under section 134.  
136. Rights of intermediary to certain lands.  
137. Collector to  take charge of estates, etc., vested in the Government.  
138. Decision of disputes.  
139. Appeal.  
CHAPTER  XII.—ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION  
140. Intermediaries entitled to receive compensation.  
141. Date from which compensation shall be due.  
142. Every intermediary to be treated as a separate unit.  
143. Appointment of compensation officers.  
144. Compensation assessment roll.  
145. Determination of gross income and net income.  
146. Compensation payable to intermediary.  
147. Disposal of claims of cred itors.  
148. Appeal against the decision of claims officer.  
149. Preliminary publication of compensation assessment roll and disposal of objections.  
150. Contents of the order of compensation officer.  
151. Appeals against order of compensation officer.  
152. Final publication of the compensation assessment roll.  
153. Correction of bona fide  mistakes.  
154. Ad interim  payment of compensation.  
155. Mode of payment of compensation.  
156. Compensation due to maintenance holder.  
157. Compensation due to person incom petent to alienate.  
158. Inquiries to be judicial proceedings.  
159. Penalties.  6 SECTIONS  
160. Application of Part III to persons becoming raiyats or under -raiyats under Part IV.  
161. Power to make rules.  
PART V  
CHAPTER  XIII. —CEILING ON LAND HOLDINGS  
162. Exemptions.  
163. Definitions.  
164. Cellings on holdings.  
165. Submission of returns.  
166. Collection of information through other agency.  
167. Procedure for determination of excess land.  
168. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers.  
169. Exc ess land to vest in Government.  
170. Publication of the final list and consequences thereof.  
171. Compensation.  
172. Manner of payment of compensation.  
173. Limit of future acquisition of land.  
174. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases.  
175. Power of Collector to take possession of excess land.  
176. Offences and penalties.  
177. Finality of orders.  
178. Power to exempt, etc.  
CHAPTER  XIV.—PREVENTION OF FRAGMENTATION  
179. Definitions.  
180. Restrictions on transfer, etc.  
181. Partition of holding.  
182. Transfers in contravention of this Chapter.  
183. Penalty.  
184. Power to make rules.  
PART VI  
CHAPTER  XV.—GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  
185. Recovery of amount due as arrear of land revenue.  
186. Protection against eviction or surrender in certain cases.  
187. Special provision regarding Scheduled Tribes.  
188. Jurisdiction of civil courts excluded.  
189. Act to over -ride contracts and other laws.  7 SECTIONS  
190. Court -fees.  
191. Village officers to be public servants.  
192. Power to exempt.  
193. General provision as to penalties.  
194. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
195. Delegation of powers.  
196. Power to remove difficulties.  
197. General power to make rules.  
198. Laying of rules before Parliament.  
199. Repeal and savings.  
       THE SCHEDULE . 8 THE TRIPURA LAND REVENUE AND LAND REFORMS ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1960  
[21st September , 1960.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to land revenue in the Union territory of 
Tripura and to provide for the acquisition of estates and for certain other measures of land 
reform.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
CHAPTER  I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Tripura Land Revenue 
and Land Reforms Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Tripura.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Adm inistrator may, by notification in the                    
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different areas and for different 
provi sions of this Act.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Tripura;  
(b) “agriculture ” includes horticulture, the raising of annual or periodical crops or garden 
produce, dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding, grazing and pisciculture;  
(c) “basic holding ” means land used for agricultural pur poses which is equal to  two standard 
acres  in area;  
(d) “Collector ” means the Collector of the district and includes any officer appointed by the 
Administrator to exercise and perform all or any of the powers and functions  of a Collector under this 
Act; 
(e) “commencement of this Act”, in relation to any provi sion, means t he date specified in respect 
of that provision in a notification unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 1;  
(f) “competent authority ”, in relation to any provision, means any officer appointed by the 
Administrator to be the competent authority for  the purpose of that provision;  
(g) “family ” except in Chapter XIII means, in relation to a person, the wife or husband of such 
person, his children, grandchildren, parents and brothers, and in the case of a Joint Hindu fam ily, any 
member of such family;  
(h) “family holdi ng” means  land used for agricultural pur poses which is equal to 6.4 standard 
acres in area;  
(i) “Government ” means the Central Government;  
(j) “holding ” means a parcel of land separ ately assessed to land revenue;  
(k) “improvement ”, in relation to any land,  means any work which materially adds to the value of 
the land and which is suitable to the land and consistent with the  character thereof and includes — 
(i) the construction of tanks, wells, water channels and other works for the storage, supply 
and distri bution of water for agricultural purposes or for the use of man and cattle employed in 
agriculture;  
(ii) the construction of works for the drainage of land or for the protection of land from floods 
or from erosion  or from other damage by water;  9 (iii) the p reparation of land for irrigation;  
(iv) the conversion of one -crop into two -crop land;  
(v) the reclaiming, clearing, enclosing, levelling or terracing of land used for agricultural 
purposes;  
(vi) the erection on land or in the immediate vicinity thereof otherwise than on the village 
site, of a building or house for the occupation of the under -raiyat, his family and servants or of a 
cattle shed, a store -house or other construction for agricultural  purposes or of any building 
required for the convenient or profitable use or occupation of the land; and  
(vii) the renewal or reconstruction of any of the foregoing works or such alterations therein or 
additions thereto as are not of th e nature of ordinar y repairs;  
(l) “minor ” means a person who is deemed not to have attained majority under the                        
Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875);  
(m) “Official Gaze tte” means the Tripura Gazette;  
(n) “pay”, “payable ” and “payment ”, used with refere nce to rent, include “deliver ”, “deliverable ”  
and “delivery ”; 
(o) “person under disability ” mean s— 
(i) a widow;  
(ii) a minor;  
(iii) a woman who is unmarried or who, if married, is divorced or judicially separated from 
her husband or whose husband is a person falling under item ( iv) or ( v); 
(iv) a member of the Armed Forces of the Union ; 
(v) a person incapable of cultivating land by reason of some physical or mental disability;  
(p) “personal cultivation ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means 
cultivation  by a person on his own account — 
(i) by his own labour, or  
(ii) by the labour of any member of his family, or  
(iii) by servants or by hired labour on wages, payable in cash or in kind but not as a share of 
produce, under his p ersonal supervision or the personal supervision of any member of his family;  
Explanation  I.—Land shall not be deemed to be cultivated under the personal supervision of a 
person or a member of his family unless such person or member resides in the village in which the 
land is situated or in a nearby village situated within a distance to be prescribed, during the major part 
of the agricultural season;  
Explanation  II.—In the case of a person under disability, supervision by a paid employee on 
behalf of such p erson shall be dee med to be personal supervision;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made unde r this Act;  
(r) “public purpose ” includes a purpose c onnected with allotment of land t o cultivators,                   
under -raiyats ejected as a result o f resumption, land -less agricultural workers or co -operative farming 
societies;  
(s) “raiyat ” means a person who owns land for purposes of agriculture paying land revenue to the 
Government and includes the successors -in-interest of such person;  
(t) “rent” means whatever is lawfully payable, in money or in kind, or partly in money and partly 
in kind, whether as a fixed quantity of produce or as a share of the produce, on account of the use or 
occupation of land or on account of any right in land but shall n ot include land revenue;  10 (u) “standard acre ” means one acre of „lunga ‟ or „nal‟ or three acres of „tilla‟ land;  
(v) “under -raiyat ” means a person who cultivates or holds the land of a raiyat under an agreement, 
express or implied, on condition of paying th erefor rent in cash or in kind or delivering a share of the 
produce and includes a person who cultivates or holds land of a raiyat under the system generally 
known as „bhag’, „adhi’ or „barga’; 
(w) “village ” means any tract of land which, before the commencement of this Act, was 
recognised as or was declared to be a village under any law for the time being in force or which may 
after such commencement be recognised as a village at any settlement or which the Administrator 
may, by notification in the Official Ga zette, declare to be a village;  
(x) “year” means the agricultural year commencing on such date as the Administrator may, in the 
case of any specified area, by notification in  the Official Gazette, appoin t. 
PART II  
CHAPTER  II—REVENUE DIVISIONS, REVENUE OFFICERS AND THEIR APPOINTMENT  
3. Power to create, alter or abolish  districts, sub -divisions, etc. —(1) The Administrator may, with 
the previous concurrence of the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, divide the Union 
territory of Tripura into one or more districts, and may similarly divide any district into sub -divisions, 
circles and tehsi ls, and may alter the limits of, or abolish, any district, sub-division, circle or tehsil.  
(2) The districts, sub -divisions, circles and tehsils existing at the commencement of this Act shall 
continue respectively to be the districts, sub -divisions, circle s and tehsils under this Act unless otherwise 
provided under sub -section ( 1). 
4. Appointment of revenue officers. —The Government or such other officer as may be authorised 
by the Government in this behalf may appoint the following class es of revenue office rs, namely: — 
(a) Collector,  
(b) director of se ttlement and land records,  
(c) sub-divisional officers,  
(d) survey and settlement officers,  
(e) assistant  survey and settlement officers,  
(f) circle officers,  
(g) revenue inspectors,  
(h) tehsildars,  
(i) village  accountants and such other village officers and servants as may be specified by rules 
made under this Act.  
5. Collector and certain other revenue officers .—(1) Each district shall be placed under the charge 
of a Collector who shall be in charge of the rev enue administration of the district and exercise the powers 
and discharge the duties of the Collector under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and  
shall exercise so far as is consistent therewith such other powers of superintendence and control within 
the district and over the officers subordinate to him as may from time to time be prescribed.  
(2) Each sub -division shall be placed under the charge of a sub -divisional officer.  
(3) Each circle or tehsil shall be placed under the charge of a  circle officer or a tehsildar, as the case 
may be.  
(4) The duties and powers of the sub -divisional officers, the circle officers and other revenue officers 
shall be such as may be imposed or conferred on them by or under this Act or any other law in force  for 
the time being or any general or special order of the Administrator published in the Official Gazette.  11 6. Settlement officers. —The officers specified in items ( b), (d) and ( e) of section 4 shall have power 
to take cognizance of all matters connected with the survey of land and the settlement of the revenue -rates 
and the prepar ation  and maintenance of land records and other register s and shall exercise all such powers 
and perform all such duties as may be prescribed by or under this Act or by any gener al or special order 
of the Administrator published in the Official Gazette.  
7. Subordination of revenue officers. —All revenue officers shall be subordinate to the 
Administrator and all revenue officers in the district or a sub -division shall be sub  ordinat e to the 
Collector or the sub -divisional officer, as the case may be.  
8. Combination of offices. —It shall be lawful for the Administrator to appoint one and the same 
person to any two or more of the offices provided for in this Chapter, to make any appoint ment by virtue 
of office and also to confer on any officer of the Government all or any of the powers and duties of any of 
the revenue officers including the Collector.  
9. Notification of appointments. —All appointments made under this Chapter except appointments 
of revenue inspectors, tehsildars and village accountants and other vil lage officers and servants shall be 
notified in the Official Gazette.  
10. Seals.—The Administrator shall, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specif y the revenue officers who shall use a seal and also the size and description of the seal which each 
such officer shall use.  
CHAPTER  III.—LAND AND LAND REVENUE  
11. Title of Government to lands, etc. —(1) All lands, public roads, lanes and paths and bridges, 
ditches, dikes, and fences on or beside the same, the beds of rivers, streams, nallas , lakes and tanks, and 
all canals and water courses, and all standing and flowing water, and all rights in or over the same or 
appertaining thereto, which are not the property of any person, are and are hereby declared to be the 
property of the Government.  
(2) Unless it is  otherwise expressly provided in the terms of a grant made by the Government, the 
right to mines, quarries, minerals and mineral products including mineral oil, natural gas and petroleum 
shall vest in the Government, and it shall have all the powers necess ary for the proper enjoyment of such 
rights.  
(3) Where any property or any right in or over any property is claimed by or on behalf of the 
Government, or by any person as against the Government and the claim is disputed, such dispute shall be 
decided by th e Collector whose order shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be final.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 3) or in appeal or revision therefrom 
may institute a civil suit to contest the order within a period of six months  from the date of such order and 
the decision of the civil court s hall be binding on the parties.  
12. Right to trees, forests, etc. —(1) The right to all trees, jungles or other natural products growing 
on land set apart for forest reserves and to all trees , brush wood, jungle or other natural product, wherever 
growing, except in so far as the same may be the property of any person, vests in the Government, and 
such trees, brush wood, jungle or other natural product shall be preserved or disposed of in such manner 
as may be prescribed, keeping in view the interests of the people in the area with regard to the user of the 
natural products.  
(2) All road side trees which have been planted and reared by or under the orders or at the expense of 
the Government and all trees which have been planted and reared at the expense of local authorities by 
the side of any road belonging to the Government vest in the Government.  
13. Assignmen t of land for special purposes. —Subject to rules made in this behalf under this Act, 
the Collector may set apart land belonging to the Government for pasturage for the village cattle, for 
forest reserves or for any other purpose.  
14. Allotment of land. —(1) The Collector may allot land belonging to the Government for 
agricultural purposes o r for construction of dwelling houses, in accordance with such rules as may be 
made in  this behalf under this Act; and such rules may provide for allotment of land to persons evicted 
under section 15.  12 (2) The  Administrator shall have power — 
(a) to allot an y such land for the purpose of an industry or for any purpose of public utility on 
such cond itions as may be prescribed, or  
(b) to entrust the management of any such land or any rights therein to the gram panchayat of the 
village established under any law for the time being in force.  
15. Unauthorised occupation of land. —(1) Any person who occupies or continues to occupy any 
land belonging to Government without lawful authority shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be 
summarily evicted therefrom by the competent authority and any building or other construction erected or 
anything deposited on such land, if not removed within such reasonable time as such authority may from 
time to time fix for the purpose, shall be liable to be forfeited to the Government  and to be disposed of in 
such manner as the competent authority may direct:  
Provided that the competent authority may, in lieu of ordering the forfeiture of any such building or 
other construction, order the demolition of  the whole or any part thereof.  
(2) Such trespasser shall also be liable by way of penalty to pay a sum which may extend to six times 
the annual assessment on such land as may be specified by the competent authority and such sum shall be 
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(3) Upon payment of the penalty referred to in sub -section ( 2), the trespasser shall have the right of 
tending, gathering and removing any ungathered crops.  
16. Liability of land to land revenue. —(1) All lands, to whatever purpose applied, are lia ble to 
payment of land revenue to the Government.  
(2) The Administrator may exempt any land from the liability to such payment by means of a special 
grant or contract or in accordance with any law for the time being in force or the rules made under this 
Act. 
17. Alluvial lands. —All alluvial lands, newly formed islands, or abandoned river beds, which vest 
under any law for the time being in force in any holder of land shall be subject in respect of liability to 
land revenue to the same privileges, conditions  and restrictions as are applicable to the original holding by 
virtue of which such lands, islands or river beds vest in the said holder, but no revenue shall be leviable in 
respect of any such lands, islands or river beds unless the area of the same excee ds one acre.  
18. Land revenue in case of diluvion. —Every holder of land paying land revenue in respect thereof 
shall be entitled, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, to a decrease of assessment if any 
portion thereof, not being less than o ne acre in extent, is lost by diluvion.  
19. Assessment of land revenue. —(1) The assessment of land revenue on any land shall be made, or 
shall be deemed to have been made, with respect to the use of the land — 
(a) for purposes of agriculture;  
(b) for industrial or commercial purposes;  
(c) as sites for dwelling houses;  
(d) for any other purpose.  
(2) Where,  land assessed for use for any one purpose is diverted to any other purpose, the land 
revenue payable upon such land shall, notwithstanding that the term for which the assessment may have 
been fixed has not expired, be liable to be altered and assessed  at a different rate in accordance with the 
rules made under this Act.  
20. Diversion of land. —(1) If any person holding land for any purpose wishes to divert such land or 
any part thereof to any other purpose except agriculture, he shall apply for permission to the competent 
authority who may, subject to the provisions of this section and to the rule s made under this Act, refuse 
permission or grant it on such conditions as it may think fit.  13 (2) Permission to divert may be refused by the competent autho rity only on the ground that the 
diversion is likely to cause a public nuisance or that it is not in the interest of the general public or that the 
holder is unable or unwilling to comply with the conditions that may be imposed under sub -section ( 3). 
(3) Conditions may be imposed on diversion for the following objects and no others, namely, in order 
to secure the public health, safety and convenience, and in the case of land which is to be used as building 
sites, in order to secure in addition that the dimensions, arrangement and accessibility of the sites are 
adequate for the health and convenience of occ upiers or are suitable to the locality.  
(4) If any land has been diverted without permission by the holder or by any other person with or 
without the consent of the holder, the competent authority, on receiving information thereof, may impose 
on the person  responsible for the diversion a penal ty not ex ceeding one hundred rupees, and may proceed 
in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) as if an application for perm ission to divert has been 
made.  
(5) If any land has been diverted in contravention of an order passed or of a condition imposed  under 
any of the foregoing sub -sections, the competent authority may serve a notice on the person responsible 
for such contravention, directing him, within a reasonable period to be stated in the notice, to use the land 
for its original purpose or to observe the condition; and such notice may require such person to remove 
any structure, to fill up any excavation, or to take such other steps as may be required in order that the 
land may be used for its original pu rpose, or that the condition may be satisfied. The competent authority 
may also impose on such person a penalty not exceeding one hundred rupees for such contravention, and 
a further penalty not exceeding four rupees for each day during whic h such contrave ntion continues.  
(6) If any person served with a notice under sub -section ( 5), fails within the period stated in the notice 
to take the steps ordered by the competent authority under that sub -section, the competent authority may 
itself take such steps or c ause them to be taken; and any cost incurred in so doing shall be recoverable 
from such person in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
Explanation .—“Diversion ” in this section means using land assess ed to one purpose for any other 
purpose, but using land for the purpose of agriculture where it is assessed with reference to any other 
purpose shall not be deemed to be diversion.  
21. Remission or suspension of revenue on failure of crops. —The Administra tor may, in 
accordance with the rules made in this behalf under this Act, grant a remission or suspension of land 
revenue in years in which crops have failed in any area.  
22. Responsibility for payment of land revenue. —(1) The following persons shall be pr imarily 
liable for the payment of land revenue assessed on land, namely: — 
(a) the person to whom the land belongs;  
(b) the under -raiyat or any other person in possession of the land, provided that such under -raiyat 
or other person shall be entitled to credit from the owner of the l and for the amount paid by him;  
(2) Where there are two or more persons liable to pay land reve nue under sub -section ( 1), all of them 
shall be jointly and severally liable for its payment.  
23. Receipt for land revenue. —Every r evenue officer receiving payment of land revenue shall, at 
the time when such payment is received by him, give a written receipt for the same.  
CHAPTER  IV.—SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT OF LAND REVENUE  
24. Definitions of “revenue survey ”, “settlement ” and “term of settlement ”.—The operations 
carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter in order to determine or revise the land 
revenue payable on lands in any local area are called a “revenue survey ”, the results of the operations are 
called a “settlem ent” and the period during which such results are to be in force is called the “term of 
settlement ”. 14 25. Inquiry into profits of agriculture. —(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act, the Administrator shall take steps to institute and shall cause to be constantly maintained, in 
accordance with the rules made under this Act, an inquiry into the profits of agriculture and into the value 
of land used for agricultural and non -agricultural purposes.  
(2) For the purpose of determining the pro fits of agriculture , the following matters shall be taken into 
account in estimating th e cost of cultivation, namely: — 
(a) the depreciation of stock and buildings;  
(b) the money equivalent of the labour and supervision by  the cultivator and his family;  
(c) all other expenses usually incurred in the cultivation of the l and which is under inquiry; and  
(d) interest on the cost of buildings and stock, on all expenditure for seed and manure and on the 
cost of agricultural operations paid for in cash.  
26. Revenue  survey.—Whenever the Administrator thinks it expedient so to do, he may, with the 
approval of the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct the revenue survey of any local 
area with a view to the settlement of the land revenue and to the  preparation of a record of rights 
connected therewith or the revision of any existing settlement or record of rights.  
27. Power to requi re assistance from landholders. —A survey officer deputed to conduct or take 
part in any revenue survey may, by special order or by general notice to be published in the prescribed 
manner, require the attendance of holders of lands to assist in the measurement or classification of the 
lands to which the revenue survey extends and, when hired labour is employed for purposes incidental to 
the revenue survey, may assess and apportion the cost thereof on the lands surveyed, for collection as land 
revenue due on such lands.  
28. Survey numbers and villages. —Subject to the rules made in this behalf under th is Act, the 
survey office r may— 
(a) divide the lands to which the revenue survey extends into villages and the villages into plots 
and survey numbers ; and 
(b) recognise the existing villages and survey numbers, reconstitute them or form new survey 
numbers.  
29. Division of survey n umbers into sub -divisions. —The survey officer may sub -divide survey 
numbers into as many sub -divisions as may be required in the manner prescribed . 
30. Determination of revenue -rates.—The Administrator may at any time direct the determination 
or the revision of the revenue -rates for all lands in any area of which a revenue survey has been made.  
31. Preparation of statistical and fiscal records. —It shall be the duty of the survey officer or the 
settlement officer on the occasion of making or revising a  settlement of land revenue to prepare a register 
to be called the “settlement register ”, showing the area and assessment of each survey number, with any 
other particulars that may be prescribed, and other records in accordance with such orders as may from  
time to time be made in this behalf by the Administrator.  
32. Revenue -rates how determined. —For the purpose of determining the revenue -rates, the 
settlement officer may divide any area into units and in forming such units, he shall have regard to the 
physical features, agricultural and economic conditions and trade facilities and communications; and shall 
then determine the revenue -rates for different classes of lands in each such unit in the manner and 
according to the principles prescribed and in partic ular, in the case of agricultural land, to the profits of 
agriculture, to the consideration paid for leases, to the sale prices of land and to the principal monies on 
mortgages and in the case of non -agricultural land, t o the value of the land for the  purpose for which it is 
held.  
33. Publication of table of revenue -rates.—(1) The settlement officer shall prepare a table of 
revenue -rates in the prescribed form and publish it in the prescribed man ner for the prescribed period.  15 (2) Any person objecting to any  entry in the table of revenue -rates may present a petition in writing to 
the settlement officer within the prescribed period and the settlement officer shall consider such 
objections after giving a hearing to the objector.  
(3) The settlement officer shall  submit the table of  revenue -rates to the Administrator together with a 
summary of objections, if any, his decisions on such objections and a statement of the grounds in support 
of his proposals.  
34. Confirmatio n of the table of revenue -rates.—(1) The Admi nistrator may confirm the table of 
revenue -rates submitted to him by the settlement officer with such modifications, if any , as he may 
consider necessary.  
(2) The table of revenue -rates confirmed under sub -section ( 1) shall be finally published in the 
Official Gazette.  
35. Rates of revenue to  form part of settlement register. —The table of revenue -rates published 
under section 34 shall be incorporated in and form part of the settlement register of the village.  
36. Introduction of revenue -rates.—When the revenue -rates are determined under this Chapter in 
respect of any area, such rates shall take effect from the beginning of the year next after the date of final 
publication of the table of revenue -rates under section 34.  
37. Duration of revenue -rates.—(1) When the table of revenue -rates for any area has been finally 
published, the rates specified therein shall remain in forc e for a period of thirty years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) revenue -rates may be altered or revised  in any year after the expiry of every ten years from the 
date on which the table of revenue -rates was introduced, in such manner and to such extent as may be 
prescribed;  
(b) when the circumstances of a local area are such that a fresh determination of the  revenue -rates 
is in the opinion of the Administrator inexpedient, he may extend the term of settlement by such 
further period as he may think necessary.  
38. Assessment on holdings. —(1) The settlement  officer shall calculate the assessment on each 
holding in accordance with the revenue -rates confirmed and finally published under section 34 and such 
assessment shall be the fair assessment.  
(2) The settlement officer shall have the power to make fair ass essment on all lands whatsoever to 
which the revenue survey extends, whether such lands are held with liability to pay full land revenue or 
land revenue at concessional rates or are held revenue free.  
(3) The fair assessment of all lands shall be calculate d in accordance with rules made in this behalf 
and having regard to the following princ iples, namely: — 
(a) no regard shall be had to any claim to hold land on privileged terms;  
(b) regard shall be had in the case of agricultural land to the profits of agri culture, to the 
consideration paid for leases, to the sale prices of land and to the principal monies on mortgages, and 
in the case of non -agricultural land, to the value of the land for the purpose for which it is held;  
(c) where any improvement has been effected at any time in any holding held for the purpose of 
agriculture by or at the expense of the holder thereof, the fair assessment of such holding shall be 
fixed as if the  improvement had not been made.  
39. Additional assessment for water advantages. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Chapter, the Administrator may direct that any land in respect of which the rate of revenue has been 
determined shall be liable to be assessed to  additional land revenue during  the term of the settlement for 
addit ional advantages accruing to it from water received on account of irrigation works or improvements 
in existing irrigation works completed after the table of revenue -rates came into force and not effected by 
or at the exp ense of the holder of the land.  16 40. Continuance of survey operations and rates i n force at commencement of                                
Act.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, all survey operations commenced under any 
law for the time being in force and continuing at the c ommencement of this Act shall be deemed to have 
been commenced and to be continuing under the provisions of this Chapter, and all revenue -rates in force 
at such commencement shall be deemed to have been determined and introduced in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter and shall remain in force until the introduction of revised revenue -rates; and 
such revised revenue -rates may be introduced at any time, notwithstanding anything contained in              
section 37.  
41. Power of Collector to correct  errors, etc. —(1) The powers and duties exercisable by the 
officers referred to in section 6 may also be exercised, during the term of settlement, by the Collector or 
such other revenue officer as may be specified by the Administrator for the purpose by no tification in the 
Official Gazette.  
(2) The Collector may at any time during the term of settlement correct any error in the area                          
or the assessment of any survey number or sub -division due to a mistake of survey or  arithmetical 
miscalculation:  
Provided that no arrears of land revenue shall become payable by reason of such correction . 
CHAPTER  V.—LAND RECORDS  
42. Preparation of re cord of rights. —It shall be the duty of the survey officer to prepare a record of 
rights for each village showing the area of each survey number and other particulars and any other record 
or register, in accordance with the rules made under this Act.  
43. Publication of the record of rights. —(1) When a record of rights has been prepared, the survey 
officer shall publish a draft of the record in such manner and for such period as may be prescribed and 
shall receive and consider any objections which may be made during the period of such publication, to 
any entry therei n or to any omission therefrom.  
(2) When a ll objections have been considered and disposed of in accordance with the rules made in 
this behalf, the survey officer shall cause the record to be finally published in the p rescribed manner.  
(3) Every entry in the record of rights as finally published sh all, until, the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be correct.  
44. Jurisdiction of civil courts to decide disputes. —The civil courts shall have jurisdiction to 
decide any dispute to which the Government is not a party relating to any right or entry which i s recorded 
in the record of rights.  
45. Correction of  bona fide  mistake in register. —The survey officer may, on application made to 
him in this behalf or on his own motion, within one year from the date of final publication of the record of 
rights, correct any entry in such record which he is satisfied has been made owing to a bona fide  mistake.  
46. Register of mutations. —(1) There shall be maintained for every village a register of mutations in 
such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person acquiring by succession, survivorship, inheritance, partition, purchase, gift, mortgage, 
lease or otherwise any right in land or, where such person acquiring the right is a minor or otherwise 
disqualified, his guardian or other person having c harge of his property, shall report his acquisition of 
such right to the village accountant within three months from the date of such acquisition and the village 
accountant shall give at once a written acknowledgement in the prescribed form for such report  to the 
person making it.  
(3) The village accountant shall enter the substance of every report made to him under sub -section ( 2) 
in the register of mutation s and also make an entry therein respecting the acquisition of any right of the 
kind mentioned in su b-section ( 2) which he has reason to believe to have taken place a nd of which a 
report has not b e made under the said sub -section and, at the same time, shall post up a complete copy of 
the entry in a conspicuous place in the village and shall give written  intimation to all persons appearing 
from the record of rights or the register of mutations to be interested in the mutations and to any other 
person whom he has reason to believ e to be interested therein.  17 (4) Should any objection to an entry made under su b-section ( 3) in the register of mutations be made 
either orally or in writing to the village accountant, he shall enter the particulars of the objection in the 
register of disputed cases and shall at once give a written acknowledgement in the prescribed f orm for the 
objection to the person making it.  
(5) The objections made under sub -section ( 4) shall be decide d on the basis of possession by the 
competent authority and orders dis posing of objections entered in the register of disputed cases shall be 
recorded in the register of mutations by the competent authority . 
(6) After the entries in the register of mutations have been tested and found correct , the entries shall 
be transferred to the record of rights and shall be certified by such officer as may be prescribed in this 
behalf.  
47. Penalty for  neglect to afford information. —The Collector may, if he is of opinion that any 
person has wilfully neglected to make the report required by section 46 within the prescribed period, 
impose on such person a pena lty not exceeding twenty -five rupees.  
48. Assistance in preparation of maps. —Subject to rules made under this Act, — 
(a) any revenue officer may, for the purpose of preparing or revising any map or plan required for 
or in connection with any record or register under this Chapter, exercise any of the powers of the 
survey officer under section 27 except the power of assessing the cost of hired labour; and  
(b) any revenue officer not below the rank of sub -divisional officer may assess the cost of the 
prepa ration or revision of such maps or plans and all expenses incidental thereto, and such costs and 
expense s shall be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
49. Certified copies. —Certified copies of entries in the record of rights may be  granted by such 
officers and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
50. Maps and ot her records open to inspection. —Subject to such rules and on payment of such 
fees, if any , as may be prescribed, all maps and land records shall be open to inspection by the public 
during office hours, and certified extracts therefrom or certified copies thereof may be given to all persons 
applying for the same.  
51. Power to transfer duty of ma intaining maps and  records to settlement officer. —When a local 
area is under settlement, the duty of maintaining the maps and records may, under the orders of the 
Administrator, be transferred from the Collector to the settlement officer.  
CHAPTER  VI.—BOUND ARIES AND BOUNDARY MARKS  
52. Determination of village boundaries. —The boundaries of villages, survey numbers,                     
sub-divisions and fields shall be fix ed, and all disputes relating thereto shall be determined, by survey 
officers or by such other officers as may be appointed by the Administrator for the purpose, in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf.  
53. Effect of settlement of boundary. —(1) The settlement of a boundary under this Chapter shall be 
determinative — 
(a) of the proper p osition of the boundary line or boundary marks; and  
(b) of the rights of the landholders on either side of the boundary fixed in respect of the land 
adjudged to appertain, or not to appertain , to their respective holdings.  
(2) Where a boundary has been so fixed, the Collector may at any time summarily evict any 
landholder who is wrongfully in possession of any land which has been adjudged in the settlement of a 
boundary not to appertain to his holding or to the holding of any person through or under whom he  
claims.  
54. Construction and repair of boundary marks. —It shall be lawful for any survey officer 
authorised in this behalf to specify, or cause to be constructed, laid out, maintained or repaired, boundary 
marks of villages or survey numbers or sub -divisions and to assess all charges incurred thereby on the 
holders or others having an interest therein.  18 55. Description of boundary marks. —The boundary marks shall be of such description and shall be 
constructed, laid out, maintained or repaired in such manner and shall be of such dimensions and 
materials as may, subject to the rules made under this Act, be determined by the Collector or other officer 
appointed for the purpose.  
56. Responsibilities for maintaining boundary marks. —Every landholder shall be  responsible for 
the maintenance an good repair of the boundary marks of his holding and for any charge reasonably 
incurred on account of the same by the revenue officers in case of alteration, removal or disrepair. It shall 
be the duty of the village offi cers and servants to prevent the destruction or unauthorised alteration of the 
village boundary marks.  
57. Collector to have charge of boundary marks. —After the introduction of survey and settlement 
in a district, the charge of the boundary marks shall dev olve on the Collector and it shall be his duty to 
take measures for their construction, laying out, maintenance and repair.  
58. Penal ty for injuring boundary marks. —Any person wilfully erasing, removing or injuring a 
boundary mark shall be liable to such p enalty not exceeding fifty rupees as the competent authority may 
impose.  
CHAPTER  VII.—REALISATION OF LAND REVENUE AND  OTHER PUBLIC DEMANDS  
59. Land revenue to be first charge. —Land revenue assessed on any land shall be the first charge 
on that land and on the cr ops, rents and profits thereof.  
60. Payment of land revenue. —Land revenue shall be payable at such times, in such instalments, to 
such persons, and at such places, as may be prescribed.  
61. Arrear of land revenue. —(1) Any instalment of land revenue or part thereof which is not paid 
on the due date shall become an arrear of land revenue and the person responsible for the pa yment shall 
become a defaulter.  
(2) A statement of account certified by the circle officer shall, for the purpose of this Chapter,  be 
conclusive evidence of the existence of the arrear, of its amount and of the person who is the defaulter:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prejudice the right of such person to make payment 
under protest and to question the correctness o f the account in separate proceedin gs before the com petent 
authority.  
62. Recovery of arrears. —An arrear of land revenue may be recovered by any one or more of t he 
following processes, namely: — 
(a) by serving a written no tice of demand on the defaulter ; 
(b) by distraint and sale of the defaulter ‟s movable property,  including the produce of the land;  
(c) by the attachment and sale of the defaulter ‟s immovable property.  
63. Notice of demand. —The form and contents of the notice of demand and the officers by whom 
such notices shall be issued shall be such as may be prescribed.  
64. Distrain t and sale of movable property. —(1) The distraint and sale of the movable property of 
a defaulter shall be made by such officers or class of officers, in such manner and in a ccordance with such 
procedure, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to authorise the distraint or sale of any property which, 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), is exempt from attachment or sale in executio n of a 
decree or of any article set aside exclusively for religious use.  
65. Sale of immovable property. —(1) When the Collector is of opinion that the processes referred 
to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 62 are not sufficient for the recovery of an arre ar, he may, in addition 
to or instead of any of those processes, cause the land in respect of which such arrear is due to be attached 
and sold in the prescribed manner.  19 (2) The Collector may also cause the right, title and interest of the defaulter in any other immovable 
property to be similarly attached and sold.  
66. Notice of sale. —(1) Before effecting the sale of any land or other immovable property under the 
provisions of this Chapter, the Collector or other officer empowered in this behalf shall issue such notices 
and proclamations, in such form, in such manner and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed; 
the notices and proclamations shall also be published in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) A copy of every notice or proclamation issued  under sub -section ( 1) shall be served on the 
defaulter.  
67. Sale to be by auction. —All sales of property, movable or immovable, under this Chapter shall be 
by public auction held in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
68. Prohibition to bid at auction. —No officer having any duty to perform in connection with any 
such sale and no person employed by or subordinate to such officer shall, either directly or indirectly, bid 
for or acquire any property except on behalf of the Government.  
69. Sale o f perishables. —Perishable articles shall be sold by auction with the least possible delay 
and such sale shall be finally concluded by the officer conducting the sale.  
70. Sales not to be excessive. —Every sale of property, movable or immovable, under the pr ovisions 
of this Chapter shall, as far as may be practicable, be proportionate to the amount of the arrear of land 
revenue to be recovered together with the interest thereon and the expenses of attachment and sale.  
71. Deposit by purchaser of immovable pro perty.—In all cases of sale of immovable property, the 
party who is declared to be the purchaser shall be required to deposit immediately 25 per cent. of the 
amount of his bid, and the balance within fifteen days of the date of sale.  
72. Failure to make de posit.—(1) In default of the payment of deposit referred to in section 71, the 
property shall be put up for re -sale and the expenses incurred in connection with the first sale shall be 
borne by the defaulting bidder.  
(2) In default of payment of the balanc e of the bid amount within the period prescribed in section 71, 
the deposit after defraying therefrom the expenses of the sale s hall be forfeited to the Govern ment and  the 
property shall be re -sold.  
(3) Where the proceeds of the re -sale are less than the p rice bid by such defaulting purchaser, the 
difference shall also be recoverable from him in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
73. Setting aside sale. —Where immovable property has been sold under this Chapter, the defaulter, 
or any person owning  such property or holding an interest therein, may, at any time, within thirty days of 
the date of sale or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as the Collector may for sufficient 
cause allow, apply in the prescribed manner to the Colle ctor to have the sale set aside — 
(a) on the ground of some material irregularity or mistake or fraud resulting in substantial loss or 
injury to him, or  
(b) on his depositing in the Collector ‟s office the amount of the arrear specified in the 
proclamation of sa le, the cost of the sale and for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to 5 per cent. 
of the purchase money.  
74. Confirmation of sale. —If, on the expiration of thirty days from the date of sale of any 
immovable property or of the further period, if any, al lowed under section 73, no application has been 
made for setting aside the sale, or if any such application has been made and rejected, the Collector shall 
make an order confirming the sale unless, for reasons to be recorded, the Collector sets aside the s ale 
notwithstanding that no application therefor has been made.  
75. Refunds. —(1) The Collector shall order the refund and payment to me purchaser, of — 
(a) the amounts deposit ed by him under section 71; and  
(b) the sum equal to 5 per cent. of the purchase money deposited under clause ( b) of section 73;  
if the sale is not confirmed or is set aside.  20 (2) The Collector shall order the refund and payment of all the moneys deposited under clause ( b) of 
section 73 to the person who made the dep osit, if the sale is  confirmed:  
Provided that the Collector may set off the whole or any part of any such moneys against any arrears 
of land revenue or any other arrear recoverable as an arrear of  land revenue, which may be out santanding 
against the person who made the deposit.  
76. Certificate of purchase. —When a  sale held under this Chapter is confirmed, the Collector shall 
put the person declared to  be the purchaser in possession of the property and shall grant him a certificate 
in the prescribed  form to the effect tha t he has purchased the property specified therein, and such 
certificate shall be deemed to be a valid transfer of such property.  
77. Application of proceeds of sale. —The proceeds of the sale of any property  under this Chapter 
shall be applied in defraying the expenses of the  sale which shall be determined  in the prescribed manner 
and the balance shall be applied to the payment of the arrears on account of which the sale was held and 
the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person whose property has been so ld. 
78. Liability of certified purchaser. —The person who has purchased any land and to whom a 
certificate of purchase has been granted shall not be liable for the land revenue in respect of the land for 
any period prior to the date of the sale.  
79. Precaut ionary measures in certain cases. —When the crop of any land or any portion of the 
same is sold, mortgaged or otherwise disposed of, the Collector may, if he thinks it necessary, prevent its 
being removed from the land until the demand for the current year in respect of the said land is paid 
whether the date fixed for the payment of the same has arrived or not.  
80. Recovery of other public demands. —The following moneys may be recovered under this Act in 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue, name ly:— 
(a) rent, fees and royalties due to the Government for use or occupation of land or water or any 
product of land;  
(b) all moneys falling due to the Government under any grant, lease or contract which provides 
that they shall be re -coverable as arrears of l and revenue;  
(c) all sums declared by this Act or any other law for the time being in force to be recoverable as 
an arrear of land revenue.  
CHAPTER  VIII.—PROCEDURE OF REVENUE OFFICERS : APPEALS AND REVISIONS  
81. Revenue officers to be courts. —(1) A revenue officer, while exercising power under this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force to inquire into or to decide any question arising for 
determination between the Government and any person or between parties to any proceedings, shall be a 
revenue court.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the inherent power of the revenue 
court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the 
process of the revenue court.  
82. Place of hearing.—Except for reasons to be recorded in writing, no revenue officer shall inquire 
into or hear any case at any place outside the lo cal limits of his jurisdiction:  
Provided that a sub -divisional officer may inquire into or hear any case at the headqua rters of the 
district to which he is appointed.  
83. Power  to enter upon and survey land. —All revenue officers and persons acting under their 
orders may enter upon and survey any land and demarcate boundaries and do all other acts necessary for 
the purpose of discharging their duties under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and in 
so doing, shall cause no more damage than the circumstances of the case may require.  
84. Power to transfer cases. —(1) The Administrator may transfer any case or class of cases arising 
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force from any revenue  officer to any other revenue 
officer competent to deal with it.  21 (2) The Collector or a sub -divisional officer may transfer any case or class of cases arisin g under this 
Act or any other law for the time being in force for inquiry or decision from his own file or from the file 
of any revenue officer subordinate to him to the file of any other revenue officer subordinate to him 
competent to deal with such case or class of cases.  
85. Power to take e vidence, summon witnesses, etc. —(1) Every revenue officer not lower in rank 
than a circle officer acting as a revenue court shall have power to take evidence and to summon any 
person whose attendance he considers necessary, either as a party or as a witness or to produce any 
document, for the purpose of any inquiry which such officer is legally empowered to make; and all 
persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authorised agent as such  offic er 
may direct, and to p roduce such documents as may be  required.  
(2) Every summons shall be in writing, signed and sealed by the officer issuing it and shall be in such 
form and be served in such manner as may be prescribed.  
86. Compelling attendance  of witnesses. —If any person on whom a summons to attend as witness 
or to produce any document has been served fails to comply with the summons, the officer by whom the 
summons has b een issued under section 85 may — 
(a) issu e a bailable warrant of arrest;  
(b) order him to furnish security for appearance; or  
(c) impose upon him a fine not exceeding rupees twenty.  
87. Hearing in absence of party. —(1) If, on the date fixed for hearing a case or proceeding, a 
revenue officer finds that a summons or notice was not served on any party due to the failure of the 
opposite party to pay the requisite process fees for such service, the case or proceeding may be dismissed 
for default of payment of such process fees.  
(2) If any party to a case or proceeding before a reve nue officer does not appear on the date fixed for 
hearing, the case may be heard and determined in his absence or may be dismissed for default.  
(3) The party against whom any order is passed under sub -section ( 1) or ( 2) may apply, within thirty 
days from t he date of such order, to have it set aside on the ground that he was prevented by sufficient 
cause from paying the requisite process fees or from appearing at the hearing; and the revenue officer 
may, after notice to the opposite party and after making su ch inquiry as he considers necessary, set aside 
the order passed.  
88. Adjournment of hearing. —(1) A revenue officer may, from time to time, for reasons to be 
recorded, adjourn the hearing of a case or proceeding before him.  
(2) The date and place of an adjourned hearing shall be intimated at the time of the adjournment to 
such of the parties and witnesses as are present.  
89. P ower to order payment of costs. —A revenue officer may direct the parties to pay the cost 
incurred in any case before him and also apportion the cost among the parties in such manner and to such 
extent as he may think fit.  
90. Use of force. —Where any order is passed under this Act directing any person to deliver 
possession of land or directing the eviction of any person from land, such order shall be executed by the 
competent authority in such manner as may be prescribed and it shall be lawful for such authority, in 
accordance with rules to be prescribed, to take such steps and use or cause to be used such force as may 
be reasonably  necessary for secu ring compliance with the order.  
91. Appearances before and ap plications to revenue officers. —All appearances before, 
applications to, and acts to be done before, any revenue officer under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in f orce may be made or done by the parties themselves or by their authorised agent s or by any 
legal practitioner:  
Provided that any such appearance shall, if the revenue officer so directs, be made by the party in 
person.  22 92. Correction of error or omission. —Any revenue officer by whom an order was passed in a case 
or proceeding may, either on his own motion or on the application of a party, correct any error or 
omission not affecting a material part of the case or proceeding, after such notice to the parties as he may 
consider necessary.  
93. Appeals. —(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, an appeal shall lie from every origina l order 
passed under this Act, — 
(a) if such a n order is passed by an officer subordinate to the sub -divisional officer, to the           
sub-divisional officer;  
(b) if such an order is passed by the sub -divisional officer, to the Collector;  
(c) if such an order is passe d by the Collector, to the Admi nistrator;  
(d) if such an order is passed by an assistant survey and settlement of ficer, to the survey and 
settlement officer or to a revenue officer notified by the Administrator in the Official Gazette to be 
the appellate authority; and  
(e) if such an order is passed by a survey and settlement officer, to the director of settlement an d 
land records or to a revenue officer notified by the Administrator in the Official Gazette to be the 
appellate authority.  
(2) A second appeal shall lie against an y order passed In first appeal, — 
(a) if such an order is passed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) to the Collector;  
(b) if such an order is passed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), to the Administrator;  
(c) if such an order is passed under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), to the director of settlement and 
land records or to a revenue offic er notified by the Administrator in the Official Gazette to be the 
second appellate authority; and  
(d) If such an order is passed under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1), to the Administrator.  
94. Limitation of appeals. —(1) No appeal shall lie, — 
(a) in the case of a first appeal, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of the order appealed 
against; and  
(b) in the case of a second appeal, after the expiry of sixty days from the date of the order 
appealed against.  
(2) In computing the above periods, the  time required to obtain copies of the order appealed against 
shall be excluded.  
95. Revision. —The Administrator or the Collector may, at any time, either on his own motion,  or on 
the application of any party, can for the records of any proceedings before any revenue officer 
subordinate to him for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or the propriety of any order 
passed by such revenue officer, and may pass such order in ref erence thereto as he thinks fit:  
Provided that he shall not vary or reverse any order affecting any right between private persons 
without having given to the parties interested notice to appear and be heard.  
96. Review of orders. —(1) A revenue officer may, either on his own motion or on the application of 
any party interes ted, review any order passed by himself or by any of his predecessors -in-office and pass 
such order in reference thereto as he thinks fit:  
Provided that a revenue officer subordinate to the Collector shall, before reviewing any order under 
this section, obtain the permission of the Collector and the Collector shall, before reviewing an order 
passed by any of his predecessors -in-office obtain the permission of the Administrator.  
(2) No order affecting any question of right between private persons shall be reviewed except on the 
application of a party to the proceedings or except after notice to the other party and no application for the 
review of such order shall be entertained unless it is made within ninety days from the date of the order.  23 (3) No order sh all be reviewed except on the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) discovery of new and important matter of evidence;  
(ii) some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record; or  
(iii) any other sufficient reason.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, the Collector shall be deemed to be the successor -in-office of any 
revenue officer who has left the district or who has ceased to exercise powers as a revenue officer and to 
whom there is no successor in the district.  
(5) An order which has been dealt with in appeal or on revision shall not be reviewed by any officer 
subordinate to the appellate or revisional authority.  
97. Stay of execution of orders. —(1) A revenue officer who has pa ssed any order or his                 
successor -in-office may, at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed for appeal, direct the stay 
of execution of such order for such period as he thinks fit provided  that no appeal has been filed.  
(2) Any authority before whom a case is pending in appeal or revision may direct the stay of 
execution of the order appealed from or under revision for such period as it may think fit.  
(3) The revenue officer or other authority directing such stay of execution of any order may impose 
such conditions, or order such security to be furnished , as he or it may think fit.  
98. Power to make rules. —(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of appointment of revenue officers, survey officers and settlement officers, and 
other village officers and servants, their powers and duties, the official seals, if any, to be used by 
them and the size and description of the seals;  
(b) the Collector ‟s powers of superintendence and control over other officers;  
(c) the officers who should hear and decide disputes regarding rights in or over any property 
claimed by or against the Government and the pr ocedure to  be followed by them;  
(d) the disposal of Government lands by assignment or grant to individuals or to public purposes 
and the terms and conditions subject to which such assignments or grants may be made;  
(e) the preservation and disposal of trees, brush, wood, jungle and other natural products on 
Government land and the recovery of the value of trees or other natural product unauthor isedly 
appropriated by persons;  
(f) the procedure for summary eviction of trespassers on Government land;  
(g) the alteration and rev ision of the land revenue in ca ses of alluvion or diluvion or of diversion 
of land for purposes other than agriculture;  
(h) the grant of permission to use agricultural land for non - agricultural purposes;  
(i) the determination of additional rates fo r use of water;  
(j) the circumstances in which remission or suspension of revenue may be made and the rate of 
such remission or suspen sion;  
(k) the form of receipt for payment of land revenue;  
(l) the conduct of surveys a nd settlements of land revenue;  
(m) the manner of estimating the cost of cultivation and other expenses in relation to the inquiry 
into profits of agriculture;  
(n) the division of survey numbers into sub -divisions and the assessment of sub -divisions;  24 (o) the statistical, fiscal and other re cords and registers to be prepared and maintained under this 
Part;  
(p) the manner in which the costs and expenses incidental to revenue survey or the construction, 
repair and maintenance of boundary marks shall be determined and apportioned between persons  who 
are liable to bear the same;  
(q) the fixing, construction, laying out, maintenance and repair of boundary marks, and the 
settlemen t of disputes relating thereto;  
(r) the division of areas into units for determining the revenue -rates and the preparatio n of the 
table of revenue -rates;  
(s) the preparation and the preliminary and final publication of the record of rights and the table 
of revenue -rates;  
(t) the hearing and disposal of objections to any entry or omission in the table of revenue -rates, 
the re cord of rights, and the register of mutations;  
(u) the manner and extent of  alteration or revision of revenue -rates  during the term of settlement;  
(v) the correction of bona fide  errors and mistakes in the revenue records, registers and maps 
prepared under  this Part;  
(w) the manner in which the average yield of crop s of land shall be ascertained;  
(x) the manner of holding inquiries by revenue officers under this Part;  
(y) the application of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), to  cases 
and proceedings before a revenue court;  
(z) the form of summons and other processes, notices, orders and proclamations to be issued or 
made by revenue officers and the manner of their service;  
(aa) the procedure for the attachment and sale of property and the confirmation and the setting 
aside of sales of immova ble property under Chapter VII;  
(bb) the manner of publication of notices and proclamations of attachment and sale of property;  
(cc) the manner in which the cost and expenses incidental to the attachment and sale of property 
shall be determined;  
(dd) the manner of payment of deposit and of the purchase money of property sold for arrears of 
land revenue;  
(ee) the circumstances in which precautionary measures for securing the land revenue u nder 
section 79 may be taken;  
(ff) the procedure for the transfer of cases from one revenue officer to another;  
(gg) the manner of preferring appeals or applications for revision or review, the documents to 
accompany the memorandum of appeal or such applic ation and the fee, if any, leviable therefor ; 
(hh) the grant of certified copies and the payment of fees for inspection and grant of certified 
copies of revenue records and registers;  
(ii) the mode of execution o f any orders directing any per son to deliver  possession of land or to 
be evicted from land, including the use of force for securing compliance with such order;  
(jj) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
PART III  
CHAPTER  IX—RIGHTS OF RAIYATS IN LAND  
99. Rights of raiyats. —(1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, — 
(a) the rights of a raiyat in his land shall be permane nt, heritable and transferable;  25 (b) the raiyat shall be entitled by himself, his servants, under -raiyats, agents or other 
representatives to erect farm buildings, construct wells or tanks or make other improvements thereon 
for the better cultivation of the land or it s convenient or profitable use;  
(c) the raiyat is entitled to plant trees on his land, to enjoy  the products thereof and to fell, utilise 
or dispose of the timber of any trees on his land.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle a raiyat to use his land to the detriment of any adjoining 
land which is not his or in contravention of the provision s of any other law for the time being in force 
applicable to such lands.  
100. Reservation of land for personal cultivation. —(1) Every raiyat who, at the comm encement of 
this Act, owns land  in excess of a basic holding sh all be entitled to apply to the  comp etent authority for 
the reservation  for his personal cultivation of any parcel or parcels of his land leased to under -raiyats.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in the pres cribed form and shall be made in the 
prescribed manner within a p eriod of one year from the comme ncement of this Act.  
Explanation .—In the case of a person under disability, the application shall be  made by his guardian 
or his author ised agent, as the case may be.  
101. Procedure for reservation of lands. —(1) The competent authority shall, on an application 
made under section 100, issue notice together with a copy of the ap plication to each of the under -raiyats 
holding land f rom the applicant requiring the  under -raiyat to submit his objections, if any, within a per iod 
of ninety days from the date of service of such notice or within such further period as the  competent 
authority may allow.  
(2) An under -raiyat on whom a no tice has been served under sub -section ( 1), shall furnish to the 
competent authority within the period aforesaid details of lands  owned by him or held as under -raiyat of 
any other raiyat and of lands which he selects for retention by him.  
(3) The competent authority shall, after considering the objections and the details, if any, furnished by 
the und er-raiyats and after making such inquiry as it may consider necessary, determine the land or lands, 
not exceeding the permissible limit, which in its opinion having regard to all the circumstances of the case 
may be reserved for personal cultivation of the  raiyat and the lands which each of his under -raiyats may 
be allowed to retain.  
102. “Permissible limit ” defined.—(1) In section 101, “permissible limit ” means an area of land 
which a raiyat may resume from under -raiyats for persona l cultivation, that is to say,— 
(a) in the case of a person under disability, 25 standard acres;  
(b) in the case of any other person who — 
(i) owns a basic holding or less, the entire area own ed by him;  
(ii) owns more than a basic holding but not exceeding a family holding, one -half of the area 
leased to under -raiyats or the area by which the land under  his personal cultivation falls  short of a 
basic holding, whichever i s greater;  
(iii) owns more than a family -holding,— 
(1) if he has no land, or any land which is less th an a family holding , under his personal 
cultivation, one-half of the area leased to under -raiyats but not exceeding the area by which 
land under his personal cultivation falls short of a family holding, provided that the under -
raiyat is left with not less than  a basic holding a nd provided further that a  raiyat shall in any 
case be en titled to resume an area by which land under his persona l cultivation falls shor t of a 
basic holding; and  
(2) if he has a family holding or more under his personal cultivation,  the area leased to 
under -raiyat s but no t exceeding the area by which land in his personal cultivation falls short 
of 25 standard acres, provided that the under -raiyat is left  with not less than a family holding.  26 Explanation .—For the purpose of determining the permissible limit of a raiyat under this                     
sub-section, any non -resumable land which he may hold as an under -raiyat shall also be taken into 
account.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), an under -raiyat who under any law, 
custom or usage is not liable to eviction at the commencement of this Act on the ground that the land is 
required for personal cultivation, shall in all cases be left with a basic holding or the land actually held b y 
him, whichever is less.  
(3) Any transfer of land made on or after the 10th August, 1957 shall be disregarded in computing the 
permissible limit.  
103. Land deemed to be reserved for personal cultivation in certain cases. —In the case of a raiyat 
who at the  commencement of this Act does not own land in excess of a basic holding, all lands owned by 
him and held by under -raiyats at such commencement shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 102, be deemed to have been reserved for his pers onal cultivation.  
Explanation .—Any transfer of land made on or after the 10th August, 1957 shall be disregarded in 
determining the extent of land owned by a raiyat at the commencement of this Act.  
104. Non-resumable land. —The competent authority shall decl are every land which, under                    
sub-section ( 3) of section 101, an under -raiyat is allowed to retain to be the non -resumable land of the 
under -raiyat.  
105. Right to lease. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a raiyat may lease out his  land to 
another person on such rent not exceeding the maximum rent referred to in section 111 as may be agreed 
upon between him and such person.  
(2) Every lease of land made after the commencement of this Act shall be for a period of five years 
and at the  end of the said period, and thereafter at the end of every such period of five years, the tenancy 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), be deemed to be renewed for a further period of five 
years on the same terms and conditions except to th e extent that a modification thereof consistent with 
this Act is agreed to by both parties.  
(3) In respect of any lease made after the commencement of this Act, a raiyat who is a member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union, on his discharge from service or pos ting to the reserve, may by giving the 
under -raiyat three months ‟ notice in writing before the expiry of any year, and any other raiyat may by 
giving the under -raiyat one year ‟s notice in writing before the expiry of any term of five years, terminate 
the tenancy if the raiyat requires the land bona fide  for personal cultivation by him.  
106. Land left uncultivated. —(1) Where the Collector is satisfied that any land has remained 
uncultivated for a period of not less than two consecutive years  otherwise than i n accordance with rules 
made in this behalf under this Act, and that it is necessary for the purpose of ensuring the full and 
efficient use of the land for agriculture to do so, he may after making such inquiry as may be prescribed 
lease out the land in ac cordance with the rules made under this Act.  
(2) Any lease made under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a lease made by the raiyat under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 105.  
107. Relinquishment. —(1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, a raiyat may 
relinquish his rights in respect of any land in his possession in favour of Government by giving a notice in 
writing to the competent authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed, not less than three 
months before the close  of any year and thereupon he shall cease to be a raiyat in respect of that land from 
the year nex t following the date of notice:  
Provided that relinquishment of only a part of a holding or of a holding which, or part of which, is 
subject to an encumbrance  or a charge, shall not be valid.  
(2) If any person relinquishes his rights to a land under sub -section ( 1), the way to which lies through 
other land retained by him, any future holder of the land relinquished shall be entitled to a right of way 
through th e land retained.  27 CHAPTER  X.—RIGHTS OF UNDER -RAIYATS  
108. Interest of under -raiyats.—(1) The interest of an under -raiyat in any land held by him as such 
shall be heritable but, save as otherwise provided in this Act, shall not be transferable.  
(2) No under -raiyat shall be evic ted from his land except as pro vided in this Act.  
109. Right to create a mortgage or charge. —It shall be lawful for an under -raiyat to create a simple 
mortgage or a charge on his interest in the land leased to him, in favour of th e Government or a                    
co-operative society in consideration of any loan advanced to him by the Government or such society; 
and in the event of his making default in the repayment of such loan in accordance with its terms, it shall 
be lawful for the Government or the society, as the case may be, to cause his interest in the land to be 
attached and sold and the proceeds applied in payment of such loan.  
110. Right to make improvements. —An under -raiyat may, with the permission in writing of the 
raiyat, or if permission is refused without sufficient reason or is not given within two months, after 
obtaining the orders of the competent authority in the prescribed manner, make at his own expense any 
improvement to the land held by him, but shall not b ecome liable to pay a higher rate of rent on account 
of any increase of production or of any change in the nature of the crop raised, as a consequence of such 
improvement.  
111. Maximum rent. —The rent payable by an under -raiyat in respect of any lan d held by him shall 
not exceed, — 
(a) where the rent is payable in kind as a share of the produce, one -fourth of the produce of such 
land or its value estimated in the prescribed manner if plough cattle for the cultivation of such land is 
supplied by the raiyat an d one -fifth of such produce or its value as so estimated if plough cattle is not 
supplied by the raiyat;  
(b) in any other case, four times the land revenue payable in respect of the land.  
112. Payment of rent. —(1) The rent payable by an under -raiyat shall, subject to the provisions of 
section 111, be the rent agreed upon between him and the raiyat, or where there is no such agreement, the 
reasonable rent.  
(2) The rent shall be paid at such times and in such manner  as may have been agreed upon, or in the 
absence of such agreement, as may be prescribed.  
113. Reasonable rent. —(1) The competent authority may, on application made to it in this behalf by 
the raiyat or the un der-raiyat, determine the reasonable rent for any land.  
(2) The form of application under sub -section ( 1) and the procedure to be followed by the competent 
authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) In determining the reasonable rent, the competent  authority shall have regard to — 
(a) the rental  value of lands used for similar purposes in the locality;  
(b) the profits of agriculture of  similar lands in the locality;  
(c) the price of crops and commodities in the locality;  
(d) the improvements, if any, made to the land by the raiyat or the under -raiyat; 
(e) the land revenue payable in respect of the land; and  
(f) any other f actor which  may be prescribed.  
(4) Where the reasonable rent for any land has been determined under this section, it shall not be 
altered for a period of five years except on any  of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the quality of the land has deteriorated by flood or other natural causes;  
(b) that there has been an increase in the produce of the land on account of improvements made to 
it at the expense of the raiyat;  28 (c) that the extent of land has been altered by more than one acre by alluvion or diluvion.  
(d) that the land has been partially or wholly rendered unfit for cultivation.  
(5) Nothing in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 4) shall affect the right of the Government to make a n order 
directing the determination of the reasonable rent of lands in any specified area.  
114. Commutation of rent payable in kind. —(1) In any case in which rent is payable in kind, the 
raiyat or the under -raiyat may apply in writing to the competent auth ority in the prescribed form and 
manner, for comm uting the rent into money rent.  
(2) On receipt of such application, the competent authority shall, after giving notice to the other party, 
determine the money rent payable for the land in accordance with the  following provisions but not 
exceeding the maximum  rent specified in section 111.  
(3) In determining the mon ey rent, regard shall be had to — 
(a) the average money rent payable by under -raiyats for land of similar description and with 
similar advantages in  the vicinity;  
(b) the average value of the rent for the land actually received by the raiyat during the three years 
preceding the date of application;  
(c) the average prices of crops and commodities in the locality during the three years pre ceding 
the date of application;  
(d) the improvements, if any, made to the land by the raiyat or the under -raiyat; and  
(e) any other factor which may be prescribed.  
115. Receipt for payment of rent. —Every raiyat shall give or cause to be given a receipt for the rent 
received by him or on his behalf in such fo rm as may be prescribed duly signed by him or his authorised 
agent.  
116. Refu nd of rent recovered in excess. —If any raiyat recovers from an  under -raiyat rent in excess 
of the amount due under this Act, he shall forthwith refund the excess amount so recovered and shall also 
be liable to punishment as provided in this Act.  
117. Suspension or remission of rent. —(1) Where a raiyat has obtained fr om or been granted by the 
Government any relief by way of suspension or remission, whether in whole or in part, of the land 
revenue payable in respect of his land, he shall be bound to give, and the under -raiyat concerned shall be 
entitled to receive from the raiyat, a corresponding or proportionate relief by way of suspension or 
remission of rent p ayable in respect of such land.  
(2) The nature and extent of the relief which a raiyat is bound to give and which the under -raiyat is  
entitled to receive under s ub-section ( 1) shall be determined in accordance with  the rules made under this 
Act. 
(3) No suit shall lie and no decree of a civil court shall be executed for the recovery by a raiyat of any 
rent the payment of which has been remitted, or during the perio d for which the payment of such rent has 
been  suspended, under this section.  
(4) The period during which the payment of rent is suspended under this section shall be excluded in 
computing the period of limitation for any suit or proceeding for the recovery  of such rent.  
(5) If any raiyat fails to suspend or remit the payment of rent as provided in sub -section ( 1), he shall 
be liable to refund to the under -raiyat the amount recovered by him in contravention of the provisions of 
this section and shall also be  liable to punishment as provided in this Act.  
118. Eviction of under -raiyat.—(1) No person shall be evicted from any land held by him as             
under -raiyat except under the order of the competent authority made on any of the following grounds, 
namely:— 
(a) that the land has been reserved for personal cultivation of the raiyat under section 101, or is 
deemed to have been reserved for personal cultivation of the raiyat under section 103;  29 (b) that a notice has been given to the under -raiyat under s ub-section ( 3) of secti on 105;  
(c) that the under -raiyat has intentionally and wilfully committed such acts of waste as are 
calculated to impair materially or permanently the value or utility of the land for agricultural 
purposes;  
(d) that the under -raiyat  has failed to pay rent within a period of t hree months after it falls due:  
Provided that the competent authority may, if it thinks fit, grant further time not exceeding six 
months for payment of the rent;  
(e) that the under -raiyat, not being a person unde r disability, has, after the commencement of this 
Act, sublet the land without the consent in writing of the raiyat.  
(2) No order for eviction of an under -raiyat shall be executed till the standing crops, if any, on the 
land are harvested.  
(3) Where any la nd has been reserved for the personal cultivation of a raiyat by an order made under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 101, no suit or application for the eviction of the under -raiyat in respect of such 
land under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall lie after the  expiry of five years from the commencement of 
this Act or one year from the date of the said order, whichever is later:  
Provided that where any such raiyat is a person under disability, such suit or application may be 
instituted or made within a period of  five years from the d ate when the disability ceases.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the disa bility of a person shall cease, — 
(a) in the case of a widow, if she re -marries, on the date of her remarriage or if any person 
succeeds to the widow on her death , on the date of her death;  
(b) in the case of a minor, on the date of his attaining majority;  
(c) in the case of a woman who is unmarried or who is divorced or judicially separated from her 
husband on the date of her marriage or remarria ge, as the case may be, or in the case of a woman 
whose husband is a person falling under clause ( d) or (e), on the date  on which the disability of the 
husband ceases;  
(d) in the case of a person who is a member of the Armed Forces of the Union, on the dat e of his 
discharge from service or of his posting to the reserve;  
(e) in the case of a person suffering from a physical or mental disability, on the date on which the 
disability ceases to exist.  
119. Restoration of poss ession of land to under -raiyat.—Where  a person who has taken possession 
of any land by evicting an under -raiyat therefrom on the ground that the land had been reserved for 
personal cultivation by him, fails to cultivate such land personally within one year from the date on which 
he took posse ssion thereof or ceases to cultivate such land personally in any year during a period of four 
years next following, the under -raiyat shall be entitled to be restored to possession of the land from which 
he was evicted.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, land shall not be deemed to be under the personal 
cultivation of a person (not being a person under disability) unless such person or a member of his family 
engages himself in the principal agricultural operations.  
120. Certain lands to be non -resumable land of unde r-raiyat.—If a raiyat fails to — 
(a) apply for reservation of any land within the period prescribed in section 100, and the land is 
not deemed to have been reserved under section 103, or  
(b) file a suit or application for the eviction of the under -raiyat from any land reserved  under 
section 101 within the period prescribed in sub -section ( 3) of section 118, or  
(c) cultivate or ceases to cu ltivate the land and the under -raiyat is restored to possession  of the 
land under section 119,  
the com petent authority may suo motu  and shall, on application, after making such inquiry as may be 
prescribed, declare the land to be the non -resumable land of the under -raiyat.  30 121. Compensation for improvements. —(1) An under -raiyat who has made any improvement  at his 
own expense on the land leased to him shall, if he is to be evicted under the provisions  of this Chapter, be 
entitled to receive compensation, before he is so evicted, for such improvement as, in the opinion of the 
comp etent authority, is reasonable.  
(2) The compensation payable to an under -raiyat under sub -section ( 1) shall be determined in 
accordance with the value of such improvements on the date of eviction, and in determining such 
compensation, regard shall be had to the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the amount by which the value of the land has increase d by reason of the improvement;  
(b) the condition of the improvement at the date of the determination of the value thereof and the 
probable duration of its effect;  
(c) the labour and c apital involved in the  making of the improvement; and  
(d) the advantages secur ed by the under -raiyat in consi deration of the improvement made by him.  
(3) In any case in which compensation is payable to an under -raiyat under this section, the competent 
authority ma y direct that — 
(a) the whole or any part of any loan which the under -raiyat has taken on the security of his 
interest in the land under section 1 09 and which is outstanding shall be deducted from such 
compensation and paid to the Government or the co -operative society, as the case may be;  
(b) any arrear of rent due by the under -raiyat to the raiyat and the costs, if any, awarded to the 
raiyat shall  be adjusted against the compensation.  
122. Under -raiyat may remove building, works, etc., not deemed improvements. —An                   
under -raiyat against whom an order of evi ction has been passed, shall be  entitled to remove within such 
time as is deemed reasonable by the competent authority any work of improvement which can be severed 
from the land and which the under -raiyat desires to remove, or any building or construction or work 
(which is not an improv ement) in respect of which the raiyat is not willing to pay the compensation.  
123. Restoration of possession of land in certain other cases. —(1) Where an under -raiyat of  any 
land has, on or after the 10th August, 1957, surrendered, or been evicted from, such land and the 
surrender or eviction could not have taken place if this Act had been in force on the date of such surrender 
or eviction, the competent authority may, suo motu  or on application made by the under -raiyat, restore 
him to possession of the land which he surrendered or from which he was evicted unless some other                 
under -raiyat, not being a member of the raiyat ‟s family, had bona fide  been admitted  to possession of 
such l and. 
(2) The competent authority shall, before making an order under sub -section ( 1), make such inquiry 
as may be prescribed.  
124. Relief against terminati on of tenancy for act of waste. —Where a tenancy is sought to be 
terminated on  the ground that the under -raiyat has materially impaired the value or utility of the land for 
agricultural purposes, if the damage to the land admits of being repaired or if pecuniary compensation 
would afford adequate relief, no proceeding for eviction s hall lie against the under -raiyat unless and until 
the raiyat has served on the under -raiyat a notice in writing specifying the damage complained of and the 
under -raiyat has failed within a period of one year from the service of such notice to repair the d amage or 
to pay compensation therefor.  
125. Surrender of land by under -raiyat.—(1) After the commencement of this Act, no under -raiyat 
shall surrender any land held by him as such, and no raiyat shall enter upon the land surrendered by the 
under -raiyat, wi thout the previous permission in writ ing of the competent authority.  
(2) Such permission shall be granted if, after making such inquiry as may be prescribed, the 
competent authority is satisfied that the proposed surrender is bona fide  and in case the surr ender is by a 
person who was holding the land as under -raiyat immediately before the commencement of this Act, the 
permissible limit of the raiyat concerned is not exceeded by such surrender; in other cases, the permission 
shall be refused.  31 (3) Where permi ssion is refused in any case, and the under -raiyat gives a declaration in writing 
relinquishing his rights in the land, the competent authority shall, in accordance with the rules made in 
this behalf, lease out the land to any other person who shall acquire all the rights of the under -raiyat who 
relinquished his rights.  
126. Transfer of owne rship of land to under -raiyats.—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, 
the ownership of any land which is declared to be the non -resumable land of an under -raiyat under  
section 104 or section 120 shall stand transferred from the raiyat thereof to the under -raiyat with effect 
from the date of such declaration, and the under -raiyat shall become the owner of such land and be liable 
to pay land revenue therefor.  
127. Compensation to raiyat. —(1) In respect of every land the ownership of which stands 
transferred to the under -raiyat under section 126, the raiyat shall be entitled to compensation which shall 
consist of the aggregate of the following amounts, that is to say,— 
(a) an amount equal to thirty times the full land revenue payable for the land or, if the land is held 
revenue -free or at a concessional rate, thirty times the amount of land revenue payable for  similar 
lands in the locality;  
(b) the value of tree s, if any, planted by the raiyat.  
Explanation .—Where any improvement has been made on the land at the expense of the raiyat at any 
time subsequent to the last settlement, the land revenue for the purpo se of this section shall be the  land 
revenue payable fo r similar lands in the locality.  
(2) The land revenue payable for similar lands in the locality and the value of trees referred to in             
sub-section ( 1) shall be determined in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Every raiyat entitled to compensation under this section shall, within a period of six months from 
the date of the declaration referred to in section 126, apply to the competent authority in the prescribed 
manner fo r determining the compensation.  
128. Pa yment of compensation to raiyat. —(1) The compensation to which a raiyat is entitled under 
section 127 shall be paid to him by the Government in the first instance, and it may be paid in cash, in 
lump sum or in annual instalments not exceeding twenty or in the form of bonds which may be negotiable 
or non-negotiable but transferable.  
(2) From the date of the declaration referred to in section 126, the raiyat shall be entitl ed to interest at 
the rate of 2 ½ per cent. per annum  on the compensation or such  portion thereof as remains un  paid.  
(3) Any mortgage of, or encumbrance on, the land of which the ownership is transferred to the             
under -raiyat under section 126 shall be a valid charge on the amount of comp ensation payable to the 
raiyat.  
(4) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3), where the person entitled to 
compensation under section 127 is a charitable or religious institution, the compensation shall, instead of 
being assessed under that section, be assessed as a perpetual annuity equal to the reasonable rent  for the 
land, less the land re venue payable on such land. The amount so assessed shall be paid to such institution 
in the prescribed manner.  
129. Under -raiyat to pay compensation amount. —(1) Every under -raiyat to whom ownership of 
any land has been transferred under section 126 shall be liable to pay to the Government in respect of that 
land compensation as determined under section 127 . 
(2) The compensation shall be payable in cash, in lump sum or in such number of annu al instalments, 
not exceeding twenty as may prescrib ed. Interest at the rate of 2 ½ per cent. per annum shall be payable on 
the compensation or such portion thereof as r emains unpaid.  
(3) The compensation payable under this section  shall be a charge on the land.  
(4) The compensation or any instalment thereof shall be re -coverable in the same manner as an arrear 
of land revenue.  32 130. Issue o f certificate to under -raiyats.—When the compensation or the first instalment of the 
compensation, as the case may be, has been paid by the under -raiyat, the competent authority may                 
suo motu  and shall, on application made to it in this behalf, issue to the under -raiyat a certificate in the 
prescribed form declaring him to be the owner of the land specified therein.  
131. First option to purchase. —(1) If a raiyat at any time intends to sell his land held  by an                
under -raiyat, he shall give notice in writing of his intention to such under -raiyat and offer to sell the land 
to him. In case th e latter intends to purchase the land, he shall intimate in writing hi s readiness to  do so 
within two months from the date of receipt of such notice.  
(2) If there is any dispute about the reasonable price payable for the land, either the raiyat or the 
under -raiyat may apply in writing to the competent authority for determining the reasonable price; and the 
competent authority, af ter giving notice to the other party and to all other persons interested in the land 
and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, shall fix the reasonable price of the land which shall be  the 
average of the prices obtaining for similar lands in the loca lity during the ten years immediately preceding 
the date on  which the application is made.  
(3) The under -raiyat shall deposit with the competent authority the amount of the price determined 
under sub -section ( 2) within such period as may be prescribed.  
(4) On deposit of the entire amount of the reasonable price, the competent authority shall issue a 
certificate in the prescribed form to the under -raiyat declaring him to be the purchaser of the land; the 
competent authority shall also direct that the reasona ble price deposited shall be paid to the raiyat.  
(5) If an under -raiyat does not exercise the right of purchase in response to the notice given to him by 
the raiyat under sub -section ( 1) or fails to deposit the amount o f the price as required by sub -sectio n (3), 
such under -raiyat shall forfeit his right of purchase, and the raiyat shall be entitled to sell such land to any 
other person.  
(6) The forfeiture of the right to purchase any land under this section shall not affect the other rights 
of the under -raiyat in such land.  
132. Power to  make rules. —(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying  out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form of notices to be issued under this Part and the manner of their service;  
(b) the manner of holding inquiries under this Part;  
(c) the circumstances in which and the period for which land used for agricultural purposes ma y 
be left uncultivated;  
(d) the conditions subject to which lands may be leased by t he Collector under section 106;  
(e) the form of applications to be made under this Part, the authorities to whom they may be made 
and the procedure to be followed by such a uthorities in disposing of t he applica tions;  
(f) the determination of the value of the produce of land, the profits of agriculture, and the rental 
values of land,  for the purposes of this Part;  
(g) the time and manner of  payment of rent by the under -raiyat ; 
(h) the form of receipt for rent to be given by the raiyat;  
(i) the factors to be taken into account in determining reasonable rent for land and in commuting 
rent in kind into money rent;  
(j) the nature and the extent of relief to the under -raiyat in cas es of suspension or remission of 
land revenue by the Government;  
(k) the determination of compensation for improvements to under -raiyats who are evicted from 
land;  33 (l) the grant of permission to surrender land;  
(m) the determination of the amount of compen sation payable to the raiyat in respect of the                     
non-resumable lands of under -raiyats;  
(n) the form of certi ficates to be granted to under -raiyats;  
(o) the determination of the price to be paid by under -raiyat for land in respect of which  the first 
option to purchase is exercised ; 
(p) any other matter which  is to be or may be prescribed.  
PART IV  
CHAPTER  XI.—ACQUISITION OF ESTATES AND OF RIGHTS OF INTERMEDIARIES THEREIN  
133. Definitions. —In this Part, — 
(a) “estate ” means lands included under one entry in any of the general registers of                                      
revenue -paying and revenue -free lands and includes — 
(i) revenue -free lands not entered in any register, and  
(ii) a part of, or a share in, an estate;  
(b) “homestead ” means a dwelling house together with any courtyard, compound, garden, or 
outhouse and includes any outbuildings used for purposes connected with agriculture and any family 
graveyard, libr ary, office, guest house, grain store, latrine s, boundary walls, tanks, wells or places of 
worship appertaining to such dwelling house;  
(c) “intermediary ” means a person who holds in an estate the right, title or inte rest of a talukdar 
and includes — 
(i) a person who holds land either revenue -free or a t a concessional rate, and  
(ii) a tenure holder;  
(d) “tenant ” means a person who cultivates or holds the land of an intermediary under an 
agreement, express or implied, on condition of paying therefo r rent in cash or in kind or de livering a 
share of the pr oduce and includes a person who cultivates or holds land of an intermediary under the 
system generally kn own as “bhag ”, “adhi” or “barga ”; and the term “sub-tenant ” shall be construed 
accordingly;  
(e) “tenure holder ” means a person who has acquired from an intermediary the right to ho ld lands 
for the purpose of col lecting rents or bringing them under cultivation by establishIng tenants thereon.  
134. Notificatio n vesting estates in the State. —(1) As soon as may be afte r the commencement of 
this Act, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that, with effect from the 
date specified in the notification (hereinafter referred to as the vesting date), all estates situated in any 
area or areas a nd all rights, title and interest of every intermediary in such estates shall vest in the 
Government free from all encumbrances.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall also be published in such other  manner  as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The publication of a notification in the manner provided in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
conclusive evidence of the notice of declaration to the intermediaries whose interests are affected by such 
notification.  
135. Consequences of notification under sect ion 134.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force or in any agreement or contract, express or implied, with effect from the 
vesting date, — 
(a) each estate to which the notification relates and all rights, title and interest  of intermediaries in 
such estate shall vest in the Government free fr om all encumbrances, including — 
(i) rights in hats,  bazars, ferries, forests, wastelands, abadi  sites, fisher ies, tolls and other 
interests;  34 (ii) rights in any building other than a dwelling house or in any part of such building, used 
primarily as office cutcherry  for collection of rent;  
(b) all grants and confirmation of title to the estate and rights therein made in favour of an 
intermediary shall cease and determine;  
(c) any building used for educational or charitable purposes and held by the intermediary shall 
vest in the Government for those  educational or charitable purposes;  
(d) subject to the other provisions of this Act, every tenant holding any land under an 
intermediary shall hold the same directly under the Government as a raiyat thereof and shall be liable 
to pay to the Government lan d revenue equal to the rent payable by him to the intermediary on the 
vesting date, subject to a maximum of the value of one -eighth of the gross produce which  value shall 
be deter mined in the manner prescribed:  
Provided that the tenant shall become the own er of any building or structure constructed on such 
land at the expense of the intermediary on payment of such compensation to the intermediary as is 
equivalent to its market value on the vesting date, which value shall be determined in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf;  
(e) all arrears of land revenue, local rates, cesses and other dues lawfully payable to the 
Government by the intermediary on the vesting date in respect of the estate shall, without prejudice to 
any other mode of recovery, be r ecoverable by deduction from the compensation payable to the 
intermediary;  
(f) all rents and other dues in respect of the estate for any period after the vesting date which, but 
for this Act, would be payable to an intermediary shall be payable to the Gove rnment and any 
payment made in contravention of this clause shall not be valid discharge of the person liable to pay 
the same;  
(g) where under any agreement or contract ma de before  the vesting date, any rent , cess, local rate 
or other dues for an y period after the said date has been paid to or compounded of released by an 
intermediary, the same shall, notwithstanding such agreement or contract, be recoverable by the 
Government from the intermediary, and may, without prejudice to any other mode of r ecovery, be 
realised by deduction from the compensation payable to the intermediary.  
136. Rig hts of intermediary to certain lands. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 
134 and 135, an intermediary shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), be entitled to retain with 
effect from the vesting date, — 
(a) homesteads, buildings and structures together with the lands appurtenant thereto i n the 
occupation of the inter mediary other than buildings vested in the Government under section 135;  
(b) lands under the personal cultivation of the intermediary;  
(c) lands in which permanent rights have not already accrued to a tenant under any custom, 
agreement or law and which have been leased by an intermediary who, both at the commencement of 
the lease  and on the vesting date, was a person under disability;  
(d) lands held by the intermediary as mortgagor which are subject to usufructuary mortgage and 
are under the person al cultivation of the mortgagee ; 
(e) lands comprised in orchards or used for the pur pose of live -stock breeding, poultry farming, or 
dairy farming , which are in the occupation of the intermediary;  
(f) so much of the lands comprised in a tea garden, mill, factory or workshop as in the opinion of 
the Administrator is required for such tea g arden, mill, factory or workshop.  
(2) An intermediary who is entitled to retain possession of any land under sub -section ( 1) shall hold 
such land directly under the Government from the vesting date as a raiyat thereof and be liable to pay 
therefor land rev enue at full rate applicable to similar lands in the locality.  35 137. Collector to take charge of estates, etc., vested in the Government. —(1) The Collector shall 
take charge of estates and interests of intermediaries which vest in the Government under section 135.  
(2) For the purpose aforesaid, the Collector may, by written order served in the prescribed manner, 
require any intermediary  or other person in possession, of any such estate or interest to give up such 
possession by a date to be specified in the order (which shall not be earlier than sixty days from the date 
of service of the order) or to deliver by that date any documents, registers, or records, connected with the 
management of such estate or interest which are in his custody or to furnish a statement in the prescribed 
form in respect of such estate or interest.  
(3) The Collector or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may take such steps or use such 
force as may be necessary to enforce compliance with the order and may also ente r any building or place 
for the purpose of taking possession of the documents, registers or records referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) An intermediary shall be entitled to make inspection of any documents, registers or records which 
have been delivered to  or taken possession of by the Collector, to make notes therefrom or to have 
certified copies thereof granted to him. No fees shall be charged for making inspection or for making 
notes, but fees may be charged, according to the prescribed scale, for the gr ant of certified copies.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the collector to take possession of — 
(a) any land or of any right of an intermediary therein, which may be retained by the intermediary 
under section 136, or  
(b) any religious institution or any building connected therewith.  
138. Decision of disputes. —If there is any dispute as to the possession of any homestead or land or 
building referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 136, the Collector shall, on application made to him in 
this behalf, make such inquiry as he deems fit and pass such orders thereon as may appear to him just and 
proper.  
139. Appeal. —An appeal against an order of the Collector passed under section  138, if preferred 
within sixty  days of such order, shall lie to the District Judge having jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER  XII.—ASSESSMEN T AND PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION  
140. Intermediaries en titled to receive compensation. —Every intermediary, whose right, title and 
interest in any estate vest in th e Government under Chapter XI shall be entitled to receive and be paid 
therefor compensation as hereinafter provided.  
141. Date from w hich compensation shall be due. —The compensation referred to in section 140 
shall be due as from the vesting date and the portion remaining unpaid shall carry interest at the rate of 
21/2 per cent. per annum.  
142. Every intermediary to be treated as a separate unit. —(1) For the purpose of assessing 
compensation under this Chapter, — 
(a) every intermediary shall be treated as a  separate unit;  
(b) if two or more intermediaries hold an estate or any interest therein jointly, the share of each 
intermediary in such estate or interest shall be treated as a separate unit:  
Provided that where any such estate or interest is held by a Hi ndu joint family consisting of a 
common ancestor in the male line and his descendants, the family sha ll if the common ancestor was 
alive on the vesting date, be treated as one unit;  
(c) if an intermediary holds shares or interest in two or more estates, th e aggregate of his shares or 
interest in all such estates shall be treated as a single unit.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, no partition or transfer by 
way of sale or gift of an estate or part thereof made on or af ter the 10th August, 1957, shall be recognised 
for the purpose of assessing the compensation.  36 (3) Nothing in  sub-section ( 2) shall apply to — 
(a) any sale made under an order of court in execution of any decree or  order for payment of 
money, or  
(b) any sale  or gift made in favour of a wakf, a trust, an endowment or a society registered under 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and established wholly for charitable purposes, 
unless the Government in any particular case directs otherwise.  
143. Appointment of compensation officers. —The Administrator shall, as soon as possible after the 
publication of a notification under section 134, appoint one or more officers to be compensation officers 
to prepare compensation assessment rolls and to perform suc h other duties as may be prescribed.  
144. Compensation assessment roll. —(1) The compensation officer shall prepare a compensation 
assessment roll in respect of every estate vested in the Government under Chapter XI.  
(2) The compensation assessment roll sha ll contain particulars of the gross income and the net income 
from the estate, the share of the net income of the intermediary or each of the intermediaries, the amount 
of compensation payable to  him or them and such other par ticulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where an intermediary has shares or interest in two or more estates all of which have vested in the 
Government, the particulars of the shares or interest of such intermediary in the net income from all such 
estates and the compensation payable to him in respect of his shares or interest in all such est ates shall be 
shown in the com pensation assessment roll relating to any one of such estates.  
(4) Where an intermediary has shares or interest in two or more es tates either or any of which has not 
vested in the Government, the compensation payable to the intermediary shall be determined after all 
such estates have vested in the Government, on the basis of the aggregate of his shares or interest in the 
net income f rom all such estates.  
(5) Nothing in sub -section ( 4) shall be construed as authorising the postponement of payment of ad 
interim  compensation to any such intermediary as is referred to in that sub -section in respect of the estate 
or estates which have vest ed in the Government.  
(6) For the purpose of preparing the compensation assessment roll, the compensation officer may 
require an intermediary to submit such statements and furnish such pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
145. Determination of gross income and net income. —(1) For the purpose of assessment of 
compensation p ayable in respect of an estate, — 
(a) the gross income from the estat e shall be taken to consist of — 
(i) in respect of lands other than those referred to in section 136, the rents, cesses, local rates 
and other amounts payable or deemed to be payable to the intermediary or intermediaries by the 
tenants and tenure -holders for the previous year, including the commuted value of rents payable 
in kind which value shall be dete rmined in the prescr ibed manner;  
(ii) the gross income from abadi  sites, fisheries, hats, bazars, ferries, forests, tolls, waste 
lands and other interests in th e estate for the previous year;  
(iii) the aggregate of the annual rents for the previous year from buildings used as  offices or 
cutcherries  and any other building  which vest  in the Government;  
(iv) any other income during the previous year appertaining to the estate vesting in the 
Government not expressly mentione d in the foregoing sub -clauses;  
(b) the net income from the estate shall be computed by deducting from the gros s income the 
following, namely: — 
(i) any sum which was payable by the intermediary or intermediaries during the previous year 
as land revenue, ce sses, local rates or rent to the Government in respect o f the interests to which 
the gross income relates;  37 (ii) any sum payable under the Bengal Ag ricultural Income -tax Act 1944  (Ben. IV of 1944), 
as extended to Tripura or the Indian Income -tax Act 1922 (11 of 1922), during the previous year 
as defined in those  Acts, in respect of the interests to which the gross income relates;  
(iii) charge s on ac count of management and colle ction at the following  rates,  namely:— 
Amount of gross income      Rate  
(a) Where the gross income exceeds Rs.  30,000 .         15 per centum  of such gross income.  
(b) Where the gross income exceeds Rs.  10,000           121/2 per centum  of such gross income.  
but does not exceed Rs. 30,000.  
(c) Where the gross income exceeds Rs.  5,000            10 per centum  of such gross income.  
but does not exceed Rs. 10,000.  
(d) Where the gross income exceeds Rs. 2,500             71/2 per centum  of such gross income.  
but does not exceed Rs. 5,000.          
(e) Where the gross income does not exceed                 5 per centum  of such gross income . 
   Rs. 2,500. 
Provided that the net income (after deducting the charges on account of management and collection) 
from an estate which falls under item ( a), (b), (c) or ( d) shall in no case be less than the maximum net 
income from an estate which falls under the item immediately, following.  
Illustration .—The net income after deducting the charges on account of management and collection 
at 121/2 per cent. under item ( b) from an estate the gross income of which is Rs.  10,100 will be                          
Rs. 8,837 .50 while the net income after deducting the charges on account of management at 10 per cent. 
under item ( c) from an estate the gross income of which is Rs.  10,000 will be Rs. 9,000;  under the proviso, 
the net income from the first mentioned estate shall be taken to be Rs. 9,000 and not Rs. 8,837 .50. 
(2) The net income from the estate as determined under sub -section ( 1) shall be apportioned among 
all the intermediaries having a share or interest in the estate in the proportion of their shares or interest, 
and if in doing so, any dispute involving a question of title arises, the compensation officer shall refe r the 
parties to a civil court.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section except clause ( b) (ii) of sub -section (1), “previous year ” 
means the year immediately preceding the year in which the vesting date falls.  
146. Compen sation payable to intermediary. —(1) The compensation payable to an intermediary 
shall be a multiple of his net income from the estate or where the intermediary has shares or interests in 
two or more estates, of the aggregate of his net incomes from all such estates, in accordance wi th the 
following table, namely: — 
          Amount of net income    Total compensation payable  
(a) Where the net income  does not exceed  Rs.1,000.     Fifteen times such net income.  
(b) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 1,000  but           Twelve times such net income  or the  
      does not exceed Rs. 2,500.                                         maximum amount  under ( a) above,  
                                                                                         whichever is greater.   
(c) Where the net income exceeds Rs. 2,500 but           Eleven times such net  income or the  
 does not excee d Rs. 5,000 .          maximum amount under ( b) above,  
                                     whichever is greater.  
(d) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 5,000                 Ten times such net income or the maximum  
      but does  not exceed Rs. 7,500.                      amount under ( c) above, whichever is  
                                                                                        greater.  
 (e) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 7,500                   Nine times such net income  or the maximum                      
       but does not exceed Rs. 10,000.                                amount  under ( d) above, whichever is greater . 38             Amount of net income           Total compensation payable  
(f) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 10,000     Eight times such net income or  the maximum  
      but does  not exceed Rs. 15,000.                     amount under ( e) above, whichever is greater .                   
(g) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 15,000    Seven times such net income  or the maximum  
      but does  not exceed Rs. 30,000.         amount under ( f) above, whichever is greater.  
(h) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 30,000    Six times such net income  or the maximum  
       but does  not exceed Rs. 50,000,        amount  under ( g) above,  whichever is greater.  
(i) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 50,000     Five times such net income  or the maximum          
     amount  but does  not exceed Rs. 1,00,000.       amount  under ( h) above, whichever is greater.  
(j) Where the net income   exceeds Rs. 1,00,000    Three times such net income or  the maximum  
      but doe s not exceed Rs. 3,00,000.        amount under  (i) above, whichever is greater.  
(k) Where the net income  exceeds Rs. 3,00,000.      Two times such net income or  the maximum  
                 amount  under ( j) above, whichever, is greater.  
(2) Where the net income or any portion of the net income from an estate is dedicated exclusively to 
charitable or religious purposes, the compensation payable in respect of such net income or portion shall, 
instead of being assessed under sub -section ( 1), be assessed as a perpetual annuity equal to such net 
income or portion, as the case may be, payable in the prescr ibed manner for those purposes.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -sectio n, if the salary, remuneration or any allowance 
payable to the Mutawalli of a wakf or the shebait of a Hindu temple or a trustee of any other charitable or 
religious trust does not exceed 15 per cent. of the net income, then such net income shall be deemed  to be 
dedicated exclusively to charitable or religious purposes.  
147. Disposal of claims of creditors. —(1) The Administrator shall appoint a claims officer not 
below the rank of sub -judge to dispose of the claims of creditors whose debts are secured by a mortgage 
of or charge on any estate or part thereof vested in the Government under section 134 and to discharge 
any other duties assigned to him by this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
(2) Every creditor referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall prefer his cl aim in writing before the claims 
officer in the manner an d with -in the time prescribed.  
(3) The claims officer shall inq uire into the claims in accord ance with such rules as may be prescribed 
and determine the amount to which eac h of the creditors is entit led. 
(4) Where there are two or more creditors, the claims officer shall determine, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 ( 4 of 1882), the order in which each such creditor is 
entitled to receive the amount due to him.  
148. Appeal against the decision of claims officer. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
claims officer may, within sixty days of the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the District Judge having 
jurisdiction.  
(2) The decision of the District Jud ge on appeal, or of the claims officer where no appeal is preferred, 
shall be final.  
149. Preliminary publication of compensation assessment roll and disposal of                         
objections. —(1) After the amount of compensation has been determined i n accordance with the 
provisions of section 146 and entered in the compensation assessment roll, the compensation officer shall 
cause a draft of such roll to be published in the prescribed manner and for the prescribed period. The 
compensation officer shal l send copies of the relevant portions of the draft roll to the intermediaries 
concerned and shall receive and consider any objections which may be made within three months of the 
receipt of such copy to any entry therein or to any omission therefrom. The compensation officer shall 
dispose of such object ions in the prescribed manner.  
(2) Separate draft compensation assessment rolls may be prepared and published under                           
sub-section ( 1) for different  villages or groups of villages . 39 150. Contents of the  order of compensation officer. —Every order of the compensation officer 
deciding an objection under sub -section ( 1) of section 149 shall contain a concise statement of the case, 
the points for determination, the decision thereon and the rea sons for such decision.  
151. Appeals against  order of compensation officer. —(1) From every order passed by a 
compensation officer under section 150, an appeal shall lie t o a Special Judge appointed for  the purpose, 
within ninety days of the date of the order.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the court of the Judicial Commissioner, from every order passed on appeal 
by a Special Judge under sub -section ( 1), within sixty days of the passing of such order, on any  of the 
grounds specified in section 100 of the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(3) The decision of the Judicial Commissioner, or of the Special Judge where no second appeal is 
preferred, or of the compensation officer where no appeal to the Spe cial Judge is preferred, shall be final.  
152. Final publication of the compensation assessment roll. —(1) Where no objection or appeal has 
been filed or all the objections and appeals filed have been finally disposed of , the compensation officer 
shall cause  the draft compensation assessment roll to be finally published, or make such alterations in the 
draft compensation assessment roll as may be necessary to give effect to any order passed on objection 
made under  sub-section ( 1) of section 149 or on  appeal u nder section 151 and cause the roll as  so altered 
to be finally published, in the prescribed manner together with a certificate stating the fact of such final 
publication and the date thereof.  
(2) The publication of the compensation assessment roll under s ub-section ( 1) shall be conclusive 
evidence that the said roll has been duly made under this Chapter and every entry in such roll shall, save 
as otherwise provided in this Act, be conclusive evidence of the matters referred to in such entry.  
153. Correction of bona fide  mistakes. —(1) No Correction of the compensation assessment roll 
after it has been finally published under section 152 shall be made exce pt as provided in this section.  
(2) Correction of bona fide  mistakes or corrections necessitated b y succession to or inheritance of any 
interest in the estate can be made by the compensation officer at any time before the payment of 
compensation , either of his own motion or on the application of the person interested, but no such 
correction shall be ma de while any legal proceeding affecting such entry is pending.  
(3) Every t ime a  correction is made under sub -section  (2), the compensation  officer shall cause a draft 
of the correction to be published in the same manner as the draft compensation, assessment roll, and after 
considering and disposing of any objections that may be made, shall cause the correction to be finally 
published.  
154. Ad interim  payment of compensation. —After the vesting date and before the final publication 
of the compensation assessment roll, ad interim  payment to the outgoing inter mediary may be made as 
follows:— 
(a) the compensation officer shall calculate the probable amount  of compensation payable t o him ; 
(b) two and a half per cent. of such probable amount shall be paid ad interim  to each intermediary 
in cash every year until such time as the compensation assess ment roll is finally published;  
(c) if there is any dispute as to the title of any person  to receive the amount or as to the 
apportionment of it, the amount shall be kept in deposit in the manner prescribed until the dispute is 
finally determined;  and on such determination, the compensation officer shall pay the amount or the 
portion thereof t o the person or persons entitled to receive the same.  
155. Mode of payment of compensation. —(1) After the compen sation assessment roll has been  
finally published, the compensation officer shall deduct from the amount shown in such roll as payable to 
an intermediary or any other person having interest in the estate , the following amounts namely: — 
(a) ad interim  payments made under section 154;  
(b) the amo unt, if any, the deduction of which has been ordered under section 135;  
(c) the amounts payable to creditors as determined by the claims officer.  40 (2) The balance remaining after the deductions referred to in sub -section ( 1) are made shall be given 
in cash,  in one lump sum or in annual instalments not exceeding twenty, or in bonds, or partly in cash and 
partly in bonds, in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(3) The bonds referred to in sub -section ( 2) may be either neg otiable  or non-negotiable,  and 
transferable in such circumstances and in such manner as may be prescribed and shall carry interest at the 
rate of two and a half per cent. per annum on the amount outstanding thereon, with effect from the date of 
issue.  
(4) If any dispute, arises as to the title of any person to r eceive the, amount or  as to the apportionment 
of it, the compensation officer may, if he thinks fit, keep the amount of compensation or the bonds 
referred to above in deposit in the manner prescribed, until the dispute is fin ally determined; and on such 
determination, the compensation officer shall pay the amount or the portions thereof to the person or 
persons entitled to receive the same.  
156. Compensation due to maintenance holder. —(1) If any person claiming as maintenance holder 
to be entitled to any portion of the compensation awarded to any intermediary under this Chapter applies 
to the compensation officer for payment of the same to him, the compensation officer may, with the 
consent of the intermediary, direct the payme nt to the applicant out of the compensation of such  amount 
as the intermediary may  have agreed to be paid to the applicant, and any such payment shall be a valid 
discharge of the liability of the Government in  respect of the amount so paid.  
(2) If the inte rmediary does not give his consent, the compensation officer shall direct the applicant to 
file, within three months, a suit or other proceeding in the court having jurisdiction to establish his claim 
and orde r that the amount claimed shall , not in the mea ntime be paid to the intermediary.  
(3) The Government shall not be made a party to any suit or proceeding instituted or commenced in 
pursuance of any direction given under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) If the suit or proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 2) is ins tituted or commenced within the period 
aforesaid, the compensation officer shall place the amount claimed at the disposal of the court before 
which such suit or proceeding is instituted.  
(5) If the suit or proceeding is not instituted or commenced within t he period of three months 
aforesaid, the compensation officer shall order the amount to be paid to the intermediary.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, a maintenance holder means a person entitled to 
receive maintenance under a registered deed, decree or order of court.  
157. Compensation due to person incompetent to alienate. —If any intermediary entitled to receive 
compensation in respect of any interest is a person incompetent to alienate such interest, the 
compensation officer shall keep the am ount of compensation payable, in respect of such interest, whether 
in cash or in bonds, in deposit with the Collector who shall arrange to invest the cash or the income from 
the bonds in the purchase of such Government or other approved securities as the C ollector thinks fit and 
shall direct the payment of the income from such investment to the intermediary who would for the time 
being have been entitled to hold and enjoy such interest if it had not vested in the Government; and such 
cash, bonds and securit ies shall remain so deposited until they are made over to any person or persons 
becomi ng absolutely entitled thereto:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall affect the liability of any person who may receive the 
whole or any part of any compensation under this section to pay the same to the person lawfully entitled 
thereto.  
158. Inquir ies to be judicial proceedings. —The Collector, the compensation officer and the claims 
officer, for the purposes of any inquiries or proceedings under this Part, shall h ave the same powers as are 
vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in respect of — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath or affirmation;  
(b) compelling the production of documents; and  
(c) issuing commission for the e xamination of witnesses;  
and such inquiries or proceedings sha ll be deemed to be judicial pro ceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 41 159. Penalties. —Whoever — 
(a) wilfully fails or neglects to comply with any requirements made of him under this Part, or  
(b) contravenes any lawful order passed under this Part, or  
(c) obstructs or resists the taking by the Collector or any other officer authorized by him in 
writing of charge of any property which is vested in the Government under this Part , or 
(d) furnishes information which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true,  
shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punishable with fine which may ext end to five hundred 
rupees.  
160. Application of Part III to persons becoming raiyats or under -raiyats under                              
Part IV.—Where, as a result of the operation of this Part, any person acquires the right to hold land either 
as a raiyat or an under -raiyat, the provisions of Part III shall as far as may be, apply to the determination 
of such right and in such application, any reference in the said Part to the commencement  of this Act shall 
be construed  as a reference to the vesting date.  
161. Power to make rules. —(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying  out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the ge nerality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner of publication of a notification under section 134;  
(b) the procedure to be followed and the forms to be adopted in inquiries a nd proceedings under 
this Part;  
(c) the mode of service of any order, notice or other documents under this Part;  
(d) the form of the state ments to be furnished by intermediaries;  
(e) the inspection of and making notes from documents, registers and records under section 137, 
the grant of certified copies thereof and the fee to be charged for  such grant;  
(f) the form and the manner in which compensation assessment rolls shall be prepared and the 
particulars to be mentioned therein;  
(g) the manner of apportionment of net income among intermediaries;  
(h) the procedure to be  followed in the case of inter mediaries having shares or interest in different 
estates;  
(i) the manner in which the preliminary and the final publication of the compensation  assessment 
roll shall be made;  
(j) the manner of determining the amount of annuities payable to religiou s and char itable 
institutions and the procedure for making payments;  
(k) the manner in which the income of the pre vious year shall be determined;  
(l) the determination of the amount of ad interim  compensation ; 
(m) The manner in which and the period within which creditors may prefer their claims before the 
claims officer and the procedure to be followed in the disposal of such claims;  
(n) the manner in  which objections shall be submitted to the compensation officer and the 
procedure to be followed in the dis posal of such objections;  
(o) the manner of determining the commuted va lue of rents under section 145;  
(p) the manner of preferring app eals under Chapters XI and XII;  
(q) the manner of keeping in deposit the amount of c ompensat ion    under sections 155 and  157; 42 (r) the form and contents of bonds;  
(s) the manner in which , and the circumstances under which, bonds shall be transferable, and  
(t) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
PART V  
CHAPTER  XIII. —CEILING ON LAND HOLDINGS  
162. Exemptions. —The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to land owned by the Government 
or a local authority.  
163. Definitions. —For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “ceiling limit ”, in relation to land, means the limit fixed under section 164;  
(b) “family ”, relation to a person, means the person, the wife or husband, as the case may be, and 
the dependent children and grand -children, of such person;  
(c) “land” does not i nclude land used for non -agricultural purposes.  
164. Ce ilings on holdings. —No person either by himself or, if he has a family, together with any 
other member of his family (here inafter referred to as the  person representing the family) shall, whether 
as a raiyat or an under -raiyat or as a mortgagee with possession or otherwise, o r partly in one capacity and 
partly in another, hold land in excess of twenty -five s tandard acres in the aggregate:  
Provided that where the number of members of the family of such person  exceed s five, he may hold 
five additional standard acres for each mem ber in exces s of five, so , however , as not to  exceed fifty 
standard acres in the aggregate.  
Explanation .—In the case of a company, an association or any other body of individuals, the ceiling 
limit shall be twenty -five standard acres.  
165. Submission of returns.—Every person representing a family who at the commencement of this 
Act holds, or has at any time during the period between the 10th day of August, 1957 and such 
commencement held, land in excess of the ceiling limit shall submit to the competent a uthority, in such 
form and within such time as may be prescribed, a return giving the particulars of all land held by him 
and indicating therein the parcels of land, not exceeding the ceiling lim it, which he desires to retain:  
Provided that in the case of a joint holding, all co -sharers may submit the return jointly indicating the 
parcels of land, not exceed ing the aggregate of their individual ceiling limits, which they desire to retain.  
Explanation .—In the case of a person under disability, the return sha ll be furnished by his guardian or 
authorised agent, as the case may be.  
166. Collection of information through other agency. —If any person, who under section 165 is 
required to submit a return, fails to do so, the competent authority may collect the neces sary information 
through such agency as may be prescribed.  
167. Procedure for determination of excess land. —(1) On-receipt of any return under section 165 
or information under section 166 or otherwise, the competent authority shall, after giving the persons 
affected an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, and having 
regard to the provisions of section 168 and section 169 or of any rules that may be made in thi s behalf, it 
shall determine — 
(a) the total area of land held by each person representing the family;  
(b) the specific parce ls of land which he may retain;  
(c) the land held by him in excess of the ceiling limit;  
(d) whether such excess land is held by him as a raiyat or as an under -raiyat or as a mortga gee 
with possession;  43 (e) the excess land in respect of which the under -raiyat or the mortgagee with possession may 
acquire the rights of the raiyat or the mortgagor, as the case may be;  
(f) the excess land which may be restored to a raiyat or a mortgagor;  
(g) the excess land which shall vest in the Government; and  
(h) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) For the purposes of determining the excess land under this section, any land transferred at any 
time during the period between the 10th day of Augu st, 1957 and the commencement of this Act shall, 
notwithstanding such transfer, be deemed to be held by the transferor.  
(3) The competent authority shall prepare a list in the prescribed form containing the particulars 
determined by him under sub -section ( 1) and shall cause every such list to be published in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as may  be prescribed.  
168. Selection of excess land in cases of certain transfers. —(1) Where any person holding land in 
excess of the ceiling limit at any time during the period between the 10th day of August, 1957 and the 2nd 
day of December, 1959, has transferred during such period any part of his land to any other person under 
a registered deed for valuable consideration, the excess land to be determi ned under section 167 shall, to 
the extent possible, be selected out of the land held at the commencement of this Act by the transferor in 
excess of a family holding and no land shall be select ed out of the land transferred.  
(2) Where any person holding la nd in excess o f the ceiling limit at any time — 
(a) during the period between the 10th day of August, 1957 and the 2nd day of December, 1959, 
has transferred during such period any part of his land to any other person in any manner other than 
under a registered deed for valuable consideration, or  
(b) during the period between the 2nd day of December, 1959 and the commencement of this Act 
has transferred during such period any part of his land to any other person in any manner whatsoever,  
the excess lan d to be determined under section 167 shall be selected out of the lands held at the 
commencement of this Act by the transferor and the transferee in the same proportion as the land held by 
the transferor bears to the land transferred and where no land is h eld by the transfero r, out of the land 
transferred.  
(3) Where excess land is to be selected out of the lands of more than one transferee, such land shall be 
selected out of the lands held by each of the transferees in the same proportion as the area of the  land 
transferred to him bears to the total area of the lands transferred to all the transferees.  
(4) Where any excess land is selected out of the land transferred, the transfer of such land shall be 
void.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the excess land to be selected shall in no case 
include the homestead land of a person.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “homestead land ” means the land on which the 
homestead (whether us ed by the owner or let out on rent) stands together with any courtyard, compound 
and attached garden, not exceeding one acre in the aggregate.  
169. Excess land to vest in Government. —(1) Where any excess land of a raiyat is in his actual 
possession, the ex cess land shall vest in the Gover nment.  
(2) Where any excess land of a raiyat is in the possession of a person holding the same as an                
under -raiyat or as a mortgagee and the excess land together with any other land held by such person 
exceeds  his ceiling limit, the land in excess of the ceiling limit shall vest in the Government.  
(3) Where any excess land of  a raiyat is in the possession of a person holding the same as an             
under -raiyat or as a mortgagee and such person is allowed to  retain the excess land or a part thereof as 
being within his ceiling limit, that person shall acquire the rights of the raiyat or of the mortgagor, as the 
case may be, in respect of such excess land or part thereof on payment of compensation, if any, as 
hereinafter provided, but if that perso n refuses to pay such com pensation, the excess land or part th ereof 
shall vest in the Government.  44 (4) Where there is any excess land of an under -raiyat or of a mortgagee with possession, the excess  
land shall vest in t he Government:  
Provided that in any case where the excess land or any part thereof held by the raiyat or the 
mortgagor together with any other land held by such person does not exceed the ceiling limit, the excess 
land or such part thereof as does not exce ed the ceiling limit shall be restored to the possession of that 
person on an application made by him in this behalf to the competent authority within such time as may 
be prescribed and in the case where the possession of such land is restored to the mortg agor, the mortgage 
in respect of such land shall be deemed to be a simple mortgage.  
170. Publication of the final list and consequences thereof. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an entry 
in the list published under sub -section ( 3) of section 167 may, within thi rty days from the date of 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette, file objections thereto before the Collector.  
(2) The Collector or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Administrator may, after 
considering the objections and after givin g the objector or his representatives an opportunity of being 
heard in the matte r, approve or modify the list.  
(3) The list as approved or modified under sub -section ( 2) shall then be published in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as may b e prescribed and subject to the provisions of thi s Act, the 
list shall be final.  
(4) With effect from the date of the publication of the list in the Official Gazette under                            
sub-section ( 3),— 
(a) the excess land shall stand  transferred to and vest in the  Government free of all encumbra nces; 
or 
(b) the possession of the excess land shall stand restored to the raiyat or the mortgagor, as the 
case may be; or  
(c) the rights of the raiyat or the mortgagor in respect of the excess  land shall stand transferred to 
the under -raiyat or the mortgagee, as the case may be.  
171. Compensation. —(1) Where any excess land of a raiyat vests in the Government there shall be 
paid by the Government to the raiyat compensation, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), of an 
amount equal to twenty times the net annual inco me from such land.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the net annual income from any land shall be 
deemed to be one -fifth of the value of the average yearly  gross produce of the land, calculated in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where such excess land or any part thereof is in the possession of an under -raiyat, the 
compensation payable under sub - section ( 1) in respect of the land shall be apportioned between the raiyat 
and the under -raiyat in such proportion as may be determined by the competent authority in the 
prescribed manner, having regard to their respective shares in the net income from such land.  
(3) In addition to the compensation payable in r espect of any excess land under sub -section ( 1), the re 
shall also be paid compensa tion in respect of any structure or building constructed on such land and any 
trees planted thereon and su ch compensation shall be deter mined by the competent authority in th e 
prescribed manner, having regard to the market value of such structure or building or the value of such 
trees, and such compensation shall be paid to the person who has constructed the structure or building or 
planted the trees.  
(4) Where any excess land  in respect of which compensation is payable is subject to any mortgage or 
other encumbrance, the amount due under the mortgage or other encumbrance in respect of such excess 
land, or where a transfer in respect of any excess land is void by virtue of sub -section ( 4) of section 168, 
the consideration money paid by the transferee in respect of such excess land, shall be a charge on the 
compensation payable in respect of the excess land to the person who has created the mortgage or 
encumbrance or, as the case may be, to the transferor.  45 (5) Where an under -raiyat acquires the rights of a raiyat in respect of any excess land, the 
compensation payable by him in respect of that land shall be equal to the amount which the raiyat would 
have been paid as compensation under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) if the land had vested in the 
Government; and the amount shall, in the first instance, be paid to the raiyat by the Government and shall 
be recovered from the under -raiyat in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(6) Wh ere a mortgagee in possession acquires the rights of the mortgagor in respect of any excess 
land under sub -section ( 3) of section 169, the compensation payable by the mortgagee in respect of that 
land shall be such sum of money, if any, as may be due to th e mortgagor after setting off the mortgage 
debt against the ma rket value of such excess land.  
(7) Where any excess land of a religious or charitable institution vests in the Government,                       
such institution shall, in lieu of compensation payable under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), or                  
sub-section ( 3), be paid an annuity equal to the net annual income of the excess land and such net annual 
income shall be determined by the competent auth ority in the prescribed manner.  
(8) The competent authority shall, after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, make an orde r 
determining the amount of com pensation payable to  any person under this section.  
172. Man ner of payment of compensation. —(1) The compensation payable under section 171 shall 
be due from the date of the publication of the list under sub -section ( 3) of section 170 and may be paid in 
cash, in a lump sum or in instalments, or in bonds.  
(2) Where the compensation is payable in bonds, the bonds may be made not tran sferable or 
transferable by endorsement or in any other manner but all such bonds shall be redeemed within such 
period, not exceeding twenty years from the date of issue, as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where there is any delay in the payment of compensation or where the compensation is paid 
either in instalments or in bonds, it shall carry interest at the rate of two and a half per cent. per annum 
from the date on which it falls due.  
173. Limit  of future acquisition of land. —No person representing a family shall  acquire in any 
manner whatsoever, whether by transfer, exchange, lease, agreement or succession, any land where such 
acquisition has the effect of making the total area of the land held by him exceed the ceiling limit; and 
any such land in excess of the c eiling limit shall be treated as excess land of the transferee and the 
provisions of sections 167 to 172 shall, as far as may be, apply to such excess land.  
174. Excess land not to be surrendered in certain cases. —Where a person representing a family 
holds  land not exceeding the ceiling limit, but subsequently the land held exceeds the ceiling limit, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, such person shall not be required to surrender any 
part of the land on the ground that it is excess l and, if such excess is d ue to any improvements effected  in 
the land by the efforts of the family or to a decrease in the number of its members.  
175. Power of Collector to take possession of excess land. —After the publication of the list of 
excess land under sub -section ( 3) of section 170, and after demarcation in the prescribed manner of such 
land where necessary, the Collector may take possession of any excess land and may use or cause to be 
used such force as may be necessary for the purpose.  
176. Off ences and penalties. —(1) Whoever being bound to submit a return under section 165 fails to 
do so, without reasonable cause, within the prescribed time, or submits a return which he knows or has 
reason to believe to be false, shall be punishable with fine w hich may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever contravenes any lawful order made under this Chapter or otherwise obstructs any person 
from lawfully taking possession of any land shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.  
177. Finality of orders. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made under this Chapter 
shall be final.  46 178. Power to exempt, etc. —(1) The Administrator may, on an application made to him in this 
behalf within three months from the commencement o f this Act, exempt from the operation of section 
164— 
(a) any land which is being used for growing tea, coffee or rubber including lands used or 
required for use for purposes ancillary to, or for the extension of, the cultivation of tea, coffee or 
rubber to be determined in the prescribed manner;  
(b) any sugarcane farm operated by a sugar factory;  
(c) any specialised farm which is being used for cattle b reeding, dairy or wool raising;  
(d) any person who holds a compact block of land ex ceeding the ceiling l imit which — 
(i) is being used as an orchard from b efore the 1st January, 1958; or  
(ii) is being used as a farm in which heavy investment or permanent structural improvements 
have been made and which, in the opinion of the Administrator, is being so effi ciently managed 
that its break up is likely to bring a fall in production:  
Provided that where such person holds the compact block of land together with any other land, he 
shall be permitted to elect to retain either the compact block of land, notwithstanding  that it exceeds the 
ceiling limit or the other land not exceeding the ceiling limit;  
(e) any land which is being held by a co -operative society, provided that where a member of any 
such society holds a share in such land, his share shall be taken into account in  determining his 
ceiling limit:  
Provided that the Administrator may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of 
three months, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application  in time.  
(2) Where any land in resp ect of which exemption has been  granted to a person under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 1) is transferred to another person, the Administrator may, on an application made to him 
within three months from the date of the transfer, exempt the transferee from the operation of section 164 
and section 173 and the provisions of the said clause shall,  as far as may be, apply to the grant of such 
exemption.  
(3) Where the Administrator is of opinion that the use of land for any specified purpose is expedient 
or necessary in the public interest, he may, by notification in t he Official Gazette, make a dec laration to 
that effect and on the issue of such notification, any person may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 173, acquire land in excess of the ceiling limit for being used for such specified purpose and such 
person shall, within one month f rom the date of such acquisition, send intimation ther eof to the competent 
authority.  
(4) Where any land, in respect of which exemption has been granted under sub -section ( 1) or                   
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), ceases to be used, or is  not within the prescribed time used, for the 
purpose for which exemption had been granted, the Administrator may, after giving the persons affected 
an opportunity of being heard , withdraw such exemption.  
CHAPTER  XIV.—PREVENTION OF FRAGMENTATION  
179. Definitions. —For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “holding ” means the aggregate area of land held by  a person as a raiyat;  
(b) “fragment ” means a holding of less than two standard acres in area;  
(c) “land” has the same meaning as in Chapter XIII.  
180. Restrictions on transfer, etc. —(1) No portion of a holding shall be transferred by way of sale, 
exchange, gift, bequest or mortgage with possession, so as to create a fragment:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply to a gift made in favour of the 
Bhoodan  movement initiated by Acharya Vinoba Bhave.  47 (2) No portion of a holding shall be transferred by way of lease, w here as a result of such lease, — 
(i) the lessor shall be left with less than two standard acres, or  
(ii) the total area held by the lessee exceeds the limit of a family holding.  
(3) No fragment shall be transferred to a person who does not have some land under personal 
cultivation or to a person  who holds, or by reason of such transfer shall hold, land in excess of the limit of 
a family holding.  
181. Partition of holding. —(1) No holding shall be partitioned in such manner as to create a 
fragment.  
(2) A fragment shall not be partitioned unless as a result of such partition its portions get merged in 
holdings of two standard acres or more or in fragments so as to create holdings of two standard acres or 
more.  
(3) Whenever, in a suit for partition, the court finds that the partition of a holding will  result in the 
creation of a fragment, the court shall, instead of proceeding to divide the holding, direct the sale of the 
same and distribute the  proceeds thereof among the co -sharers.  
(4) Wherever a holding is put up for sale under sub -section ( 3), a co -sharer shall have the first option 
to purchase the holding at the highest bid; if there are two or more co -sharers claiming the first option, 
that co -sharer who offers the highest consideration shall be preferred.  
182. Transfers in contravention of this Chapter. —(1) Any transfer, partition or lease of land made 
in contravention of the provisions  of this Chapter shall be void.  
(2) No document of transfer, partition or lease of land shall be registered unless declarations in 
writing are made, in such form a nd manner as may be prescribed, by the parties thereto before the 
competent registering authority under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) , regarding lands 
held by each prior to the transaction and the land which each  shall come to hold thereaf ter. 
(3) No registering authority shall register under the Indian Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908 ), any 
document of transfer, partition or lease of land if, from t he declarations made under sub -section ( 2), it 
appears that the transaction has been effected in contravention of the provisions of this Chapter.  
183. Penalty. —The parties to any transfer, partition or lease made or entered into in contravention of 
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees.  
184. Power to make rules. —(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules m ay 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which, and the period within which, a return under section 165 may be sub mitted;  
(b) the agency through which information may be collected under section 166;  
(c) the manner of holding enquiries under this Part;  
(d) the matters which may be determined under sub -section ( 1) of section 167 and the manner of 
determination of excess  lands under this Part;  
(e) the form in which a list under sub -section ( 3) of section 167 or sub -sectio n (3) of section 170 
may be prepared and the manner of publication of such list;  
(f) the period within which an application for restoration of excess land may be made under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 169;  
(g) the manner of apportionment of c ompensation between the raiyat and the under -raiyat under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 171;  48 (h) the manner of assessment of the m arket value of any structure or  building or trees under            
sub-section ( 3) of section 171;  
(i) the manner of recovery of the compensation payable by the under -raiyat under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 171;  
(j) the manner of determining under sub -section ( 6) of section 171 the market value of any excess 
land in respect of which a mortgagee in possession acquires the rights of t he mortgagor;  
(k) the manner of determination of the net annual income of any excess land for the purpose of 
payment of compensation under section 171;  
(l) The manner of payment of compensation, including the number of instalments in which the 
compensation  may be paid or recovered and the period within which bonds may be redeemed;  
(m) the manner of demarcation of any  excess land under section 175;  
(n) the matters which may be determined by the Administrator in granting an exemption under 
section 178 includi ng the form in which applications and intimations may be made or given, under 
section 178;  
(o) the form of declarations under section 182;  
(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
PART VI  
CHAPTER  XV.—GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS  
185. Recovery of amount  due as arrear of land revenue. —Without prejudice to any other 
provision of this Act, any amount due to the Government, whether by way of costs, penalty or otherwise, 
and any other amount which is ordered to be paid to or recovered by the  Government, under this Act shall 
be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
186. Protection against eviction  or surrender in certain cases. —(1) After the commencement of 
this Act and before the vesting date referred to in sub -section (1) of sect ion 134,— 
(a) the provisions of sections 111 to 117 shall, so far as may be, apply to tenants and sub -tenants 
as defined in clause ( d) of section 133;  
(b) no such tenant or sub -tenant shall surrender any land held by him as such and no person shall 
enter upon any such land unless such surrender is bona fide  and is made with the previous permission 
in writing of the competent authority, and the provisions o f sub -section ( 3) of section 125 shall apply 
to any case wh ere such permission is refused;  
(c) no such tenant or sub -tenant shall , whether in execution of a decree or order of court or 
otherwise, be evicted from any such land on any ground other than those  specified in clauses ( c) and 
(d) a sub -section ( 1) of section 118, and any proceeding for eviction of such tenant or sub -tenant on 
any ground other than those specified in the said clauses ( c) and ( d) pending at such commencement 
shall abate without prejudice to any action that may be taken under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Where, on or after the 10th day of August, 1957 and before the commencement of this Act, any 
such tenant or sub -tenant has surrendered any land held by him as such or been evic ted from such land 
and the surrender or eviction could not have taken place if this Act had been in force on the date of such 
surrender or eviction, the competent authority may, either on his own motion or on application made by 
the tenant  or sub-tenant in  this behalf, restore him to possession of the land which has been surrendered or 
from which he has been evicted.  
187. Special provis ion regarding Scheduled Tribes. —No transfer of land by a person who is a 
member of the Scheduled Tribes shall be valid unless— 
(a) the transfer is to another mem ber of the Scheduled Tribes; or  
(b) where the transfer is to a person who is not a member of any such tribe, it is made with the 
previous permission in writing of the Collector; or  49 (c) the transfer is by way of mor tgage  to a co -operative society.  
188. Jurisdi ction of civil courts excluded. —No suit or other proceeding shall, unless otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, lie or be instituted in any civil court with respect to any matter arising 
under and provided for by this Act:  
Provided that if in a dispute between parties a question of title is involved, a civil suit may be brought 
for the adjudication of such question.  
189. Act to over -ride contracts and other laws. —Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of  this 
Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law, custom or 
usage or agreement or decree or order of court.  
190. Court -fees.—Notwithstanding a nything contained in the Court fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870) , every 
application, appeal or other proceeding under this Act shall bear a court -fee stamp of such value as may 
be prescribed.  
191. Village officers to be public servants. —Every village accountant and every other village 
officer appointed under this Act shall be dee med to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
192. Power to e xempt.—With the previous approval of the Government, the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any class of lands  from all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
193. General provision as to penalties. —Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act for which 
no penalty has been otherwise provided for therein shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
194. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other proceedings shall lie — 
(a) against any officer of the Government for anything in good faith done or inte nded to be done 
under this Act;  
(b) against the Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused or any injury suffered or 
likely to be suffered by anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
195. Delegation of powers. —The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette del egate 
to any officer or authority subordinate to him any of the powers conferred on him or on any officer 
subordinate to him by this Act, other than the power to make rules, to be exercised subject to such 
restrictions and conditions as may be specified in  the said notification.  
196. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this 
Act, the Government may, as occasion requires, take any action not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act which may appear to it necessary for the purpose  of removing the difficulty.  
197. General power to make rules. —Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules  generally  
to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
198. Lay ing of rules before Parliament. —Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as 
may be after it  is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modificati on in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however , that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice t o the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
199. Repeal and savings. —(1) On and from the date on wh ich any of the  provisions of this Act are 
brought into force in any area in the Union territory of Tripura, the enactments specified in the S chedule 
or so much t hereof as relate to the matters  covered by the provisions so brought into force shall stand 
repealed in such area.  50 (2) The repeal of any enactment or part thereof by sub -section ( 1) shall not affect,— 
(a) the previous operation of such enactment of anything duly done or suffered thereunder;  
(b) any right , privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under such 
enactment;  
(c) any penalty , for forfeiture  or punishment incurred in res pect of any offence committed against  
such enactment;  
(d) any investigation , legal proceeding or remedy in res pect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty , forfeiture or  punishment  as aforesaid;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted or enforced and any such 
penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if such ena ctment or part thereof had not been 
repealed.  
(3) Subjec t to the provisions contained i n sub -section ( 2), any appointment, rul e, order, notification or 
proclamation made o r issued, any lease, rent, right or liability granted, fixed, acquired or incurred and any 
other thing done or action taken under any of the enactments or parts thereof repealed, under                   
sub-section ( 1) shall, in so far as it is not inconsi stent with the provision of this Act brought into force, be 
deemed to have been made, issued, granted, fixed acquired, incurred, done or taken under this Act and 
shall continue to be in force until  superseded by anything done or a ny action taken under this  Act. 
(4) Any custom or usage prevailing at the time any of the pro visions of this Act are brought into force 
in any area in the Union territory of Tripura and having the force of law therein shall , if such custom or 
usage is repugnant to or inconsistent with such provision, cease to be operative to the extent of such 
repugnancy or inconsistency.  51 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 199 ( 1)] 
(1) Praja Bhu myadhikari Sambandha Bishyak Ain (EK Ain , 1296 Tripurabda) . 
(2) 1296 Tripurabder Praja Bhumyadhik ari Ain Sansudhan B ishyak 1337 Tripurabder EK Ain, and 
1296 Tripiurabder Praja Bhumyadhikari Ain Sansudhan B ishyak 1335 Tripurabder EK Ain.  
(3) Rajdhani Agartala Sahar Bondobasta Sambandhiya B idhan, 1346 T.E.  
(4) Jarip -o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya  Niyamabal i, 1309 Tri purabda.  
(5) Tripura Rajyer Jarip Bondobasta Sambandhyia Niyamabal i Sansudhan Bishyak, 1336 Tripurabder Tin 
Ain. 
(6) Jarip -o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya Niyamabali (Prathem Khanda).  
(7) Jarip -o-Bondobasta Sambandhiya Niyamabal i (Dwitiya Khanda), 1323 T.E.  
(8) 1290 Saner EK Ain Ort hat Rajaswa Sambandhiya Niyama bali, and  
1323 Tripurabd er Dui Ain Orthat Rajaswa Sambandhiya  
1290 Saner EK Ain Sansudhan Bishyak Bidhi.  
(9) Sarkari Prapya Aday Sa mbandhiya  1326 Tripura Char Ain , and 
Sarkari Prapya Aday Sambandhiya 1326 Tripura Char Ain Sansudhan Bishyak Ain Athab a                 
1358 Tring Saner 18 Nang Ain.  
 
--------------------------The Tripura Municipal Law (Repeal) Act, 1960--------------------------
1 
 THE TRIPURA MUNICIPAL LAW (REPEAL) ACT , 1960  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1960  
[9th September, 1960 .]  
An Act to provide for the repeal of the municipal law in force in the Union territory of Tripura.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Tripura Municipal Law (Repeal) Act, 1960.  
2. Repeal of Tripura State Municipal Act .—On and from the date on which the Bengal Municipal 
Act, 1932  (Bengal Act XV of 1932 ), is extended by notification under section 2 of the Union Territories 
(Laws) Act, 1950  (30 of 1950) , to the Union territory of Tripura, the Tripura State Municipal               
Act, 1349  T.E. (2 of  1349  T.E.), shall stand repealed.  
3. Savings .—(1) The repeal of the Tripura State Municipal Act, 1349  T.E. (2 of  1349 T.E .), by 
section 2 shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of that Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder,  
(b) any  right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under that Act,  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
that Act, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respec t of any such right, privilege, 
obligation , liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imp osed as if that Act had not been repealed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), anything done or any action                   
taken (including any municipality constituted, appointment or delegation made, notification,       
instruction or direction issued, from, bye -law or scheme framed, certificate obtained, permit or licence 
granted or registration effected, or order of su persession  issued) under the Act repealed by section 2      
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the Bengal Municipal 
Act, 1932 (Bengal Act XV of 1932)  extended by notification as provided in that section to the Union 
territory of Tripura, and shall continue to be in force accordingly  unless and until superseded by  anything 
done or any action taken under the Act so extended.  
(3)  Notwithstanding the repeal by section 2 of the Tripura State Municipal                                     
Act, 1349  (2 of  1349 T.E .), the Chief Commissioner may, with the approval of the Central       
Government, direct, by notification in the Tripura Gazette, whether prospectively or retrospectively,     
that any of the taxes leviable under the repealed Act shall continue to be levied f or such time and under 
such conditions as may be specified in the notification, and on the issue of any such notification, the 
provisions of the repealed Act, in so far as they relate to the assessment, levy, collection and recovery of 
such tax and to matt ers incidental thereto, shall apply in relation to the tax so continued as if the said 
provisions had not been repealed.  
 
